CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 1986 by Order of the City Council 
Adopted June 26, 1986 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Kenneth McKinney 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ron Schreiber 
Robert Stover, Sr. 
Abe Stice 
Daryl Janicek 
Elroy Schorn 
City Council 
____________ 
Jackson Jones 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Joan Collier 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Ron Tomison 
Code Enforcement Officer 
PREFACE 
This Code is a codification of the ordinances of the City of Marble Falls, Texas, of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the City Council through January 14, 1986. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 4 is numbered 4-1 and the third section of Chapter 1 is 1-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-1.1, 4-1.2 and 4-1.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index of the code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Supervising Editor, and Beth Miles, Editorial Assistant, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Jackson Jones, City Attorney, and Ms. Vida Nelson, Administrative Assistant, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 86-O-6C 
An Ordinance Adopting and enacting a New Code for the City of Marble Falls, Texas; Establishing the Same; Providing For the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing For a Penalty For Violation Thereof; Providing For the Manner of Amending and Supplementing Such Code; Providing a Penalty For Violation of the Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
It is Ordained by the City Council of the City of Marble Falls, Texas; 
Section 1: The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapter 1 to 27 each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Marble Falls, Texas," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before January 14, 1986, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2: All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after June 26, 1986, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City adopted on final passage on or before January 14, 1986, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such code. 
Section 3: The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4: Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of such Code or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for all such rules, ordinances and police regulations that govern fire, safety, zoning and public health and sanitation including vegetation and litter violations nor exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for all other violations in the discretion of the court. 
Section 5: Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments. 
Section 6: In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and in Section 1-9 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7: Any ordinance adopted after January 14, 1986, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
Section 8: This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall become effective [June 26, 1986.] 
Adopted by roll call vote as follows: Unanimous. 
Passed and Approved this 26th day of June, 1986. 
Approved: 
/s/ Kenneth McKinney 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Joan Collier 
City Secretary  
THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS 
 
Adopted August 9, 1986 
Amended August 11, 1990 
Amended November 5, 2002 
Amended May 8, 2010 
Amended November 5, 2013 
  
CHARTER[1] 
THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS 
PREAMBLE 
This Charter is dedicated to the citizens of the City of Marble Falls, Texas, to ensure such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided and to encourage citizen participation in democratic government for the proper and efficient progress of our city. 
To this end we ordain this Home Rule Charter as prescribed by law and with the guidance of God. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Marble Falls, as adopted on Aug. 9, 1986. The original arrangement of the Charter including headings and section numbers has been retained. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions, and the Charter Comparative Table at the end of this Charter will contain disposition of such amendments. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Section 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The citizens of the City of Marble Falls, within the corporate limits as now established or to be established in the future by law as directed by this Charter shall be a municipal body politic and corporate in continued growth under the name of the City of Marble Falls, Texas.  
Section 1.02. - Form of Government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be the council-manager form of government consisting of a Mayor and Council Members, elected by and responsible to the people, and a City Manager, appointed by and responsible to the Council for proper administration of the affairs of the City.  
Section 1.03. - Home Rule. 
The City shall be a "home rule city" with full powers of local self-government, including the right to amend this Charter, as provided by the Constitution and laws of this state. The City and its people shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution such granted powers.  
Section 1.04. - Boundaries and Annexation. 
The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City, to annex additional territory adjoining and contiguous to the City and to detach territory by one of the following methods: 
a)  Extension of city limits upon petition: 
Upon written petition presented to the City Council describing the territory in metes and bounds and signed by a majority of those registered voters residing therein, and after hearing arguments for and against such action, the City Council may by ordinance declare such property annexed to the City of Marble Falls. 
b)  Extension of city limits by the City Council: 
The City Council may by ordinance annex territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without consent of the owners or inhabitants in such territory, not inconsistent with the procedural rules prescribed by state law. 
c)  Annexation by any other method provided by law: 
Additional territory may also be annexed to the City in any manner and by any procedure that may now or be hereafter provided by law or in such manner as shall be provided by ordinances or resolutions of the City Council. 
d)  Detachment of territory: 
Territory lying within the boundary limits of the City, and which adjoins the outer boundaries, may by ordinance, be detached from the City as prescribed by law. Any such territory so detached shall be liable for its pro-rata share of any debts incurred while it was a part of the City. 
Municipal utilities shall be extended to serve annexed territory within the time prescribed by law and when in the discretion of the City Council such extensions are advisable and financially feasible. If Council does not act within the time prescribed by law, a majority of registered voters in an annexed territory or owners of fifty-one (51) percent or more of the land in the annexed area may petition to disannex such territory, and in the event of an adverse decision of the Council may request disannexation by appeal to the appropriate court.  
ARTICLE 2. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Section 2.01. - Specific Powers. 
The City of Marble Falls may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, the federal government, or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas; and shall have all powers granted to cities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas together with the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. 
a)  The City may own or acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple, or in any lesser interest, or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and may sell, lease, hold, manage, control and police any property now owned by it or which it may hereafter acquire, and shall have the right to lease or let its property whether inside or outside of the city limits. See Section 10.12 
b)  The City may construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities. 
c)  The City may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation. 
d)  The City may borrow money on the faith and credit of the City by the issuance and sale of bonds, certificates of obligation, warrants or notes of the City; may borrow money on the revenue of municipally owned utilities or other municipal enterprises by the issuance of bonds and notes secured by such revenues. 
e)  The City may appropriate the funds of the City for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places. 
f)  The City may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations; may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the City, for the performance of the functions thereof and for the order and security of its residents; and may provide suitable penalties for the violations of any ordinance enacted by the City; and, except as prohibited by the Constitution and laws of this state or restricted by this Charter, the City may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.  
Section 2.02. - General Powers. 
The enumeration of the particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government and all other powers which, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.  
Section 2.03. - Eminent Domain. 
The City shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the City to take the fee in land so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this Charter.  
Section 2.04. - Zoning in General. 
The Council shall have full power and authority to zone the City and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules and regulations governing the same under and by virtue of the authority given to cities and legislative bodies thereof by the Civil Statutes of Texas as now or hereafter amended.  
ARTICLE 3. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Section 3.01. - Number, Selection and Term. 
The Council shall be composed of the Mayor and six (6) Council Members elected at large under a Place system, there being Places 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Each Council Member shall occupy a place on the Council and shall be elected by plurality from all candidates running for that place in the manner provided in Article 5 of this Charter, to serve for two (2) year terms. Following the election at which this Section is amended to establish the Place system, the place to be occupied by each Council Members in office shall be determined by the City Secretary in a manner that preserves the staggered term and election pattern existing prior to adoption of the Place system. 
The maximum number of consecutive terms that an individual may serve shall be three (3) terms as a Council Member and three (3) terms as Mayor. Provided however, that an individual may not serve more than four (4) consecutive terms as both Mayor and as a Councilmember. Whenever this Charter or other City Document refers to "Councilperson" or Council Member," it is understood that this term includes the Council Member occupying the position of Mayor. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990; May 8, 2010; November 5, 2013 .) 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, as a part of Supp. No. 67, the beginning of the second paragraph of § 3.01 was amended to read as set out herein.  
Section 3.02. - Qualifications. 
In addition to any other qualifications prescribed by law, the Mayor and each Council Member shall meet the conditions of Section 5.05 while in office, and shall reside within the City while in office.  
Section 3.03. - Judge of Election Qualifications. 
The Council shall be the final judge of all elections and of qualifications of its members and any other elected officials of the City.  
Section 3.04. - Compensation. 
The Mayor and Council Members shall be entitled to compensation at a rate set by the Council, which rate may not be changed more often than once every two (2) years. The Mayor and Council Members shall be entitled, with approval by the Council, to reimbursement for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of specific duties. 
(This Section amended November 5, 2013 .)  
Section 3.05. - Mayor and Mayor Pro-tem. 
The Mayor shall be the official head of the city government. The Mayor shall be the chairman and shall preside at all meetings of the Council. The Mayor shall vote on every proposition before the Council, but shall have no power to veto. The Mayor shall see that all ordinances, bylaws and resolutions of the Council are faithfully obeyed and enforced. The Mayor shall, when authorized by the Council, sign all official documents such as ordinances, resolutions, conveyances, grant agreements, official plats, contracts and bonds. The Mayor shall appoint special committees as advisable and as instructed by the Council. The Mayor shall perform such other duties consistent with this Charter or as may be imposed by the Council. 
A Mayor Pro-tem shall be elected by the Council as soon as practicable after each Regular City Election, or in case of a vacancy in the Mayor Pro-tem position. The Mayor Pro-tem shall act as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor, and in this capacity shall have the rights conferred upon the Mayor. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 3.06. - Vacancies, Forfeiture, Filling of Vacancies. 
a)  Vacancies: 
The office of a Councilmember of the office of the Mayor shall become vacant if the Councilmember or the Mayor fails to take the oath of office within 30 days of the election (i.e. the canvass), or upon death, resignation or removal from office in any manner authorized by law or by forfeiture of office. 
b)  Forfeiture of Office: 
If the Mayor or any Council Member: 
1)  Fails to maintain the qualifications as required in Sections 3.02 and 5.05 herein; or 
2)  Has been found by not less than five (5) affirmative votes of the Council to have violated any express prohibition of this Charter; or 
3)  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
4)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular council meetings without being excused by the Council; the City Council shall, at its next regular meeting, declare the office to be vacant and shall fill such vacancy as set forth below. 
c)  Filling of Vacancies: 
(1)  A vacancy in the City Council shall be filled for the remainder of the un-expired term, if any, at the next available uniform election date under state law; but the City Council, by a majority vote of all the remaining Council members shall, as quickly as possible, appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the person elected to serve the remainder of the un-expired term takes office. 
(2)  It [If] two or more vacancies exist in the City Council at any time, the City Council shall order a special election to fill such vacancies on the first uniform election day that occurs which allows sufficient time to comply with other requirements of the law. The then vacant positions shall remain so until filled by the citizens voting in the special election. 
(This Section amended November 5, 2002; May 8, 2010; November 8, 2016 )  
Section 3.07. - General Powers and Duties. 
All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, and the Council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law.  
Section 3.08. - Prohibitions. 
a)  Holding Other Office: 
Except where authorized by law, no Mayor or Council Member shall hold any other city office or city employment during a term as Mayor or Council Member and no former Mayor or Council Member shall hold any compensated appointive city office or city employment until one year after the expiration of term as Mayor or Council Member. 
b)  Appointments and Removals: 
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the City Manager or the Manager's subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
c)  Interference with Administration: 
Except for the purpose of inquiries, or investigations under Section 3.15, the Council or its members shall not direct city officers or employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager, except through the Manager, and neither the Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately, except as otherwise provided in this Charter.  
Section 3.09. - Meetings of Council. 
a)  The Council shall hold two (2) regular meetings each month at a time the Council shall designate. The Council may forego one (1) regular meeting in a month if it determines that matters requiring Council consideration or action can be sufficiently addressed in one (1) regular meeting in that month. 
b)  Regular meetings are council meetings required to be held no more often than semi-monthly and designated as regular. 
c)  Special meetings may be called by the City Secretary at the request of the Mayor or two (2) members of the Council. The City Manager shall be notified of all special meetings. 
d)  All meetings shall be open to the public except as authorized by law and shall be held at the Marble Falls City Hall or other places which will permit the attendance of the general public. 
(This Section amended November 5, 2013 .)  
Section 3.10. - Quorum. 
Four (4) Council Members, or three (3) Council Members and the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business and any action of the Council, except as provided in this Charter, shall be valid or binding when adopted by majority vote.  
Section 3.11. - Rules of Procedure. 
The Council shall, by ordinance, determine its own rules and order of business and the rules shall provide that citizens of the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting in regard to any matter under consideration.  
Section 3.12. - Voting. 
The Council shall provide for the taking and recording of minutes for all meetings, and such minutes shall be a public record. There shall also be provision for recording of meetings held in executive or closed session in accordance with applicable law. The ayes and nays of each Council Member, on every vote taken by the Council shall be recorded in the minutes. 
All members of the Council present, including the Mayor, shall vote upon every resolution or ordinance, except where there is a conflict of interest, the reason for which shall be stated concisely in the minutes. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 3.13. - Ordinances in General. 
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Marble Falls, Texas." 
Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the City Council only in written or printed form. Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to appropriations. Any reference to the reading of an ordinance made in this Charter shall be understood to mean the reading of the caption of the ordinance only, unless a specific request is made by any Council Member for the ordinance to be read in part or in full. 
Unless otherwise required by State Law, all ordinances of the City shall be read at one (1) regular Council Meeting and the caption of the ordinance published in at least one issue of the official newspaper of the City of Marble Falls with the publication occurring at least fourteen (14) days before passage of the Ordinance. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990; November 8, 2016 )  
Section 3.14. - Emergency Ordinances. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, property or the public peace the Council may adopt emergency ordinances. Such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant or renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. Neither shall they authorize the borrowing of money, except as provided in Section 7.11 and 7.12. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designated in the title as an "Emergency Ordinance" and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. Such emergency clause shall require the affirmative vote of not less than five (5) members of the Council. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published in two (2) successive issues of the official newspaper of the City of Marble Falls. 
Every emergency ordinance so adopted, except one authorizing the borrowing of money as described herein, shall automatically stand repealed after sixty (60) days following the day on which it became effective, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 3.15. - Investigative Body. 
The Council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency, office, officer or employee of the City, and for that purpose shall have the power to administer oaths and subpoena witnesses, compelling the production of books, papers and other evidence material to the inquiry. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by such ordinance.  
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 
 
Section 4.01. - City Manager. 
a)  Appointment and Qualifications: 
The Council by not less than four (4) affirmative votes shall appoint a City Manager. The method of selection shall be left to the discretion of the City Council so long as the method insures orderly, nonpartisan action toward securing a competent and qualified person to fill the position. The City Manager shall be chosen solely upon the basis of executive and administrative training, experience and ability and when appointed need not be a resident of the City. However, during the tenure of office the Manager shall reside within the City. The City Manager shall be bonded at city expense in an amount consistent with current need as established by the City Council. 
b)  Compensation: 
The City Manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the Council according to experience, education and training. The compensation shall be agreed upon before appointment with the understanding that the Council may change it at their discretion. 
c)  Term and Removal: 
The City Manager shall not be appointed for a definitive term but the City may contract with the City Manager for his or her employment for a term contained in the contract. The City Manager may be removed at the discretion of the Council by not less than five (5) affirmative votes. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final. It is the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibilities of such suspension or removal in the Council. 
d)  Powers and Duties: 
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City, and shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the City and to that end shall be required to: 
1)  See that all state laws and city ordinances are effectively enforced. 
2)  Appoint, suspend or remove any or all of the directors of departments, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
3)  Attend all meetings of the Council except when excused by Council, and shall have the right to take part in the discussions. 
4)  Prepare an annual budget and submit it to the Council and be responsible for its administration after its adoption. 
5)  Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year. 
6)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem advisable. 
7)  Make other such reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the Manager's direction and supervision. 
8)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by the Council, as consistent with this Charter. 
e)  Acting City Manager: 
The City Manager, within sixty (60) days after taking office, shall designate by letter filed with the City Secretary, a qualified administrative officer of the City to perform the duties in the absence or disability of the City Manager. Such designation shall be subject to the prior approval of the Council. 
(This Section amended May 8, 2010.)  
Section 4.02. - Administrative Departments. 
There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and may be established by ordinance and, excepting as otherwise provided in this Charter, these administrative departments shall be under the direction of the City Manager. 
The Council shall have power by ordinance to establish administrative departments or offices not herein provided by this Charter. The Council may discontinue, redesignate or combine any of the departments and/or administrative offices. No changes shall be made by the Council in the organization of the administrative service of the City until the recommendations of the City Manager thereon shall have been heard by the Council. 
The head of each department shall be a director who shall have departmental supervision and control. Two (2) or more departments may be headed by the same individual and the City Manager may head one (1) or more departments.  
Section 4.03. - Municipal Court. 
a)  There shall be established and maintained a court, designated as a Municipal Court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal courts. 
b)  The judge of said court shall be appointed by Council to serve at the discretion of the Council. The judge shall possess and maintain all requirements under state law to serve as a Municipal Court Judge in the State of Texas, and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the Council. 
c)  There shall be a clerk of said court appointed by the City Manager. 
d)  The clerk of said court and deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto and generally do and perform any and all acts usual, and necessary to be performed, by the clerks of courts, in issuing process of said courts, and conducting the business thereof. 
e)  The City Council shall have the power to create and appoint additional judges as provided by law. 
f)  All costs and fines imposed by the Municipal Court shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the City. 
(This Section amended November 5, 2013 .)  
Section 4.04. - City Attorney. 
The City Council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the State of Texas, who shall be the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall receive for services such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Attorney, or such other attorneys selected with the approval of the City Council, shall represent the City in all litigation. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the City and all officers and departments thereof.  
Section 4.05. - City Secretary. 
The City Manager shall appoint the City Secretary and such assistant city secretaries as the City Council shall deem advisable. The duties of the City Secretary, or an assistant city secretary shall be as follows: 
a)  To give notice of council meetings, 
b)  To keep the minutes of the proceedings of such meetings, 
c)  To authenticate by signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions, and 
d)  To perform such other duties as the City Manager shall assign and those elsewhere provided for in this Charter.  
Section 4.06. - Police Department. 
a)  A Police Department is established and shall be maintained to preserve law and order and to protect citizens from violence and their property from damage and loss. The Police Department shall perform other duties as directed by ordinance or by the City Manager. 
b)  The Police Department shall be directed by an experienced peace officer who shall be appointed Police Chief for an indefinite term by the City Manager after approval of the Council. The Police Chief may be removed from office by the City Manager after consultation with the Council. The Police Chief shall appoint and remove employees of the department with the approval of the City Manager and shall be responsible to the City Manager for the administration of the department.  
Section 4.07. - Fire Department. 
The City shall have the authority to establish and maintain a Fire Department within the City at such time as state statutes may require, and to cooperate with any person, other governmental body, association or corporation in the operation of the Fire Department, under such terms as the City Council may prescribe. 
Authority is also granted to support and assist in the maintenance of a volunteer fire department.  
Section 4.08. - Boards and Commissions. 
The City Council shall have authority to establish by ordinance such boards and commissions as it may deem necessary for the conduct of city business and management of municipal affairs. The authority, functions and responsibilities of such boards and commissions shall be spelled out in the establishing ordinances. All existing boards and commissions heretofore established shall be continued in accordance with the ordinance or other acts under which they have been created, or until the City Council shall by ordinance abolish, modify or alter the ordinances or acts under which they exist. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the elected City Council shall have paramount authority over all matters affecting the budgets, appropriation of funds, expenditures, purchases and sale of properties and procedures for accounting therefor, consistent with the express provisions of this Charter and applicable provisions of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
Each candidate for an appointment as a member of a board or commission shall be a registered voter of the City and shall not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the City. "In arrears" is defined herein to mean that payment has not been received within ninety (90) days from due date. No member of a board or commission shall continue in such position after filing for an elective office.  
ARTICLE 5. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 5.01. - Regular Elections. 
The regular election of members of the Council shall be held on the uniform election date provided by state law in each year that occurs in or nearest the month of May, or such other time required by general law. The election shall be ordered by the Mayor or by the Council. The City Secretary shall give notice of the election in the manner required by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(This Section amended May 8, 2010.)  
Section 5.02. - Special Elections. 
The Council shall by ordinance call special elections as required or authorized by the laws of the State of Texas or this Charter, and fix the time and place of holding these elections. Every special election shall be called and held as nearly as practicable according to the provisions governing regular elections.  
Section 5.03. - Voter Registration List. 
A certified list of voter registrants within the City, as prepared by the County Tax Assessor-Collector, shall be maintained current by the City Secretary. If for a purpose relating only to a city election or to candidates or issues involved in such election, any organization, group or person requests a list of registered voters of the City, permission to copy the current list shall be granted by the City Secretary.  
Section 5.04. - Conduct of Elections. 
All elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, this Charter and city ordinances. The Council shall appoint election judges and other election officials and shall provide for their compensation and for all other expenses of holding city elections.  
Section 5.05. - Filing for Office. 
A qualified citizen who desires to become a candidate for city office shall file with the City Secretary a signed, sworn application for the citizen's name to appear on the ballot. The citizen must also file with the City Secretary, thirty (30) calendar days prior to the election. 
Each candidate for an elective city office shall meet the following qualifications: 
a)  Shall be a registered voter of the City, twenty-one (21) years of age or over. 
b)  Shall have resided for at least twelve (12) months preceding the election within the corporate limits of the City. 
c)  No candidate may file for more than one (1) office per election. 
d)  No employee of the City shall continue in such position after filing for an elective office. 
(This Section amended November 8, 2016 )  
Section 5.06. - Official Ballots. 
a)  Names on Ballot: 
The name (as stated on the application) of each qualified candidate filing for office, except those who have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designation or symbol, and in the form designated by the candidate. If two (2) or more candidates have the same surname or surnames so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, their residence addresses shall be printed with their names on the ballot. 
b)  Order of Listing: 
The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the supervision of the City Secretary. 
c)  Absentee Ballots: 
Procedures for voting by absentee ballots shall be consistent with applicable law. 
d)  Ballots for Ordinances, Bond Issues and Charter Amendments: 
An ordinance, bond issue or charter amendment to be voted on by registered voters of the City shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement, approved by the Council with not less than four (4) affirmative votes, describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: "Shall the above described (ordinance) (bond issue) (amendment) be adopted?" Immediately below or to the left of such question shall appear, in the following order, the words "Yes" and "No" each with a square in which the voter may cast a vote by marking a cross (X). 
e)  Write-In Votes: 
Procedures for write-in votes shall be consistent with applicable law. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 5.07. - Votes Required and Canvassing of Returns. 
Following each city election, the Council shall meet, canvass the returns, and declare the results of the election within the time established by state law. The candidate for Mayor and the individual candidate for each Place on the Council who receives a plurality, or greatest number, of the votes cast shall be declared elected. 
The returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council, by totals for each candidate, or, for and against each issue submitted. 
If two (2) or more candidates for Mayor tie with the highest number of votes cast, a new election shall be ordered for the office of Mayor, with only the names of those tying candidates on the ballot to determine the winner of the Mayoral election. 
If one (1) or more ties between two (2) or more candidates make it impossible to determine the three (3) Council Members, the following rules shall apply: 
a)  If four (4) or more candidates tie for the greatest number of votes, a new election shall be ordered with only the names of those candidates who tied on the ballot to determine the winners of the three (3) seats. 
b)  If more than two (2) candidates tie for the second greatest number of votes, a new election shall be ordered with only the names of those tying candidates on the ballot to determine the winners of the remaining two (2) seats. 
c)  If two (2) or more candidates tie for the third greatest number of votes, a new election shall be ordered with only the names of those tying candidates on the ballot to determine the winner of the remaining seat. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990; November 5, 2013 .)  
ARTICLE 6. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
 
Section 6.01. - Power of Initiative. 
The voters of this City shall have the power to propose any ordinance. An initiated ordinance may be submitted to the Council by a petition signed by at least two hundred (200) registered voters of the City. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 6.02. - Power of Referendum. 
The voters of this City shall have the power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance enacted by the City Council which is subject to the initiative process under this Charter, except for bonds that have been legally awarded to a successful bidder or other legal obligations. The petition for referendum shall require the same number and qualification of signers as required by this Charter for an initiative petition.  
Section 6.03. - Requirements of Petition. 
Any five (5) registered voters may begin initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating they constitute the petitioners committee and will be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or the ordinance sought to be considered. Petitions shall contain, or have attached to them, the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. The signatures to the initiative or referendum need not all be appended to one paper, but each signer shall sign their name in ink and shall add their place of residence by street and number. The circulators of each petition page shall make an affidavit they personally circulated that page of the petition, and that each signature is the genuine signature of the person as is written, and further, that no signatures shall have been placed there more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition. Petitions shall be returned to the City Secretary for filing within forty-five (45) days after issuance of the appropriate blanks to the petitioners committee.  
Section 6.04. - Filing, Examination and Certification of Petitions. 
Within fifteen (15) days after an initiative or referendum petition is filed, the City Secretary shall determine whether it is properly signed by the requisite number of registered voters. The City Secretary shall declare void any petition paper which does not have an affidavit attached thereto as required. In examining the petition, the City Secretary shall indicate the names of signers found not qualified. The City Secretary shall certify the results of the petition examination to the Council at its next regular meeting. If the certificate of the City Secretary shows an initiative or referendum petition to be insufficient, the City Secretary shall notify the person filing the petition, and it may be amended within fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as prescribed for the original petition. Within fifteen (15) days after the amendment is filed, the City Secretary shall examine the amended petition and certify as to its sufficiency. If the amended petition is then found to be insufficient, no further proceedings shall be had with regard to it.  
Section 6.05. - Publication of Proposed and Referred Ordinances. 
The City Secretary shall publish at least once in the official newspaper of the City the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election.  
Section 6.06. - Council Consideration and Submission to Voters. 
If the Council receives an authorized initiative petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall: 
a)  Pass the initiated ordinance without amendment within thirty (30) days after the date of the certification to the Council; or, 
b)  Submit the initiated ordinance without amendment to a vote of the qualified voters of the City at the next available uniform election date under state law; or, 
c)  At an election as described in (b), submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the City the initiated ordinance without amendment and an alternative ordinance on the same subject proposed by the Council. 
If the initiated and the alternative ordinances are both approved by a majority of the votes cast at the election, the ordinance receiving the greater number of votes shall be effective as an ordinance of the City; the other ordinance shall be considered rejected and shall not be effective. 
If the Council receives an authorized referendum petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall reconsider the referred ordinance, and if upon reconsideration the ordinance is not repealed within thirty (30) days, it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City at a regular or special election to be held not more than sixty (60) days after the date of the certification to the Council or at the earliest time thereafter permitted by law. 
Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall be held when necessary as permitted by state law. No ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within one year from the date of that election. 
(This Section amended May 8, 2010.)  
Section 6.07. - Ballot Form and Results of Elections. 
The ballot used in voting upon an initiated or referred ordinance shall state the caption of the ordinance and below the caption shall set forth on separate lines the words: "For the Ordinance" "Against the Ordinance". Any number of ordinances may be voted upon at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. An ordinance submitted, and receiving an affirmative majority of the votes cast, shall then become effective as an ordinance of the City. An ordinance so adopted may be repealed or amended at any time after the expiration of two (2) years by an affirmative vote of not less than five (5) of the Council Members. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the votes is repealed.  
Section 6.08. - Franchise Ordinances Exempted From Initiative and Referendum. 
This article shall not be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of this Charter as pertains to ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights have accrued.  
Section 6.09. - Power of Recall. 
The people of the City reserve the power to recall any elected officer of the City and may exercise the power by filing with the City Secretary a petition stating cause, signed by at least three hundred (300) registered voters of the City demanding the removal of the elected officer. The petition shall be signed and verified as required for an initiative petition. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 6.10. - Recall Election. 
The provisions regulating examination, certification and amendment of initiative petitions shall apply to recall petitions. If the petition is certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall order and hold an election at the next available uniform election date under state law to determine whether the officer shall be recalled. 
(This Section amended May 8, 2010.)  
Section 6.11. - Results of Recall Election. 
If the majority of the legal votes cast at a recall election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, the Council shall immediately declare the office vacant and call a special election to fill the vacancy. An elected officer who has been so removed from office shall not be eligible to succeed their self.  
Section 6.12. - Limitation on Recall. 
No recall petition shall be filed against an elected officer within six (6) months after taking office, and no officer shall be subjected to more than one (1) recall election during the term of office.  
Section 6.13. - Public Hearing. 
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit the officer to present facts pertinent to the cause specified in the recall petition. In this event, the Council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.  
Section 6.14. - Ballots in Recall Election. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: (a) With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (Mayor) (Council Member) by recall?" (b) Immediately below the question, there shall be printed the two (2) following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: "For the recall of (name of person)" "Against the recall of (name of person)".  
Section 6.15. - Failure of Council to Call a Recall Election. 
When all the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge other duties imposed upon the Council by the provisions of the Charter with reference to such recall, then it shall be the duty of the District Judge of Burnet County, Texas, upon proper application being made, to order such elections and to enforce the carrying into effect of the provisions of this Article.  
ARTICLE 7. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE 
 
Section 7.01. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year of the City shall begin October 1 and end the following September 30. The fiscal year may be changed by Council by ordinance, but no change shall be effective until either six (6) months after the final passage of the ordinance or the close of the fiscal year during which the fiscal year change ordinance is enacted, whichever is later.  
Section 7.02. - Annual Budget. 
a)  Scope: 
The annual budget must specify appropriations for capital expenditures and for expenditures directed by the Council for services and for the operation of city departments, offices and agencies. It must comply with fund requirements of bond covenants. 
b)  Preparation: 
City department heads and officers shall submit budget requests for the next fiscal year to and as directed by the City Manager for review and consolidation. The City Manager shall submit a proposed annual budget to the Council in sufficient time to permit the Council to review and revise it. 
c)  Adoption: 
Before taxes are levied, but after a public hearing or hearings, the Council shall adopt the annual budget. The Council may amend the proposed budget, but shall not delete or decrease appropriations required for debt service, or for estimated cash deficit, or by law, and shall not authorize expenditures in excess of the total of estimated income plus funds available from earlier years. 
d)  Failure to Adopt: 
If the Council fails to adopt the annual budget before the start of the fiscal year to which it applies, appropriations of the last budget adopted shall be considered as adopted for the current fiscal year on a month-to-month, pro-rata basis until the next budget is adopted. 
e)  The budget for the fiscal year shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
1)  An ordinance authorizing adoption of the budget and appropriations. 
2)  An ordinance authorizing the levying of taxes. 
3)  A budget message, explaining the budget, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
4)  General fund revenue projections in detail. 
5)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of all funds. 
6)  Detailed estimates of expenditures by function, department, and activity, together with summaries thereof. This estimation of expenditures shall include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and the rate of pay. 
7)  A special funds section. 
8)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount outstanding, and a schedule of requirements for the principal and interest requirements of each issue of bonds. 
9)  Property valuations. 
10)  Proposed tax rate. 
11)  Tax levies and tax collections by year for the past five (5) years. 
12)  A Capital Improvements Program, as it may exist, generally covering a five (5) year span, which indicates proposed capital improvements, or improvements in the process of construction or acquisition. 
13)  Any additional information required by law. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 7.03. - Anticipated Revenue Compared With Previous Years. 
The City Manager shall, in the preparation of the budget, place in parallel columns opposite all items of revenue the actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Section 7.04. - Proposed Expenditures Compared With Previous Years. 
The City Manager, in the preparation of the budget, shall place in parallel columns opposite all items of expenditures, the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last complete fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Section 7.05. - Public Record. 
The adopted budget shall be a public record. Copies shall be made available to the public on request, as shall copies of the previous year's budget for comparison purposes.  
Section 7.06. - Notice of Public Hearing on Budget. 
The Council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published in a local newspaper a notice of the hearing, setting forth the time and place thereof at least five (5) days before the date of hearing. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 7.07. - Public Hearing on Budget. 
At the time and place set forth in the notice required by Section 7.06, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted, and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained.  
Section 7.08. - Public Hearing Amending or Supplementing Budget. 
After the conclusion of such public hearing, the Council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law. Before inserting any additional item or increasing any item of appropriation, it must cause to be published a notice setting forth the nature of the proposed changes and fixing a place and time, not less than five (5) days after publication, at which the Council will hold a public hearing thereon. 
After such further hearing, the Council may insert the additional item or items and make the increase or increases to the amount in each case indicated by the published notice, or to a lesser amount; but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures.  
Section 7.09. - Vote Required for Adoption. 
The budget shall be adopted or amended by an affirmative vote of not less than four (4) of the Council Members. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 7.10. - Transfer of Funds. 
During the fiscal year, the Council shall have the power to transfer moneys within each fund budgeted for one activity, function or department to another activity, function or department of that fund.  
Section 7.11. - Emergency Appropriations. 
The Council may make emergency appropriations at any time to meet a pressing need for public expenditures in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare.  
Section 7.12. - Borrowing to Meet Emergency Appropriations: 
In the absence of unappropriated available revenues or other funds to meet emergency appropriations provided for under the preceding Section 7.11, the Council may by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money to meet such deficit as provided by law.  
Section 7.13. - Depository. 
All moneys received by any person, department or agency of the City for or in connection with affairs of the City shall be deposited promptly in the city depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the Council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by ordinance. All checks, vouchers, or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depositories shall be signed by the City Manager, or by the Mayor in the absence of the City Manager, or by the City Manager's designees, if both the City Manager and the Mayor are absent or unavailable and countersigned by a city official designated by the City Council. Provided, that the Council, under such regulations and limitations as it may prescribe, may by ordinance authorize the use of machine-imprinted facsimile signatures of said Mayor or City Manager on such checks, vouchers and warrants. Two real signatures shall be required for all checks in excess of $5,000.00. 
(This Section amended November 8, 2016 )  
Section 7.14. - Purchase Procedure. 
In addition to the provisions of this Charter, all purchases made, and contracts executed by the City shall comply with the Purchasing Policy of the City as established by the City Council or by law. The City Manager shall determine that there is to the credit of any office, department or agency, a sufficient unencumbered appropriation and allotment balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which any contract or order is to be issued. The Council shall adopt a Purchasing Procedure Ordinance. In this Ordinance the Council may confer upon the City Manager general authority to contract for expenditures in amounts up to the maximum amount provided by law. 
All contracts or purchases shall be by competitive bid, except as provided for by law or ordinance. The Council or the City Manager, in such cases as the City Manager is authorized, shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 7.15. - Lapse of Appropriations. 
Appropriations shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year if not spent or encumbered.  
Section 7.16. - Payment and Obligation Limitation. 
No payment shall be made nor obligation incurred unless it complies with a budget appropriation and unless the City Manager first certifies that there is or will be enough unencumbered money in that account to meet the obligation when it is due.  
Section 7.17. - Financial Records and Reports. 
The City Manager shall report to the Council each month the financial condition of the City. For each budget item the monthly report will show the annual amount budgeted, the amount realized the preceding month and the amount realized in the fiscal year to the report date. Financial records and reports of the City shall be prepared and maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.  
Section 7.18. - Independent Audit. 
At the close of each fiscal year, and at other times as necessary, the Council shall have a certified public accountant conduct an independent audit of all accounts of the City. The certified public accountant shall have no personal interest in the financial affairs of the City or of its officers. A summary of the results of the completed audit shall be on file in the City Secretary's office as a public record.  
Section 7.19. - Bonds. 
Borrowing for capital improvements: 
a)  Borrowing: 
The Council shall have the power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem to be in the public interest. 
b)  General Obligation Bonds and Certificates of Obligation: 
The City shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City and to issue general obligation bonds and certificates of obligation for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the City previously issued. All such bonds or certificates of obligation shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas and shall be used only for the purpose for which they were issued. 
c)  Revenue Bonds: 
The City shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the properties, or interest therein pledged, or the income therefrom, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of moneys raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas and shall be used only for the purpose for which issued. 
d)  Bonds Incontestable: 
All bonds of the City having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable; and all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall and after said exchange, be incontestable. 
e)  Borrowing for capital improvements: 
The procedure for adoption of any ordinance relative to borrowing for capital improvements shall be: 
1)  A copy of the proposed ordinance shall be furnished to each member of the City Council, the City Attorney and the City Manager at least three (3) days before the date of the meeting at which the ordinance is to be considered. A copy of the proposed ordinance shall also be available to any citizen of the City (upon request to the City Secretary) within three (3) days before the date of the meeting at which the ordinance is to be considered. 
2)  Any ordinance relative to borrowing for capital improvements shall be adopted or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. 
3)  Any reading of an ordinance pursuant to this Section shall be by caption only, unless a reading in whole, or in part, is requested by any Council Member. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
ARTICLE 8. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Section 8.01. - Powers of the City. 
The City shall have the power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utility operations. In addition, the City shall have additional powers as granted by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas. The City shall not provide any utility services outside the city limits except by a written contract with the prospective customer requesting such services and only when the provision of such services appears to be in the best interests of the City. 
The City Council shall have the power and authority to prescribe the kind of materials used within or beyond the limits of the City of Marble Falls where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in good order and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for non-compliance with same.  
Section 8.02. - Powers of the City Council. 
The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City of Marble Falls. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) separate regular meetings of the City Council, and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first reading. No such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinances shall be published once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City. The expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be granted, renewed or extended for an indeterminate period or for a term of more than twenty (20) years nor be transferable except with the approval of the City Council expressed by ordinance. 
No grant to construct, maintain or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive.  
Section 8.03. - Franchise Value Not To Be Allowed In Rate Regulation. 
No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the City under this charter in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the City or in determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.  
Section 8.04. - Regulation of Franchises. 
All grants, removals, extensions, or amendment of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the City Council: 
a)  To forfeit the franchise by ordinance for failure of the holder to comply with the terms of the franchise, this Charter, any applicable statute of the State of Texas or the rule of any applicable governmental body. This right may be exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating how the holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting a reasonable time for the correction of the failure. Forfeiture may occur only after a hearing and after expiration of a reasonable time for correction. 
b)  To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. 
c)  To require expansion, extension, enlargement and improvement of plant and facilities as necessary to provide adequate service to the public. 
d)  To require franchise holders to furnish to the City, without cost to the city, full information regarding the location and precise description of all facilities of the franchise holder in, over and under the City; and to regulate and control the location, relocation and removal of the facilities. 
e)  To require compensation and rental as permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
f)  To collect from public utilities operating in the City a proportionate part of the increased cost of city operations and services attributable to the occupancy by or use of public property by the public utility; to collect a proportionate part of the cost of city operations and services required as a result of damage to or disturbance of public property caused by the public utility; and to compel the public utility to perform at its own expense repairs or other operations made necessary by the occupancy or use of, or damage to or disturbance of, public property by the public utility. 
g)  To require one (1) franchise holder to allow other holders to use its facilities, if the Council considers that joint use to be in the public interest. In the event of joint use, reasonable terms of use may be imposed by and a reasonable rental shall be paid to the owner for the use of the facility. The inability of franchise holders to agree on terms and rentals for the use of each other's facilities shall not be an excuse for failure to comply with a joint use requirement by the Council. 
h)  To require franchise holders to keep records which accurately reflect the value of the franchise holder's property used and useful in rendering its service to the public and which reflect the franchise holder's expenses, receipts and profits of all kinds. 
i)  To examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and other records of the franchise holder. 
j)  To require reports on the operations of the utility in the form and containing information that the Council directs. 
k)  To establish specifications for materials and construction for public utilities used within or beyond the limits of the City. 
l)  To prescribe penalties for noncompliance of this provision of the article or ordinances pertaining to franchises and public utilities.  
Section 8.05. - Consent of Property Owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility, but nothing in this Article or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owners of any right of action for damage or injury to property as now or hereafter provided by law.  
Section 8.06. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant heretofore made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in Section 8.04 of this Charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
Section 8.07. - Regulation of Rates. 
Subject to the laws of the State of Texas the Council shall have the power, after notice and hearing, to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating in the City. However, no such ordinance shall be passed as an emergency measure. Every franchise holder requesting an increase in rates, charges or fares shall have, at the hearing called to consider such request, the burden of presenting clear, competent and convincing evidence to substantiate the increase. The Council shall have the power to employ expert advice and assistance in determining rates, charges and fares and an equitable profit to the public utility and the franchise holders requesting the increase shall pay the cost of such expert advice and assistance. See Section 8.03.  
Section 8.08. - Other Conditions. 
Franchises granted by the City may be by contract or by ordinance and the contractual rights contained in any such franchise heretofore or hereafter granted by contract shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City of Marble Falls to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved; and except that the general power of the City, heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a grantee, shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in this Charter whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way the discretion of the City Council or voters of the City in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant. 
(This Section amended November 5, 2013 .)  
Section 8.09. - Submission of Annual Reports. 
Each franchise holder of a public utility operating in the City shall submit a sworn annual report to the City Manager. The report will include receipts from the operation of the public utility for the current year, amount of expenditures to include the amounts for betterments or improvements, the rates, charges or fares for services rendered to the public and any other information that the Council may require. The content, submission and inclusive dates of the report will be established by ordinance. The Council shall review these reports at least once annually to determine if rates, charges or fares are right and proper.  
Section 8.10. - Municipally Owned Utilities. 
An account will be maintained for each public utility owned or operated by the City Manager. Each account will show the true and complete financial results of the city ownership and operation including assets and liabilities by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus, revenues, operating expenses, depreciation, interest payments, rental and disposition of annual income, capital cost of each city owned utility, cost of and service rendered to any city department and other information required by the Council. Annually, a certified public accountant will prepare, and the Council will cause to be published, a financial report for each public utility owned or operated by the City. Each report will contain the information specified in this Section and such other information as required by the Council. The Council will establish, by ordinance, the submission and inclusive dates of each report.  
Section 8.11. - Records. 
Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility shall file with the City certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed or documents under which such utility is operated in the City. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises, city owned and operated public utilities and all related annual reports and documents.  
ARTICLE 9. - PLANNING AND ZONING 
 
Section 9.01. - Continuation of Zoning Ordinance. 
The adoption of this Charter shall not abolish nor change the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of its adoption.  
Section 9.02. - Power to Zone. 
The Council shall have the power to zone the City after recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and shall enact necessary implementing legislation as authorized by law and after all public hearings required by law.  
Section 9.03. - Commission: Composition and Rules. 
There shall be a planning board which shall also serve as a zoning board and which shall be known as the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of no fewer than five (5) nor more than seven (7) residents of the City who own real property within the City. The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Council for a term of two (2) years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Council. The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its appointed members. A majority of the appointed members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  
Section 9.04. - Commission: Powers and Duties. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall: 
a)  Exercise preliminary authority over platting and subdividing of land within and outside the corporate limits of the City as authorized by law; 
b)  Recommend to the Council approval or disapproval of proposed changes in the city's zoning ordinance and plan; 
c)  Recommend to the Council plans for the physical development of the City; and, 
d)  Perform all other functions of Planning and Zoning Commissions, including but not limited to, hearing special exceptions, variances and appeals from orders enforcing zoning laws, under the laws of the State of Texas, and recommending to the Council appropriate action.  
Section 9.05. - Development of Property. 
The City Council shall cooperate in every manner possible with persons interested in the development of property within or beyond the city limits. See Section 8.01. No expenditure of public funds, however, shall be authorized for the development of privately owned subdivisions within or beyond the corporate limits of the City, except for the extension of utilities or services to such areas.  
Section 9.06. - Comprehensive City Plan. 
The City Council shall cause to be written and shall adopt a comprehensive plan for the City, in compliance with State law. This master plan shall be reviewed and updated by the City Council at least annually after its adoption. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
ARTICLE 10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND TRANSITIONS 
 
Section 10.01. - Publicity of Records. 
All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the press at all reasonable times and under such reasonable regulations as may be established by the City Manager, provided that police records, records of vital statistics and other records closed to the public by law shall not be considered records for the purpose of this section.  
Section 10.02. - Official Newspaper. 
The Council shall by resolution designate a public newspaper of general circulation in the City as official organ thereof, and to continue as such until another is designated, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matter required by this Charter, by the ordinances of the City, or by the Constitution and/or laws of the State of Texas to be published.  
Section 10.03. - Personal Financial Interest. 
No elected City official or City employee shall have any financial interest in any contract with the City or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the City unless that financial interest has been fully disclosed. No elected City official or City employee shall have any financial interest in, or with, a contractor supplying the City unless that financial interest has been fully disclosed. 
Any elected City official who has such financial interest, shall notify the City Manager and City Council, in writing, of the nature and extent of that interest, and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the capacity as a City official in the preparation of, or the awarding of the bid for such contract or sale. 
Any City employee who has such financial interest, shall notify the City Manager and the City Council, in writing, of the nature and extent of that interest, and shall refrain from participating in bid process in any way for such contract or sale. 
The financial interest described in this Section may be direct, indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation. Any City official or employee who willfully conceals such financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this Section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit the office or position. Violation of this Section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the City, shall render the contract or sale voidable by the City Council or the City Manager. 
(This Section amended August 11, 1990.)  
Section 10.04. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity, nor within the third degree by consanguinity to the Mayor, a Councilmember, the City Manager, or other appointing city officer, may be appointed to a paid position of the City. This prohibition shall not apply to a person who is a current city employee and has been a city employee for six (6) months or longer at the time of election of the Mayor or Councilmember or thirty (30) days or longer at the time of the appointment of the City Manager or other appointing city officer. 
(This Section amended November 8, 2016 )  
Section 10.05. - Oath of Office. 
The officers of the City shall, whether elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the official oath prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas. The oath shall be administered by the Mayor, Mayor Pro-Tem, City Secretary or other person authorized by law to administer oaths. The oath of office of a newly elected or re-elected Mayor or Councilmember shall occur within 30 days of the election (i.e. the canvass) or the office will become vacant. 
(This Section amended November 8, 2016 )  
Section 10.06. - Exemption From Execution, Garnishment and Assignment. 
Property of the City shall not be liable for sale or appropriation by writ of execution. Funds of the City, possessed by any person, or entity, shall not be liable to garnishment on account of any debt the City may owe nor funds or property it may have on hand owed to any person. The City and its officers and agents shall not be required to answer a writ of garnishment of city property on any account whatever. The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors.  
Section 10.07. - Surety Bonds. 
The Council shall determine which city officers and employees whose duties will include the handling of moneys, before starting employment or entering the duties of office, shall make a surety bond in an amount and with a surety company acceptable to the Council. The surety company must be authorized to do business in Texas. The condition of the surety bond shall be that the principal will faithfully perform the duties of the office and account for and pay to the City all moneys and property coming into the principal's hands and belonging to the City and comply with applicable state law. The City will pay the premiums for these bonds. 
(This Section amended November 8, 2016 )  
Section 10.08. - Security or Bond Not Required. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City may be a party for any bond, undertaking, or security to be executed in behalf of the City; but all actions, suits and proceedings shall be conducted as if a bond, undertaking or security had been given. The City shall have all remedies of appeal provided by law to all courts without bond or security of any kind. For the purposes of all such actions, suits, proceedings and appeals, the City shall be liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if the bond, undertaking or security had been executed and given.  
Section 10.09. - Notice of Claim. 
The City shall not be held liable for a claim for the death or injury to a person, or for damage to property, unless the claimant or legal representative files a written statement of claim with the City Secretary within sixty (60) days after the event alleged to have caused the death, injury or damage. The statement must describe the nature and extent of the injury or damage; describe the place and circumstances of the alleged causal event; itemize by monetary amount the injury or damage; and, for personal injuries, name witnesses, if any, to the event.  
Section 10.10. - Power to Settle Claims. 
The Council shall have the authority to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the City, except suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes.  
Section 10.11. - Churches and School Property Not Exempt From Special Assessments. 
No property of any kind, church, school, or otherwise, in the City shall be exempt from any of the special taxes and assessments authorized by this Charter for local improvements unless the exemption is required by state law.  
Section 10.12. - Sale or Lease of Property Other than Public Utilities or Acquired by Tax Sale. 
Any real property owned by the City may be sold or leased by the City Council when in its judgment such sale or lease will be for the best interests of the City; provided, however, a sale or a lease for more than five (5) years shall never become effective until thirty (30) days after passage of the ordinance or resolution affecting same. If, during such thirty (30) day period, a referendum petition is presented to the City Secretary which in all respects conforms to the referendum provisions of Article 6 of this Charter, and same is found sufficient, then the Secretary shall certify the sufficiency of same to the City Council, and an election shall be called submitting the question of whether or not the sale or lease shall be consummated. Provided, further, however, the provisions of this Section shall not apply to public utilities nor to property purchased by the City at tax sales. 
Dedicated streets and alleys may be sold, abandoned or leased for more than five (5) years by the City Council in accordance with state law. 
(This Section amended May 8, 2010.)  
Section 10.13. - Continuance of Contracts and Preservation of Rights. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, ordinances, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings existing before the adoption of this Charter shall continue except as modified by this Charter; and shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by the city department, office or agency appropriate under this Charter.  
Section 10.14. - Construction of Charter. 
This Charter shall not be construed as a mere grant of enumerated powers, but shall be construed as a general grant of power and limitation of power on the government of the City of Marble Falls in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as a limitation on the powers of the Legislature. Except where expressly prohibited by the Charter, each and every power under the Constitution of Texas which it would be competent for the people of the City of Marble Falls to expressly grant to the City, shall be construed to be granted to the City by this Charter.  
Section 10.15. - Separability Clause. 
If a Section or part of a Section of this Charter is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which the Section or part of a Section invalidated appears, except to the extent that an entire Section or part of a Section is inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the Section or part invalidated.  
Section 10.16. - Charter Amendment. 
This Charter may be amended in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 10.17. - Rearrangement and Renumbering. 
The Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all Articles, Sections and paragraphs of this Charter or any amendments thereto, as it shall deem appropriate; and upon the passage of such ordinance, a copy thereof certified by the City Secretary shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing.  
Section 10.18. - Submission of Charter to Voters. 
The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter concludes that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function, it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the Charter Commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the voters of the City of Marble Falls at an election to be held for that purpose on August 9, 1986. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election, the City Council shall cause the City Secretary to mail a copy of this Charter to each registered voter of the City of Marble Falls as appears from the latest certified list of registered voters. If a majority of the registered voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall become the Charter of the City of Marble Falls, and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted and the City Secretary shall file an official copy of the Charter with the records of the City. The Secretary shall furnish the Mayor a copy of said Charter, which copy of the Charter so adopted, authenticated and certified by the Mayor's signature and the seal of the City, shall be forwarded by the Mayor to the Secretary of the State of Texas and shall show the approval of such Charter by majority vote of the registered voters voting at such election.  
Section 10.19. - Effective Date and Interim Government. 
This Charter shall take effect immediately after approval by the qualified voters of the City of Marble Falls. 
After the adoption of this Charter the City Council shall serve as elected until the next regular election, at which time an additional Council Member will be elected to the Council as prescribed by Article 3.  
Section 10.20. - Effective Date of Amendments. 
Any amendments made to this Charter shall show the effective date of the amendment directly below the text of the section amended, and all amended Sections shall be listed following this Section together with the effective date of each such amendment. 
(This Section added August 11, 1990.) 
Section 3.01  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 3.05  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 3.12  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 3.13  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 3.14  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 5.06  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 5.07  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 6.01  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 6.09  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 7.02  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 7.06  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 7.09  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 7.14  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 7.19  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 9.06  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 10.03  amended August 11, 1990. 
Section 10.20  added August 11, 1990. 
Section 3.06  amended November 5, 2002. 
Section 3.01 amended May 8, 2010 
Section 3.06 amended May 8, 2010 
Section 4.01 amended May 8, 2010 
Section 5.01 amended May 8, 2010 
Section 10.12 amended May 8, 2010 
Section 3.01 amended November 5, 2013 
Section 3.04 amended November 5, 2013 
Section 3.09 amended November 5, 2013 
Section 4.03 amended November 5, 2013 
Section 5.07 amended November 5, 2013 
Section 8.08 amended November 5, 2013 
Section 3.06 amended November 8, 2016 
Section 3.13 amended November 8, 2016 
Section 5.05 amended November 8, 2016 
Section 7.13 amended November 8, 2016 
Section 10.05 amended November 8, 2016 
Section 10.04 amended November 8, 2016 
Section 10.07 amended November 8, 2016 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, as a part of Supp. No. 65, § 10.20 was amended to read as set out herein.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Marble Falls, Texas" and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt Code of Ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1176a.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
Generally. Words shall be constructed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Marble Falls, in the County of Burnet and State of Texas. 
City officers, departments, boards and other agencies. The mention of officers, departments, boards or other agencies shall be construed to mean the officers, departments, boards or agencies of the City of Marble Falls, Texas, or any designated official or agency thereof. 
Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Marble Falls, Texas," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, by order of court, or by any applicable ordinance, the day of the act, event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a legal holiday. 
Council. The term "council" or "city council" shall mean the city council of the City of Marble Falls. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Burnet, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Shall/may. The word "shall" connotes a mandatory requirement. The word "may" is permissive. 
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions of state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 10, 23.  
Sec. 1-3. - Headings and captions. 
Headings and captions used in this Code other than the chapter, article, division and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.  
Sec. 1-4. - References and notes. 
Cross references, state law references and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses at the end of each section are for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.  
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the city council; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Making any appropriation; 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees; 
(12)  Prescribing specific traffic and parking regulations applying to certain streets; 
(13)  Pertaining to rezoning; 
(14)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Marble Falls, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Marble Falls, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows:…" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations; abatement; culpable mental state. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), except that the violation of any such provision of the Code or any such ordinance that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The penalty provided for in subsection (a) shall not prevent the abatement of the violating condition in addition to the penalty. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed the amount authorized by Section 12.23 of the Texas Penal Code does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds the amount authorized by Section 12.23 of the Texas Penal Code shall require a culpable mental state of "criminal negligence." 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8I, § II, 9-12-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1176a, § 1; municipal court jurisdiction, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1195.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance containing any administrative provisions of the city council saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); animal control advisory commission, § 6-2; housing official, § 7-131 et seq.; emergency management, Ch. 8; fire marshal, § 10-16 et seq.; planning, Ch. 17; planning and zoning commission, § 17-16 et seq.; police, Ch. 18; taxation, Ch. 24; administration and enforcement of traffic and motor vehicles, § 25-31 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 26; development code, App. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Adoption of general law relative to cities and towns. 
The city hereby accepts and adopts the provisions of chapters 1 to 10, inclusive, of title 28 of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as amended, for the government of the city.  
Sec. 2-2. - Holidays. 
The following national holidays shall be designated as the official holidays of the city and are to be taken on the same days as is the normal practice of the United States government. These official holidays are: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Good Friday; 
(3)  Memorial Day; 
(4)  Independence Day; 
(5)  Labor Day; 
(6)  Thanksgiving Day and the Friday following; 
(7)  Christmas Day and the day either before or after, as the weekend falls. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-11B, 11-12-85)  
Sec. 2-3. - Municipal court technology fund; fees. 
(1)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the "fund," pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(2)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(a)  The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). 
(b)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
1.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
2.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
3.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after the adoption of this section. 
(d)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director of the City of Marble Falls, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(3)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(a)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the City of Marble Falls, Texas, including: 
1.  Computer systems; 
2.  Computer networks; 
3.  Computer hardware; 
4.  Computer software; 
5.  Imaging systems; 
6.  Electronic kiosks; 
7.  Electronic ticket writers; or 
8.  Docket management systems. 
(b)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
(4)  Administration of fund. This section is in accordance with Article 102.0172 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. The purpose of the use of any monies remaining within the fund shall continue to be used and administered as required by Article 102.0172 CCP and shall be used for that purpose while this Article remains in effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-10D, §§ 1—3, 7, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2009-O-08B, § II(7), 8-10-2009)  
Sec. 2-4. - Establishment of juvenile case manager fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fund, here-in-now known as the "fund," as authorized by V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Articles 102.0174 and 45.056, as amended by H.B. 1575, 79th Tex. Leg. 2005. 
(b)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-2C, § II, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 2-5. - Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(a)  The fee shall be in the amount of five dollars ($5.00), unless a greater sum is allowed by state law, in which case the amount of the fee shall be the maximum amount allowed by state law. 
(b)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the defendant by the court, or 
(2)  The defendant receives deferred disposition from the Court, including deferred proceedings under V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 45.052 or 45.053. 
(c)  The municipal court judge may waive the juvenile case manager fee in cases of demonstrated financial hardship on the part of a convicted defendant if the defendant is indigent, has insufficient resources or income to pay the fee, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs. 
(d)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after the adoption of this section. 
(e)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director of the City of Marble Falls, who shall deposit the fee into the juvenile case manager fund. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-2C, § II, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 2-6. - Designated use of the fund and administration. 
The juvenile case management fund may be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a juvenile case manager that is employed by the municipal court under section 2-4 and V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 45.056(a). 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-2C, § II, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 2-7. - Juvenile case manager. 
The city council hereby authorizes the municipal court to employ one or more full-time or part-time juvenile case managers to provide services in cases involving juvenile offenders before the court consistent with the court's statutory powers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-2C, § II, 3-1-2011)  
Secs. 2-8—2-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The city council, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1007 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-07D, § II ,adopted July 5, 2016 , repealed § 2-16, in its entirety. Former § 2-16 pertained to "Council meetings," and was derived from Ord. No. 90-O-3B, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 27, 1990; Ord. No. 2002-O-1C, adopted January 22, 2002 and Ord. No. 2002-O-8B, adopted August 19, 2002.  
Sec. 2-17. - Contempt of city council. 
Pursuant to section 3.15 of the City Charter, the penalty for contempt of city council for failing to appear and testify before the city council or for failing to produce documents or other physical evidence in response to a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum shall be a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each act constituting contempt. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-3A, § 1, 3-27-90)  
Secs. 2-18—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Housing official, § 7-131 et seq.; fire marshal, § 10-16 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 2-41. - Appointment. 
The city council shall appoint a city administrator for the city who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-9, § 1, 9-14-76)  
Sec. 2-42. - Residency requirement. 
The city administrator may or may not be a resident of the city when appointed, but during the term of his office shall reside in the city. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-9, § 2, 9-14-76)  
Sec. 2-43. - Term of office. 
The city administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-9, § 3, 9-14-76)  
Sec. 2-44. - Absence; disability. 
During the absence or disability of the city administrator, the city council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-9, § 4, 9-14-76)  
Sec. 2-45. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the city administrator shall be: 
(1)  To devote all of his working time and attention to the affairs of the city, and be responsible to the city council for the efficient administration of its affairs; 
(2)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(3)  With the advice of the city council, to appoint and remove all department heads. He shall have the power to appoint or remove all subordinate employees; 
(4)  To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the city council or departments that may hereafter be created by the city council; 
(5)  To attend all meetings of the city council with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote; and be notified of all special meetings of the city council; 
(6)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city and its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the city council; 
(7)  To act as budget officer and as such to prepare and submit to the city council, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the estimated amounts required by months for the efficient operation of each department of the city government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures; 
(8)  In addition to the foregoing subsection (7), to make and file a budget as required by state law; 
(9)  To make a full written report to the city council as soon after the close of each month's accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding month, a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the monthly allowances made for such departments in the annual budget, and to keep the city council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(10)  To act as purchasing agent for the city and to purchase all merchandise, material and supplies needed by the city and establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such supplies shall be kept and from which same shall be issued as needed; and to adopt such rules and regulations governing requisitions and transaction of business between himself as the purchasing agent and the department heads, officers and employees as the city council may approve. It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent to give opportunity for competition on purchases and sales, except when the nature of the purchase or sale is such that competition is impossible or impracticable. All purchases in excess of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), except of real estate, or rights or easements therein, shall be by contract to the lowest responsible bidder and all sales in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00), except real estate or rights or easements therein, shall be made to the highest bidder after public notice and the receipt of sealed bids, unless the city council, by ordinance, determines that it is impossible or impracticable to purchase or sell in such manner. All sealed bids received shall be opened in public and thereafter shall be subject to public inspection. The purchasing agent may reject all bids and readvertise for new bids. The purchasing agent may require successful bidders to furnish security conditioned upon the faithful performance of their contract or conditioned upon the payment of the wages and compensation of all laborers employed on work for which a contract is made by the contractor, subcontractor, agent or any other person, or condition for both. The purchasing agent shall not let any contract for periods exceeding one (1) year for street lighting, public improvements, labor or supplies. In case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency, the city administrator may, with the consent of the city council, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by such accident or avoiding public emergency; but immediately afterwards, he shall file with the mayor a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity of such action together with an itemized account of all expenditures; 
(11)  To recommend to the city council the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the city; and it shall be the duty of the city council to pass ordinances or resolutions, from time to time, fixing rates of compensation; 
(12)  To recommend to the city council, in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient; 
(13)  To do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-9, § 5, 9-14-76)  
Sec. 2-46. - Compensation; bond. 
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix from time to time by ordinance and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the city council by ordinance, the premium to be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-9, § 6, 9-14-76)  
Secs. 2-47—2-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Department of housing and community development. 
(a)  Department established. There is hereby established a department of housing and community development, which department shall be under the supervision of the director of the department of housing and community development, who shall be subject to appointment and removal by the city manager. The salary of the director of the department of housing and community development shall be in accordance with the compensation plan of the city. The director shall devote his entire time to the work of his department and shall be responsible to the city manager for the efficient administration thereof. The director shall be authorized to appoint, employ and remove such officers, assistants, employees and personnel as he may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the affairs of the department and prescribe and fix their duties, scope of authority, and qualifications. All officers and employees of the department of housing and community development shall be governed by the same personnel rules and classification and compensation plan as is established for all other employees of the city. 
(b)  Reports. The director of this department shall make or cause to be made to the city manager and to the city council an annual report and may at any time, either on his own or upon request of the city council or city manager, make special reports concerning the housing and community development of the city, with his observation and recommendations thereon, together with all statistics concerning the department. 
(c)  Fees. All fees collected by the department shall be paid over to the city treasurer and deposited in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § II(2-1)—(2-3), 7-26-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-O-7, § II, adopted July 26, 1994, amended the Code by enacting provisions designated as "a new chapter" and numbered §§ 2-1—2-3. In order to provide for better classification and in order to keep related material together, the editor has included these new provisions as § 2-76.  
Secs. 2-77—2-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Animal control advisory commission, § 6-2; construction advisory and appeals board, § 7-1; planning and zoning commission, § 17-16 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-126. - Number of terms served. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the bylaws of any board or commission of the city to the contrary, there shall be no restriction on the number of consecutive terms any one (1) person may serve on any board or commission of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-0-12A, 12-6-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-0-12, adopted Dec. 6, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-126, was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-127. - Attendance regulations. 
Any appointed member of any board, commission or committee who fails to attend three (3) regular meetings in succession without notifying the chairman in advance or who does not attend at least sixty (60) percent of the regularly scheduled board meetings within a twelve-month period will be considered to have automatically resigned from the board, commission or committee. Attendance records shall be maintained by all city staff providing support to the various city boards, commissions and committees. The city manager or his designee shall monitor attendance for all boards, commissions and committees and notify the city council of resignations under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-8G, 8-25-2003)  
Secs. 2-128—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-R-12A, adopted Dec. 17, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 2-141 and 2-142 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Created. 
There shall be created an industrial development corporation pursuant to Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art. 5190.6 § 4A. This corporation shall be known as the Marble Falls Industrial Development Corporation, and shall have such powers and authority as is prescribed by law and by the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the corporation. 
(Ord. No. 91-R-12A, 12-17-91)  
Sec. 2-142. - Projects. 
The first priority of the corporation shall be to undertake such municipal water supply projects and to provide related transmission and treatment facilities connected with a municipally owned water system or sewage system as authorized by law, in order to develop the necessary infrastructure to support new and expanded business enterprises within the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-R-12A, 12-17-91)  
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-143. - Creation; membership; appointment; terms. 
There shall be created a commission known as the parks and recreation commission (also referred to as the "commission"), and shall have such powers and authority as is prescribed by the Charter, law and the bylaws of the commission. The commission shall be composed of seven (7) regular members and two (2) special cemetery members, all of whom shall be a registered voter of the city and shall not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the city, and known to be interested in parks and recreation. The mayor and city council shall appoint the regular members and special cemetery members to the commission to hold office for a term of two (2) years. No member of a board or commission shall continue in such position after filing for an elective office. Members may be removed by the city council without cause. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 2011-O-01D, § 2, 1-18-2011)  
Sec. 2-144. - Attendance. 
Regular members shall attend meetings in accordance with section 2-127 of the Marble Falls Code of Ordinances. Special cemetery members shall only be required to attend those meetings that involve cemetery related issues. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 2011-O-01D, § 3, 1-18-2011)  
Sec. 2-145. - Members not to hold other public offices—Compensation. 
(a)  No member of the commission shall hold any other public office of honor, trust or profit in the government of the city or county during their term of office. 
(b)  The members shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-146. - Chair and vice-chair—Rules and regulations. 
The commission shall select from among its members a chair and a vice-chair, and shall adopt, such rules and regulations for the government of its proceedings as may be deemed proper, not inconsistent with the ordinances and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-147. - Secretary—Duties. 
The administrative assistant of the parks and recreation department shall be the secretary of the commission in all matters pertaining to the park system and shall act without pay other than the salary received as administrative assistant. The administrative assistant shall keep a record of the transactions of the commission and shall provide the commission with data, information, plans and maps, relating to the parks and recreation system of the city, and shall cooperate fully in all particulars with the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 2011-O-01D, § 4, 1-18-2011)  
Sec. 2-148. - Ex officio members. 
The commission may invite ex officio members without the power to vote to participate in commission activities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-149. - Duty as advisory committee. 
In addition to the duties herein, the commission shall act as an advisory committee to the city manager and city council in the development, supervision and administration of the affairs of the city cemetery and parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 2011-O-01D, § 5, 1-18-2011)  
Sec. 2-150. - Parks and recreational activities; surveying; submission of findings and recommendations required. 
The commission shall from time to time, review the complete inventory of the parks of the city and of the recreational activities conducted by the city and shall report its findings to the city manager and city council, together with recommendations that it deems proper with reference to the improvement, management, development, supervision and administration of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-151. - Parks and recreational activities—Extension and development. 
The commission shall study, investigate and report upon plans for the extension of the parks and recreational activities within the city giving attention to the establishment of new parks in different parts of the city, as well as the extension and development of the existing parks and city cemetery, and the development and extension of recreational activities in parks and other public properties. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007; Ord. No. 2011-O-01D, § 6, 1-18-2011)  
Sec. 2-152. - Promoting cooperation. 
The commission shall at all times seek to promote close cooperation between the city and all private citizens, institutions and agencies interested in the establishment and development of parks and recreational activities. 
Further, all members currently appointed to the parks and recreation commission shall continue until such time as they resign, are removed or their term expires. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-2A, § II, 2-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-152.1. - Special cemetery members. 
Special cemetery members are appointed to represent city cemetery business only. Special cemetery members shall participate only in those commission meetings with cemetery business and shall be allowed to debate, make motions, and vote on cemetery business only. There shall be no less than two (2) parks and recreation commission meetings per year for the majority of cemetery business and others as needed. Special cemetery board members do not have term limits. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-01D, § 7, 1-18-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-10D, § 7, adopted Jan. 18, 2011, set out provisions to be included as § 2-153, however due to the current existence of a § 2-153 these provisions have been included as § 2-152.1.  
DIVISION 4. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN COMMITTEE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section II of Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, adopted May 11, 2009, enacted provisions designated as §§ 2-180—2-188. Inasmuch as some of those sections already exist, to avoid duplication, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 2-153—2-161. The original ordinance designations have been retained in the history note to each section. 
 
Sec. 2-153. - Creation—Membership—Appointment—Terms. 
(a)  There shall be created a committee known as the capital improvement plan committee (also referred to as the "committee" or the "CIP committee"), and shall have such powers and authority as described herein, prescribed by the Charter, law and the by-laws of the committee. 
(b)  The committee shall be composed of a total of nine (9) members, seven (7) members of which shall be members of the citys' planning and zoning commission and two (2) members who shall be citizens. All members shall be residents within the city limits and be interested in the city's capital improvement plan ("CIP") and the city's comprehensive plan. All members of the committee shall be appointed and may be removed at any time by simple majority vote of the city council. The members of the committee shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(c)  The membership of the committee shall be composed of the following: 
City of Marble Falls Planning and Zoning Commission; 
Two (2) citizens. 
(d)  If the mayor or a councilmember appointed to the committee ceases to be a member of the city council, they shall continue to serve on the committee until their successor is appointed to serve by the city council. If any other member of the committee is unable to serve or ceases to be qualified to serve, or if the member is no longer a member of the organization appointed as a member, then the organization named as a member to the committee shall appoint a successor member to serve on the committee. If the member organization does not appoint a successor member to serve within sixty (60) days from the date of the vacancy, the city council may fill the vacancy with the appointment of another organization, or by appointment of a citizen member. If a citizen member is unable to serve or ceases to be eligible to serve, the council may appoint a successor citizen member. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-180), 5-11-2009; Ord. No. 2013-O-07C, § II, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 2016-O-07C, § II, 7-19-2016 )  
Sec. 2-154. - Attendance. 
Members shall attend meetings in accordance with section 2-127 of the Marble Falls Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-181), 5-11-2009)  
Sec. 2-155. - Members not to hold other public offices—Compensation. 
(a)  No member of the committee shall hold a public office of another governmental entity during their term of office. 
(b)  The members shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-182), 5-11-2009; Ord. No. 2013-O-07C, § II, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 2-156. - Chair and vice-chair. 
The committee shall select from among its members a chair and vice-chair. The term of office for the chair and vice-chair shall be one (1) year. An officer may continue to serve until a successor is elected. A member may not hold more than one (1) office at a time. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-183), 5-11-2009; Ord. No. 2016-O-07C, § II, 7-19-2016 )  
Sec. 2-157. - Secretary—Duties. 
The committee shall select from among its members a secretary. The secretary shall keep a record of the transactions of the committee and the minutes of each meeting and shall make available to the committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the capital improvement plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-184), 5-11-2009; Ord. No. 2013-O-07C, § II, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 2-158. - Ex officio members. 
The committee may invite ex officio members without the power to vote to participate in committee activities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-185), 5-11-2009)  
Sec. 2-159. - Duty as advisory committee. 
The committee shall act only as an advisory body and provide recommendations to the city manager and city council, and shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Review the current CIP and file written comments regarding recommended amendments and prioritization of the city's needs for capital improvement projects; 
(2)  Advise the city of the need to update the CIP; 
(3)  File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the CIP; 
(4)  Develop a planning calendar and evaluation criteria to be used when recommending and prioritizing capital improvement projects; and 
(5)  Any other function or duty directed by the city council in regards to the CIP. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-186), 5-11-2009)  
Sec. 2-160. - Meetings. 
The committee shall meet no less than twice a year, or as needed or requested by the city manager or city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-187), 5-11-2009; Ord. No. 2016-O-07C, § II, 7-19-2016 )  
Sec. 2-161. - Rules and bylaws. 
The committee may adopt rules and regulations for the government of their own proceedings, and to carry out the purposes for which the committee is created, not inconsistent with state law, the Charter, this chapter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-05A, § II(2-188), 5-11-2009)  
DIVISION 5. - HOTEL MOTEL TAX ADVISORY COMMITTEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section II of Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, adopted Sept. 14, 2009, enacted provisions designated as §§ 2-200—2-208. Inasmuch as those sections already exist, to avoid duplication, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 2-162—2-170. The original ordinance designations have been retained in the history note to each section. 
 
Sec. 2-162. - Creation—Membership—Appointment—Terms. 
(a)  There shall be created a committee known as the "Hotel Motel Tax Advisory Committee" (also referred to as the "committee" or the "hotel committee"), and shall have such powers and authority as described herein, prescribed by the Charter, law and the bylaws of the committee. 
(b)  The committee shall be composed of a total of seven (7) members. At least four (4) members of the committee must be voting members. Members named to the committee that live outside of the city limits of the city will be nonvoting members. When a member named to the committee represents an organization, the organization may name another of its members to serve on the committee in lieu of the person or office named by the city. All members shall be appointed by simple majority vote of the city council. All members appointed to the committee shall not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the city. The members of the committee shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(c)  The membership of the committee shall be composed of the following: 
Director of the Marble Falls Chamber of Commerce. 
Director of the Marble Falls Economic Development Corporation. 
President of the Marble Falls Hotel Motel Association. 
City manager. 
Mayor or city councilmember. 
Two (2) citizens of the City of Marble Falls. 
(d)  If the mayor or a councilmember appointed to the committee ceases to be a member of the city council, they shall continue to serve on the committee until their successor is appointed to serve by the city council. If any other member of the committee is unable to serve or ceases to be qualified to serve, or if the member is no longer a member of the organization appointed as a member, then the organization named as a member to the committee shall appoint a successor member to serve on the committee. If the member organization does not appoint a successor member to serve on the committee within sixty (60) days from the date of the vacancy, the city council may fill the vacancy with the appointment of another organization, or by appointment of a citizen member. If a citizen member is unable to serve or ceases to be eligible to serve, the council may appoint a successor citizen member. If a member of the committee is a voting member and subsequently moves outside of the city limits, such member may continue to serve on the committee unless the number of voting members is thereby reduced to less than three (3) members. In such case, that member's seat on the committee shall be deemed to be vacant and a replacement member shall be appointed in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-200), 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 2012-O-10B, § II, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 2-163. - Attendance. 
Members shall attend meetings in accordance with section 2-127 of the Marble Falls Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-201), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-164. - Members not to hold other public offices—Compensation. 
(a)  No member of the committee shall hold any other public office of honor, trust or profit in the government of the city except the mayor, city council, or city manager members. 
(b)  The members shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-202), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-165. - Chair and vice-chair. 
The chair of the committee shall be the city manager. The vice-chair of the committee shall be the president of the Hotel Motel Association. The mayor or city council member shall serve as secretary. An officer may continue to serve until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-203), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-166. - Secretary—Duties. 
The secretary shall keep a record of the transactions of the committee and shall make available to the committee any reports, applications or other information necessary to further the activities of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-204), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-167. - Nonvoting members. 
Nonvoting members shall participate in committee activities without the power to vote. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-205), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-168. - Duty as advisory committee. 
The committee shall act only as an advisory body and provide recommendations to the city council, and shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Receive and review applications from businesses and individuals requesting funds for projects that are eligible for hotel motel tax funds; 
(2)  Prioritize the requests for such funds and projects and advise the city council regarding the committee's recommendations; 
(3)  Assist city with oversight of projects and agencies that receive funds and verify that such funds are being used in accordance with state law requirements; 
(4)  Report to city council on a quarterly basis regarding the activities of the committee and the agencies and the projects that have received funds; 
(5)  Develop a planning calendar, procedure for evaluation and evaluation criteria to be used when recommending and prioritizing agencies and projects for hotel motel tax funds; 
(6)  Recommend advertising and marketing strategies for the city council to consider and assist the city with oversight of any contracts for advertising and marketing approved by the city council; 
(7)  Any other function or duty directed by the city council in regards to the hotel motel advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-206), 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 2-169. - Meetings. 
The committee shall meet no less than twice a year, or as needed or as requested by the city manager or city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-207), 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 2016-O-07B, § II, 7-19-2016 )  
Sec. 2-170. - Rules and bylaws. 
The committee may adopt rules and regulations for the government of their own proceedings, and to carry out the purposes for which the committee is created, not inconsistent with state law, the Charter, this chapter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-09C, § II(2-208), 9-14-2009)  
Secs. 2-171—2-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-6(11). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-176—2-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Municipal Retirement System, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 110B. 
 
Sec. 2-186. - Participation. 
The city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, § 1, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-187. - Membership a condition of employment. 
Each person less than sixty (60) years of age, or who was less than sixty (60) years of age when that person became an employee of the city, who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his or her employment. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, § 3, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-188. - Current service credit. 
In accordance with the provisions of the TMRS Act, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of seven (7) percent of the full earnings of each employee of the departments. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, § 4, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-189. - Prior service credit. 
Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed prior service credit, as defined in section 63.101 of the TMRS Act, at the rate of one hundred (100) percent of the base credit of such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in section 63.105 of such act. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, § 5, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-190. - Contributions by city. 
For each month of current service rendered to this city by each of its employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is two hundred (200) percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment. The sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, § 6, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-191. - Duties of city secretary. 
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, § 7, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-192. - Effective date. 
Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall become effective on the first day of November, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, § 8, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-193. - Supplemental benefits fund. 
(a)  The city by its city council hereby elects to have the employees of all participating city departments participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided by Chapter 312, Acts Regular Session, 56th Legislature; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in the fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in the fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental benefits fund of the system. The city may, in the future, refuse to add new departments or new employees to the fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are already covered into the fund. 
(c)  The secretary is hereby directed to remit on a monthly basis to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of the city as may be fixed by the board, provided that the rate of contribution to the fund shall not exceed one-half of one percentum of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under the fund; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board may prescribe. 
(d)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the Supplemental Benefits Fund shall be effective November 1, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10, §§ 1, 3—5, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-194. - Death benefits. 
(a)  The city hereby elects to participate in the Supplemental Death Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in section XIX of the TMRS Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h, as amended) for each of the city's employees who are members of the system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided in Section XIX for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city. 
(b)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees and annuitants in the Supplemental Death Benefits Fund shall be effective on November 1, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10B, §§ 1, 3, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 2-195. - Withdrawals; redeposits upon resumption of membership. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 853.003 of subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow any member of Texas Municipal Retirement System who is an employee of this city on the eighth day of May, 1990 who has terminated a previous membership in system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least twenty-four (24) months of credited service as an employee of this city since resuming membership to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five (5) percent of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of termination of the earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of this city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to this city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. The five-percent per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or her individual account in the employees saving fund of the system. 
(b)  This section shall become effective on the twenty-third day of May, 1990, which is a date on or after the date set forth in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 82-O-10C, §§ 1, 2, 10-12-82; Ord. No. 90-O-5B, §§ 1, 2, 5-22-90)  
Sec. 2-196. - Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
Pursuant to the provisions of sections 852.105, 854.202(f), 854.204, 854.405, 854.406, and 854.410 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of Marble Falls, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the "system"): 
(a)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may terminate employment and remain eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity at any time after that member attains an applicable age and service requirement if that member has at least ten (10) years of credited service performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have authorized eligibility under section 854.202(c) of the Act or are subject to section 854.102(e) of the Act. 
(b)  An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is at least sixty (60) years old and has at least ten (10) years of creditable service performed for one (1) or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility under this subsection or are subject to section 854.102(e) of this subtitle. 
(c)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least twenty-five (25) years of credited service in that system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have participation dates after August 31, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(f) of the TMRS Act. 
(d)  If a member to whom subsection (b) of section 854.204 of the TMRS Act is applicable shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in the event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of said section 854.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(e)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (b) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(f)  An employee of this city who is a member of the system and who performed service for this city prior to September 1, 1987 (for which service that employee did not receive credit with the system because the employee was not at the time a member of the system due to his or her age at the date of his or her employment) is hereby granted service credit with the system for all of such service (performed after the date of his or her latest employment by the city) that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with the system, pursuant to section 852.105 of the Act. 
(g)  The rights, credits and benefits herein above authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this ordinance pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(h)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a "standard occupational disability annuity" under section 854.408 of the TMRS Act or an "optional occupational disability retirement annuity" under section 854.410 of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system; provided, that the system's medical board has certified to said board of trustees: (1) that the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; (2) that the disability is likely to be permanent; and (3) that the member should be retired. Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of section 854.409 of the TMRS Act. 
(i)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in section (e) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under sections 854.301 to 854.308 of the TMRS Act. 
This section shall become effective on the first day of January, 1996; provided, that it has previously been determined by the actuary for the system that all obligations of the city to the municipality accumulation fund, including obligations hereby undertaken, can be funded by the city within its maximum contribution rate and within its amortization period. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-10B, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-95)  
Sec. 2-196.1. - Additional rights effective January 1, 1998. 
(1)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 854.202(g) of subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of Marble Falls adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinreferred to as the "system"): 
(a)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in the system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(b)  Prior to adopting this ordinance, the governing body of the city has (1) prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at twenty (20) years of service and (2) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(c)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this ordinance pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(2)  This section shall become effective on the first day of January, 1998. 
(Ord. No. 97-O-11C, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 2-197. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.305 of subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city, shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said section 853.305 provided that the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service and the service meets the requirements of said section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under said section 853.305 while still an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-O-4C, § 1, 4-23-96)  
Sec. 2-198. - Military service. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 853.502, subchapter F of Chapter 853, Title 8 Government Code as amended, the City of Marble Falls hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the Armed Forces or Armed Forces Reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in section 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the Employees Saving Fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The City of Marble Falls agrees that its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-6G, §§ I, II, 6-23-2003)  
Secs. 2-199—2-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASING POLICIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-O-02E, § II, adopted on Feb. 11, 2008, amended article VII in its entirety. The new article VII pertains to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Generally. 
(a)  For purchases: 
(1)  Under three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Expenditures under three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) do not require quotes and only require the signature and approval of the department head. A purchase order is not required for purchases under three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). 
(2)  Between three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). For expenditures of more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) but less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), a purchase order with the signature from the department head and the city manager, assistant city manager or finance director is required. For expenditures in this range the purchasing department shall obtain a minimum of three (3) documented quotes, two (2) of which should be from historically underutilized businesses based on information provided by the comptroller and in accordance with state law. If the information provided by the comptroller fails to identify a historically underutilized business in the county, the city is exempt from obtaining quotes from historically underutilized businesses. Phone bids may be taken in lieu of written quotes. These quotes must be recorded, giving the date, contact person and the price quoted for the items listed. Items exempt from obtaining quotes are: sole source items, emergency purchases, personal or professional services, work paid for on a daily basis (day labor), to purchase or lease land or right of way, and inter-local or other cooperative contracts. 
(3)  Over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). If the expenditure will exceed this amount, then the city shall utilize one (1) of the bidding procedures authorized by state law. A purchase order with the signature of the department head and city manager, assistant city manager or director of finance shall be required. In the event of bona fide emergency, the city manager may exceed these limits or requirements after notifying the mayor of the emergency. The bidding procedure for purchases in this range must follow the guidelines stated in section 2-222. Purchases in this range must be approved by the city council. Items exempt from competitive bidding are: sole source items, emergency purchases, personal or professional services, work paid for on a daily basis (day labor), to purchase or lease land or right of way, and inter-local or other cooperative contracts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-02E, § II, 2-11-08; Ord. No. 2014-O-10A, § II, 11-4-2014 ; Ord. No. 2016-O-10C, § II, 10-18-2016 )  
Sec. 2-222. - Procedure for soliciting sealed bids for expenditures more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
Unless specifically exempt by state law, the procedure for soliciting sealed bids for purchases over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall generally follow the requirements set forth below, and in any instance shall be in accordance with all applicable laws: 
(1)  If the item was not specifically approved in the budget and an emergency does not exist, approval from the city council to solicit bids shall be required. 
(2)  A written set of technical specifications for the expenditure of funds for goods or services shall be prepared by the user department. The purchasing department shall maintain a set of "general conditions" requirements in addition to the technical specifications with the bid format and contract form. 
(3)  Bid openings shall be scheduled on Wednesdays at 10:00 a.m., unless another date and time is specified in the notice and bid specification documents. The place of the opening shall be at the city hall council chambers unless otherwise designated in the bid notice and contract documents. A copy of the "advertisement for bid" form which will be part of the bid package must be submitted to the official newspaper designated by the city council for publication at least fourteen (14) days before the bid opening. Notice of the time and place at which the bids will be publicly opened and read aloud shall be published at least once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the municipality. 
(4)  The city may maintain a vendor list as well as performance files for all vendors doing business with the city. Vendors may contact the city to be placed on such vendor list and it is the responsibility of the vendor to ensure the city has accurate information. The city may elect but is not required to notify vendors of available bid opportunities. 
(5)  In order to protect the interest of the city's taxpayers, the city may require a bid security bond depending on the dollar amount and specifics of the bid. In addition, the city may require performance and payment bonds, as well as insurance coverage to be provided by the successful bidder and or their subcontractors and agents. 
(6)  Sealed bids must be received prior to the published due date and time, otherwise they will be considered nonresponsive. The city will assume that vendor information is not proprietary unless it is clearly marked by the vendor. 
(7)  Sealed bids may be submitted by electronic transmission to the municipality, if specified as a permitted form of submission in the bid or proposal. The finance department shall develop and the city council must adopt rules to ensure the identification, security, and confidentiality of electronic bids or proposals and to ensure that the electronic bids remain effectively unopened until the proper time, in accordance with state law. An electronic bid or proposal is not required to be sealed. 
(8)  Bids shall be opened at the specified date, time, and place set forth in the bid specifications. The bids shall be evaluated as set forth in the bid specifications and shall "mirror" the city's specifications without exceptions. After the bid opening, the original bids shall be submitted to the city secretary for safe storage and provide copies of the department head responsible for the project. 
(9)  Staff shall prepare an agenda bill for submission to the city council describing the bids and responses, and provide a recommendation to city council. 
(10)  The city shall not enter into a contract or other transaction with a person as defined by state law, indebted to the municipality even if it is the apparent low bidder or successful proposer. 
(11)  The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(12)  The successful bidder shall be notified by the purchasing department. 
(13)  Invoices shall be delivered to the city and payment shall generally be net thirty (30) days, unless a discount is provided for prompt payment or otherwise described in the bid offer. 
(14)  Changes orders will be approved in accordance with state law. If a change order involves a decrease or an increase of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, then the city manager or assistant city manager is authorized to approve the change order. The original contract price may not be increased by more than twenty-five (25) percent. The original contract price may not be decreased by more than twenty-five (25) percent without the consent of the contractor. 
(15)  If a contract is funded by the issuance of certificates of obligation the total price of a contract may not be increased by a change order unless provision has been made for the payment of the added cost by the appropriation of current funds or bond funds, for that purpose, by the authorization of the issuance of certificates, or by a combination of those procedures. 
(16)  If a contract is funded by the issuance of certificates of obligation and the contract price is over one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the contract cannot be increased by more than twenty-five (25) percent without obtaining new bids utilizing the sealed bidding procedure. If the contract is under one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and the change order increases the contract amount by more than twenty-five (25) percent resulting in a total contract price of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or more, subsequent change orders may not increase the revised contract amount by more than twenty-five (25) percent without obtaining new bids utilizing the sealed bidding procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-02E, § II, 2-11-08; Ord. No. 2014-O-10A, § II, 11-4-2014 ; Ord. No. 2016-O-10C, § II, 10-18-2016 )  
Sec. 2-223. - Cooperative purchasing program. 
In lieu of seeking competitive bids for the purchase of goods or services, and in accordance with state law, the city may purchase goods or services under a cooperative purchasing program with another local government or a local cooperative program, or under the federal supply schedules of the United States General Services Administration, provided the expenditure is allocated in the approved municipal budget and approved by the department head and city manager. The city manager or assistant city manager is authorized to sign any agreements that satisfy the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-02E, § II, 2-11-08; Ord. No. 2014-O-10A, § II, 11-4-2014 ; Ord. No. 2016-O-10C, § II, 10-18-2016 )  
Secs. 2-224—2-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-O-2, adopted Feb. 21, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—15 as Ch. 2, Art. VIII, §§ 2-241—2-255 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-241. - City records. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, microfiche, magnetic tape, electronic media, machine-readable materials, or other documentary materials or information, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to the record is open or restricted under the laws, generated or received by the city or generated by or received by the city and any of its officers, employees, agents, contractors, consultants, committees, commissions, or subcommittees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provision of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 1, 2-21-91; Ord. No. 2006-O-2A, § 2A, 2-27-2006)  
Sec. 2-242. - Definitions. 
Active records: Those records in current use which must be retained in the offices because frequent reference is necessary in the conduct of day-to-day operations. 
Department head: The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of a department of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record: Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Inactive records: Those records which are seldom referred to, but which must be retained, temporarily or permanently, because of legal, fiscal, administrative, or archival value. 
Nonrecords: All material not usually included within the definition of records, such as unofficial copies of documents that are kept only for convenience or reference, stocks of publications and processed documents, and library or museum material intended solely for reference or exhibition. 
Permanent record: Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Public information: All information collected, assembled, or maintained under a law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official business by the city or for the city, which information the city owns or has the right to access, with exceptions as defined in Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code. 
Records control schedule: A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records management: The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records liaison officers: The persons designated under this article. 
Records management officer: The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer. 
Records management plan: The plan developed under this article. 
Records series: Records accumulated over a period of time and arranged in an organized file or set of files which can be described, handled, and disposed of as a unit. A records series may consist of records of a single type or format, or of records kept together because they relate to a particular subject or result from one activity. Example: Accounts payable, ordinances, or resolutions. 
Retention period: The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 2, 2-21-91; Ord. No. 2006-O-2A, § 2B, 2-27-2006)  
Sec. 2-243. - City records declared public property. 
All city records as defined in section 2-241 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 3, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-244. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 4, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-245. - Designation of records management officer. 
The city secretary's office, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 5, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-246. - Establishment of the records management plan. 
(a)  The records management plan (the "plan") set forth on the attached Exhibit "A," which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out in the body of this article, shall be approved as the records management plan of the city. 
(b)  The records management officer and the records liaison officers shall develop and maintain the records management plan of the city in accordance with the Local Government Records Management Act and as it may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Upon adoption of this article, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, officials, departments, divisions, employees, committees, commissions, boards, contractors, consultants, agents, or similar persons or entities of the city and city records shall be created, received, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(d)  The duties of the records management officer and the records liaison officers shall be those duties as specified in the Local Government Records Management Act, as it may be amended from time to time, and as otherwise set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 6, 2-21-91; Ord. No. 2006-O-2A, § 2C, 2-27-2006)  
Sec. 2-247. - Duties of records management officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the City of Marble Falls; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the city is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 7, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-248. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 8, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-249. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one (1) records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 9, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-250. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 10, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-251. - Records control schedules—Approval; filing with state. 
(a)  In lieu of filing records control schedules, the city has adopted record control schedules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The records management officer shall file with the Texas State Library and Archives Commission a declaration of compliance with the records scheduling requirements of the Local Government Records Act. 
(b)  The records control schedules adopted by the declaration of compliance may be amended by filing for approval a supplemental records control schedule (SLR Form 509) on which are listed proposed retention periods for records that do not appear on schedules issued by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 11, 2-21-91; Ord. No. 2006-O-2A, § 2D, 2-27-2006; Ord. No. 2015-O-02A, § II, 2-3-2015 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-02A, § II, adopted February 3, 2015, amended the title of § 2-251, to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-251 was titled records control schedules.  
Sec. 2-252. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-246 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the department heads and records liaison officers. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 12, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-253. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 13, 2-21-91)  
Sec. 2-254. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the records management plan, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operation and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 14, 2-21-91; Ord. No. 2006-O-2A, § 2E, 2-27-2006)  
Sec. 2-255. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming. Protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 91-O-2, § 15, 2-21-91)  
Secs. 2-256—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CODE OF ETHICS 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Business entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity recognized by law. 
Candidate. This term has the meaning assigned by section 251.001, Election Code. 
City official means the mayor, every member of the city council, the city manager, the city secretary, the city attorney, the city engineer and all members of any commission, committee, or board appointed by the city council or the mayor. 
Confidential information means any information that a city official would be privy to because of the official's position but otherwise is not available to the public under the provisions of the Texas Public Information Act (VTCA Government Code, ch. 552). 
Conflict disclosure statement means the Texas Ethics Commission disclosure statement form required by VTCA, ch. 176 of the Local Government Code. 
Conflict of interest questionnaire means the Texas Ethics Commission conflicts of interest form required by VTCA, ch. 176 of the Local Government Code. 
Economic benefit means any taxable income or any money, real or personal property, contract rights, sale, lease, option, credit, loan, discount, service, or other tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those enumerated. 
Economic interest means a legal or equitable interest in real or personal property or a fiduciary obligation to such property or contractual right in such property that is more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Service by a city official as an officer, director, advisor, or otherwise active participant in an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization does not create an economic interest in the property of that organization. Ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets is not an economic interest in the securities or other assets unless the city official participates in the management of the fund. A city official does not have an economic interest in a matter if the economic impact on the city official is indistinguishable from the impact on the public or on the particular group affected by the matter. 
Family member means the spouse, parent or child, and the parents of a spouse, city official, or appointee. 
Gift means a favor, hospitality, or economic benefit other than compensation but which does not include campaign contributions reported as required by state law, gifts received from a relative if given on account of kinship, or any value received by will, intestate succession, or as a distribution from an inter vivos or testamentary trust. 
Income means economic benefit received. 
Indirect ownership means an equity interest in a business entity where the interest is held through a series of business entities, some of which own interests in others. 
Property means real estate, personal items, equipment, goods, crops, livestock, or an equitable right to income from real estate, personal items equipment, goods, crops, or livestock. 
Second degree of consanguinity or affinity is defined through a chart in subsection 2-262(c)(4). 
Source of income means any business entity, employment, investment, or activity which earned or produced income, including interest, dividends, royalties or rents, which has been paid to or for the credit of a city official, candidate, or family member or which would be taxable to said city official, candidate, or family member under the United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, even though not actually paid or credited. 
Substantial interest means an interest in a business entity by a city official and/or a family member. 
(1)  Owns ten (10) percent or more of voting stock or shares of the business entity; 
(2)  Owns ten (10) percent or more or fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or 
(3)  If funds received from the business entity exceed ten (10) percent or more of the person's gross income for the previous year. 
A city official has a substantial interest in real property if he, his parent, or child or, if married, his spouse or his spouse's parent, controls or has an interest in the property and the interest has a market value of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more. 
Third degree of consanguinity is defined through a chart in subsection 2-262(c)(4). 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-262. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  No city official may disclose any confidential information gained through the official's position concerning property, operations, policies, or affairs of the city, for gain or advantage in an economic interest of the city official or the persons identified in subsection (c)(2)b. below. 
(2)  No city official may use the official's position or city-owned facilities, equipment, supplies, or resources of the city for gain in an economic interest of the city official, for a political campaign of the official, or for any of the persons identified in subsection (c)(2)b. below. A discount or award given for travel, such as frequent flyer miles, rental car or hotel discounts, or food coupons, are not things of value belonging to the city for purposes of this section due to the administrative difficulty and cost involved in recapturing the discount or award for the city. 
(3)  Except as specifically authorized by city ordinance, no city official may appear before the body of which the official is a member to represent the city official or any person identified in subsection (c)(2)b. below. The city official may designate and be represented by a person of the official's choice in any such matter. 
(4)  No city official may act as surety for any person or business entity that has a contract with the city, or as a surety on any bond required by the city for a city official. 
(5)  These general provisions do not prohibit a city official from representing the city official's interest in the city official's owner-occupied homestead before any city body, except the body of which the official is a member. 
(b)  Gifts. No city official may solicit or accept any contribution, gift, or economic benefit that is offered or given with the intention of influencing the judgment or discretion of such official; or given in consideration of the favorable exercise of the official's judgment or discretion in the past. 
(c)  Conflict of interest. 
(1)  Substantial interest. No city official may vote on or participate in any decision-making process on a matter concerning property or a business entity if the official has a Substantial Interest in the property or business entity. 
(2)  Economic interest. 
a.  No city official may vote on or participate in any decision-making process on a matter requiring filing of a conflicts disclosure statement if the official has an economic interest in the outcome of the matter under consideration. 
b.  To avoid the appearance and risk of impropriety, a city official may not take any official action that the official knows is likely to affect the economic interests of: 
1.  The city official's parent, child, stepchild, spouse, or other family member within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity or a client of the city official; 
2.  An employer of the city official, the official's parent, child, step-child, or spouse; 
3.  A business entity for which the city official serves as an officer or director or serves in any policy-making position; 
4.  A person or business entity from whom, within the past twelve (12) months, the city official or the official's spouse, directly or indirectly, received an economic benefit; 
5.  A person or business entity from whom, within the past twelve (12) months, the city official or the official's spouse, directly or indirectly, engaged in negotiations pertaining to business opportunities. 
(3)  Conflicts disclosure statement and recusal. 
a.  A city official shall file a sworn conflicts disclosure statement with the city secretary whenever a person or entity has contracted the city or is considering doing business with the person or entity and the city official has received or will receive an economic benefit in or with the person or entity or if the person or entity has given to the city official gifts that have a value in the aggregate of more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in the twelve-month period preceding the date the city official becomes aware that the city has a contract with such person or entity or that the city is considering doing business with such person or entity. The city official shall file the conflicts disclosure statement with the city secretary no later than 5:00 p.m. on the seventh business day after the date the city official becomes aware of the facts that require the failing of the statement. 
b.  A city official commits an offense if the city official knowingly fails to file the conflicts disclosure statement. An offense under the above subsection (3)a. above is a Class C misdemeanor. 
c.  The city secretary shall accept and file any and all city official conflict disclosure statements and any vendor conflict of interest questionnaires. 
d.  The city secretary shall maintain a list of city officials and shall make that list available to the public and any person who any be required to file a conflicts of interest questionnaire. 
e.  a city official having a substantial interest in the outcome of a matter under consideration shall disclose that the official has a substantial interest and recuse himself/herself immediately from voting and from the discussion of the matter. The city official shall also promptly file an affidavit with the city secretary disclosing the nature and extent of the conflict, and the affidavit shall be included in the official minutes of the body. 
(4)  Consanguinity and affinity. 
Affinity Kinship (Marriage) Relationships 
1st Degree 	2nd Degree 
Father-in-Law 	Spouse's Grandfather 
Mother-in-Law 	Spouse's Grandmother 
Son-in-Law 	Spouse's Brother (Brother-in-Law) 
Daughter-in-Law 	Spouse's Sister (Sister-in-Law) 
Spouse 	Spouse's Grandson 
	Spouse's Granddaughter 
	Brother's Spouse (Sister-in-Law) 
	Sister's Spouse (Brother-in-Law) 
 
Consanguinity (Blood) Relationships 
1st Degree 	2nd Degree 	3rd Degree 
Father 	Grandfather 	Great-Grandfather 
Mother 	Grandmother 	Great-Grandmother 
Son 	Brother 	Nephew 
Daughter 	Sister 	Niece 
	Grandson 	Great-Grandson 
	Granddaughter 	Great-Granddaughter 
		Uncle 
		Aunt 
 
(5)  Budget matters. The city council shall take a separate vote on any budget item specifically dedicated to a contract with a business entity in which a member of the city council has a substantial interest. The member of the city council that has the substantial interest may not participate in the separate vote. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-263. - Interest in property acquired with public funds. 
(a)  Disclosure of interest in property. A city official who has a legal or equitable interest in real property that is to be acquired with public funds shall file an affidavit within ten (10) days before the date on which the property is to be acquired by purchase or condemnation. 
(b)  Affidavit. The affidavit must: 
(1)  State the name of the city official; 
(2)  State the city official's office, public title, or job designation; 
(3)  Fully describe the property; 
(4)  Fully describe the nature, type, and amount of interest in the property, including the percentage of ownership interest; 
(5)  State the date when the person acquired an interest in the property; 
(6)  Include a verification as follows: "I swear that the information in this affidavit is personally known by me to be correct and contains the information required by Section 553.002, Government Code"; and 
(7)  Contain an acknowledgement of the same type required for recording a deed in the deed records of the county. 
The affidavit must be filed with the county clerk of the county in which the city official resides and the county clerk of each county in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-264. - Nepotism. 
(a)  Prohibition. 
(1)  A city official may not appoint, confirm the appointment of, or vote for the appointment or confirmation of the appointment of an individual to a position that is to be directly or indirectly compensated from city funds or fees of office if: 
a.  The individual is related to the city official within the third degree by consanguinity (blood or adoption) or the second degree by affinity (marriage); or 
b.  The city official holds the appointment or confirmation authority as a member of a state or local board, the legislature, or a court and the individual is related to another member of that board, legislature, or court within the third degree by consanguinity (blood or adoption) or the second degree by affinity (marriage). 
(2)  A city official may not appoint, confirm the appointment of, or vote for the appointment or confirmation of the appointment of an individual to a position in which the individual's services are under the public official's direction or control and that is to be compensated directly or indirectly from city funds or fees of office if: 
a.  The individual is related to another public official within the third degree by consanguinity (blood or adoption) or the second degree by affinity (marriage); and 
b.  The appointment, confirmation of the appointment, or vote for appointment or confirmation of the appointment would be carried out in whole or partial consideration for the other public official appointing, confirming the appointment, or voting for the appointment or confirmation of the appointment of an individual who is related to the first public official within the third degree by consanguinity (blood or adoption) or the second degree by affinity (marriage). 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The prohibitions in subsection (a) do not apply to: 
a.  An appointment to the office of a notary public or to the confirmation of that appointment; 
b.  An appointment or employment of a personal attendant by an officer of the city for attendance on the officer who, because of physical infirmities, is required to have a personal attendant; or 
c.  Any other appointment excepted under VTCA, ch. 573, Government Code. 
(2)  The prohibition in subsection (a)(1) does not apply to an appointment, confirmation of an appointment, or vote for an appointment or confirmation of an appointment of an individual to a position if: 
a.  The individual is employed in the position immediately before the election or appointment of the city official to whom the individual is related in a prohibited degree; and 
b.  That prior employment of the individual has been continuous for at least two (2) years. 
(3)  If, under subsection (b)(2), an individual continues in a position, the city official to whom the individual is related in a prohibited degree may not participate in any deliberation or vote on the appointment, reappointment, confirmation of the appointment or reappointment, employment, reemployment, change in status, compensation, or dismissal of the individual if that action applies only to the individual and is not taken regarding a bona fide class or category of employees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-265. - Honorariums. 
(a)  Prohibition. A city official is prohibited from soliciting, accepting, or agreeing to accept an honorarium in consideration for services that the city official would not have been requested to provide but for the city official's official position or duties. 
(b)  Exception. This section does not prohibit a city official from accepting (1) transportation expenses, (2) lodging expenses or (3) meals in connection with a conference or similar event in which the city official renders services, such as addressing an audience or engaging in a seminar to the extent that those services are more than merely perfunctory. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-266. - Gifts. 
(a)  Prohibition. 
(1)  A city employee performing regulatory functions or conducting inspections or investigations shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any benefit from a person the city employee knows to be subject to regulation, inspection, or investigation by the city employee or the city. 
(2)  A city employee having custody of prisoners shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any benefit from a person the city employee knows to be in his custody or the custody of the city. 
(3)  A city employee or a city official who exercises discretion in connection with contracts, purchases, payments, claims, or other pecuniary transactions of the city shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any benefit from a person the city employee or city official knows is interested in or likely to become interested in any contract, purchase, payment, claim, or transaction involving the exercise of his discretion. 
(4)  A city employee or city official who has judicial or administrative authority, who is employed by or in a tribunal having judicial or administrative authority, or who participates in the enforcement of the tribunal's decision shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any benefit from a person the city employee or city official knows is interested in or likely to become interested in any matter before the city employee or city official or tribunal. 
(b)  Donation of unsolicited gift. A city employee or city official who receives an unsolicited benefit that the city employee or city official is prohibited from accepting under this section may donate the benefit to a governmental entity that has the authority to accept the gift or may donate the benefit to a recognized tax-exempt charitable organization formed for educational, religious, or scientific purposes. 
(c)  Exceptions. The prohibitions set out in this section do not apply to: 
(1)  A fee prescribed by law to be received by a city employee or city official or any other benefit to which the city employee or city official is lawfully entitled or for which he gives legitimate consideration in a capacity other than as a city employee or city official; 
(2)  A gift or other benefit conferred on account of kinship or a personal, professional, or business relationship independent of the official status of the recipient; or 
(3)  A benefit to a city employee or city official required to file a statement under VTCA, ch. 572, Government Code, or a report under VTCA Title 15, Election Code, that is derived from a function in honor or appreciation of the recipient if: 
a.  The benefit and the source of any benefit in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00) is reported in the statement; and 
b.  The benefit is used solely to defray the expenses that accrue in the performance of duties or activities in connection with the office which are nonreimbursable by the state or the city; 
(4)  A political contribution as defined by VTCA Title 15, Election Code; 
(5)  An item with a value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00), excluding cash or a negotiable instrument as described by Section 3.104, Business and Commerce Code; 
(6)  An item issued by a governmental entity that allows the use of property or facilities owned, leased, or operated by the governmental entity; 
(7)  Food, lodging, transportation, or entertainment accepted as a guest and, if the donee is required by law to report those items, reported by the donee in accordance with that law; or 
(8)  Any gift or benefit otherwise excepted under VTCA, § 36.10, Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-267. - City records. 
(a)  Prohibition: City official or city employee shall not: 
(1)  Knowingly make a false entry in, or false alteration of, a city record; 
(2)  Make, present, or use any record, document, or thing with knowledge of its falsity and with intent that it be taken as a genuine city record; 
(3)  Intentionally destroy, conceal, remove, or otherwise impair the verity, legibility, or availability of a city record; 
(4)  Possess, sell, or offer to sell a city record or a blank city record form with intent that it be used unlawfully; 
(5)  Make, present, or use a city record with knowledge of its falsity; or 
(6)  Possess, sell, or offer to sell a city record or a blank city record form with knowledge that it was obtained unlawfully. 
(b)  Exception. It is an exception to the application of subsection (a)(3) of this section that the governmental record is destroyed pursuant to legal authorization or transferred under VTCA, § 441.204, Government Code. With regard to the destruction of a local government record, legal authorization includes compliance with the provisions of VTCA, Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-268. - Misuse of official information. 
(a)  Prohibition. 
(1)  A city employee or city official shall not misuse information to which he or she has access by virtue of his or her office or employment and that has not been made public, and shall not: 
a.  Acquire, attempt to acquire or aid another to acquire or attempt to acquire a pecuniary interest in any property, transaction, or enterprise that may be affected by the information; 
b.  Speculate or aid another to speculate on the basis of the information; or 
c.  As a city official or city employee coerce another into suppressing or failing to report that information to a law enforcement agency. 
(2)  A city employee or city official shall not with intent to obtain a benefit or with intent to harm or defraud another, disclose or use information for a nongovernmental purpose that: 
a.  The city official or city employee has access to by means of his office or employment; and 
b.  Has not been made public. 
(b)  Definition. In this section, "information that has not been made public" means any information to which the public does not generally have access, and/or that is prohibited from disclosure under VTCA, ch. 552, Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-269. - Ethics review commission. 
(a)  The ethics review commission (the "commission") has jurisdiction over ethics complaints as described in this article involving city officials and city employees. 
(b)  The commission is to be composed of five (5) members each serving a two-year term. The city council shall appoint each member to the commission. If a vacancy occurs on the commission, the city council shall appoint a person to fill the unexpired term. Each commission member shall take an oath of office comparable to that taken by city council members. Ethics commissioners shall serve without compensation, but shall be eligible to be reimbursed for actual expenses in accordance with the city's policy. 
(1)  Terms of commissioners. At the council meeting which creates the commission two (2) commissioners shall be selected to serve an initial one-year term and three (3) commissioners shall be selected to serve an initial two-year term. Thereafter, all members' terms shall be three (3) years. The city council may by majority vote remove a commissioner with or without cause. Any commissioner who misses three (3) consecutive meetings within a twelve-month time period or one-third ( 1/3 ) of all regular meetings shall be deemed to have automatically vacated his/her position on the commission. This section shall not apply to a commissioner who applied for and received an excused absence from the commission chairperson prior to the meeting(s) at issue. Any commissioner who no longer resides within the corporate boundaries of the city is deemed to have automatically vacated his/her position on the commission. 
(2)  Commission officers. From among its members the commission shall elect its officers, those being the chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary. Officers shall be elected for terms of one (1) year. The chairperson shall preside over all meetings and may vote. If the chairperson fails or refuses to act, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson. If the chairperson and vice-chairperson are absent, any commissioner may be appointed by the remaining members of the commission to preside over the meeting. 
(3)  Qualifications. 
a.  Commission members must be registered voters who are residents of the city. 
b.  No member of the ethics commission may be: 
1.  A city official, city employee or spouse of a city official or city employee; 
2.  A candidate for elected public office; 
3.  Anyone having an economic interest with any city official or city employee; 
4.  Anyone who has been a paid campaign worker or political consultant for any city council or mayoral candidate; or 
5.  A convicted felon. 
(b)  The ethics review commission shall have the authority to review and investigate complaints filed in accordance with this article and issue a written finding of the commission's determination when appropriate. 
(c)  Service on the ethics review commission does not preclude a member from filing a complaint with the commission. The commission member filing the complaint must recuse himself/herself from the commission procedure. 
(d)  The ethics review commission makes recommendations to the city council regarding revisions and changes to this araticle. 
(e)  The ethics review commission may seek any necessary assistance from the city council and city manager regarding financial support needed to carry out the commission's duties. 
(f)  The commission shall determine its rules and procedures, to be submitted in writing for approval of the city council. The commission shall establish, amend and rescind its procedures and maintain proper records of its proceedings and its opinions. The commission shall meet as often as necessary to fulfill its responsibilities but must meet at least once a year to review this Code Ethics. 
(g)  The commission shall have the power to investigate, request and gather evidence necessary to determine if a violation has occurred. The commission shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article, including recommending to the city council the prosecution of alleged violators. Nothing in this article shall be construed, however, to prevent complainants, including the city, from instituting direct legal action on their own behalf through the appropriate judicial authority. 
(h)  The commission shall receive from the city such administrative support as reasonably necessary to carry out the duties of the commission and shall assist the commission with maintenance of its records in compliance with the city's records retention schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-270. - Role of the city attorney. 
(a)  The city attorney serves as legal counsel to the ethics review commission. When complaints are filed relating to the mayor, city council members, city manager, or city attorney, independent legal counsel may be utilized to advise the commission and take part in its proceedings. 
(b)  The city attorney serves as ethics advisor to city officials and city employees. As ethics advisor, the city attorney is available to respond confidentially to inquiries relating to the ethics ordinance (this article) and may render advisory opinions on potential conflicts of interest or violation of this section at the request of a city official or city employee. The advisory opinion in any subsequent charges concerning the matter may be used as a defense to an alleged violation of this section unless material facts were omitted or misstated by the person requesting the opinion. 
(c)  The city attorney shall receive all sworn complaints and provide a copy and a preliminary review of the complaint to the commission for action. The preliminary review does not advise on the merits of a complaint. 
(d)  If a complainant alleges a violation by the city attorney, the complaint must be filed with the chairperson of the ethics commission, with a copy to the mayor and the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-271. - Complaint process. 
(a)  Filing. 
(1)  Any city official of the city or eligible voter of the city who believes that there has been a violation of this article may file a sworn complaint. A complaint alleging a violation of this article must meet the requirements herein and must be filed with the city secretary. A complaint alleging a violation of this article by the city attorney must also be filed with the persons named in section 2-270. A complaint must be filed within one (1) year from the date of the alleged violation. 
(2)  Required contents of a complaint. An ethics complaint must be in writing and under oath and must set forth in simple, concise, and direct statements the following: 
a.  The name of the complainant; 
b.  The street or mailing address and the telephone number of the complainant; 
c.  The name of the person who allegedly committed the violation; 
d.  The position or title of the person who allegedly committed the violation; 
e.  The nature of the alleged violation, including, if possible, the specific rule or provision of this article alleged to have been violated; 
f.  A statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation and the dates on which or period of time in which the alleged violation occurred; and must contain the following: 
1.  Documents or other material available to the complainant relevant to the allegation; 
2.  A list of all documents or other material relevant to the allegation and available to the complainant, but that are not in the possession of the complainant, including the location of the documents; if known; and 
3.  A list of all documents or other material relevant to the allegation, but unavailable to the complainant, including the location of the documents, if known. 
g.  If the complaint is based on information and belief, the complaint shall state the source and basis of the information and belief. 
(3)  The complaint must be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the information contained in the complaint is either true and correct or that the complainant has good reason to believe and does believe that the facts alleged constitute a violation of this article. 
(4)  Upon request, the city secretary shall provide information to persons about the requirements of a complaint and the process for filing a complaint. 
(b)  Confidentiality and ex parte communications. 
(1)  No city official or city employee may reveal information relating to the filing or processing of a complaint except as required for the performance of official duties. 
(2)  All documents relating to a pending complaint are confidential, unless they are required to be disclosed under the Texas Public Information Act (Tex. Gov. Code Ch. 552). 
(3)  After a complaint has been filed, and during the consideration of a complaint by the commission, a member of the commission may not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or person about any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except at a meeting of the commission. This provision does not prevent a member of the commission to consult with the city attorney regarding procedural and legal issues. 
(c)  Notification. 
(1)  A copy of a complaint which meets the requirements of this section shall be promptly forwarded by the city secretary to the city attorney and to the person charged in the complaint. 
(2)  The person alleged in the complaint to have violated this article shall be provided with a copy of the ethics ordinance (this article) and informed that: 
a.  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the complaint, a sworn response must be filed with the city secretary; 
b.  Failure to file a response does not preclude the city attorney from processing the complaint; 
c.  A copy of any response to a complaint must be provided by the city secretary to the complainant, who may within seven (7) days respond by sworn writing filed with the city secretary, who shall provide a copy of the sworn writing to the person charged in the complaint. 
(3)  City officials and city employees have a duty to cooperate with the city attorney, pursuant to this section. 
(4)  All members of the commission shall receive copies of the complaint, any background documentation, and any responses at least seven (7) days before a hearing on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-272. - Hearing process. 
(a)  Preliminary hearing. 
(1)  As soon as reasonably possible, but in no event later than sixty (60) days after receiving a complaint, the commission shall conduct a preliminary hearing. The purpose of the preliminary hearing is to determine whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this article has occurred. 
(2)  The complainant and the city official or city employee named in the complaint have the right of representation by counsel. 
(3)  Statements at a preliminary hearing shall be under oath, but there shall be no cross examination or requests for persons or evidence issued for the hearing. 
(4)  The person filing a complaint shall state the alleged violation and describe in narrative form the testimony and other evidence which are presented to prove the alleged violation as stated in the written complaint. 
(5)  The city official or city employee named in the complaint shall have the opportunity to respond but is not required to attend or make any statement. The official may describe in narrative form the testimony and other evidence presented to disprove the alleged violation. If the official agrees that a violation has occurred, the commission may consider the appropriate sanction. 
(6)  Only members of the commission may question the complainant, the independent counsel for the commission, or the city official or city employee named in the complaint. 
(7)  At the conclusion of the preliminary hearing one of the following actions shall be taken: 
a.  If the commission does not determine that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this article has occurred, the complaint shall be dismissed. 
b.  If the commission determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this article has occurred, it shall schedule a final hearing. 
c.  If the city official or city employee has agreed that a violation has occurred, the commission may proceed with the preliminary hearing to determine the appropriate sanction. 
(b)  Final hearing. 
(1)  A final hearing shall be held as expeditiously as possible following the determination by the commission that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this article has occurred, but in no event shall it be held more than thirty (30) days after said determination. The commission may grant two postponements, not to exceed fifteen (15) days each, upon the request of the city official or city employee named in the complaint. 
(2)  If a complaint proceeds to a final hearing, the commission may request witnesses to attend and testify, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and request the production of books, papers, records, or other evidence needed for the performance of the commission's duties or exercise of its powers, including its powers of investigation. 
(3)  The issue at a final hearing is whether a violation of this article has occurred. The commission shall make its determination based on the evidence in the record. All witnesses shall make their statements under oath. If the commission determines that a violation has occurred, it shall state its findings in writing, identify the particular provision(s) of this article which have been violated, and within five (5) working days deliver a copy of the findings to the complainant, the person named in the complaint, and the city secretary. The city secretary shall deliver a copy of the findings to the city council, the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-273. - Sanctions and violations. 
(a)  If the commission determines that a violation of this article has occurred, it shall consider appropriate sanctions. The commission may receive additional testimony or statements before considering sanctions, but is not required to do so. 
(b)  If the commission determines that a violation has occurred, it may impose the following sanctions. 
(1)  A letter of notification is an appropriate sanction when the violation is clearly unintentional. The letter of notification shall advise the city official or city employee of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations. 
(2)  A letter of admonition is the appropriate sanction when the commission finds the violation is minor. 
(3)  A letter of reprimand is the appropriate sanction when the commission finds a serious violation has been committed. 
(4)  A letter of censure is the appropriate sanction when the commission finds that a serious violation has occurred or more than one (1) serious violation or repeated serious violations of this article have been committed. 
(c)  Copies of all sanction letters issued by the commission under this section shall be sent to the city council. 
(d)  In addition, when the seriousness of the violation warrants, the commission may recommend to the city council the suspension or removal from office of any official serving in a city-appointed position. 
(e)  Except with regard to violations of VTCA, chs. 171 and 176 of the Texas Local Government Code, violations of the Penal Code, or violations of the Government Code, a violation by any city official or city employee as designated herein of one or more of the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to be a Class C misdemeanor under the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Sec. 2-274. - Distribution and proof of compliance. 
The city secretary shall make available to each new city official designated in this article, a copy of the text of this article; VTCA, chs. 171 and 176 of the Texas Local Government Code pertaining to conflicts of interest; the Texas Open Meetings Act (Tex. Gov. Code ch. 551); and the Texas Public Information Act (Tex. Gov. Code ch. 552) (collectively referred to in this section as the "Ethics Statutes"). 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-8A, § 2, 9-25-2005)  
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Highway beautification, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477—9a, § 4.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 3-1—3-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of Art. II, "Handbills," were deleted as being superseded by those of Ord. No. 90-O-3, adopted Mar. 27, 1990. Sections 1—4 of the ordinance were codified as a new Art. II, §§ 3-16—3-21, at the editor's discretion. The deleted provisions, §§ 3-16—3-22, 3-36—3-42, derived from sections which bore no history note and from Ord. No. 80-O-7A, §§ I—III, adopted July 22, 1980, which was repealed by § 7 of Ord. No. 90-O-3. 
 
Sec. 3-16. - Applicability of provisions; conflict. 
This article is intended to relate to handbills generally. In the event of a conflict between this article and another ordinance which deals with a specific type of handbill, poster, advertisement, pamphlet or circular of any description, the specific ordinance controls over this article. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing sentence, the land use ordinance provisions regarding signs (including, but not limited to, garage sale signs) shall control over this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-3, § 3, 3-27-90)  
Sec. 3-17. - Exemptions. 
There is specifically exempt from the terms of this article all newspapers and other publications mailed and delivered by the United States Postal Service. There is also specifically excepted and exempted from this article all advertising matter, newspapers and other publications approved in advance by the owners of the premises for placing and distributing these materials within the premises. 
Distributors, by hand, of non-commercial handbills containing political, religious, or public policy information or advocacy, are not subject to the other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-3, § 3, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 2004-O-1A, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 3-18. - Permit—Required to distribute, etc. 
No person or persons shall tack, nail, paste or otherwise fasten any handbill, poster, advertisement, pamphlet or circular of any description on any fence, wall, post, pole, billboard or building, or hand, cast, throw or place any of such material in or upon any public street, avenue, alley or other public grounds of the city or on any private street, alley, avenue or other public grounds of the city, or on any private property or on any private building, or place the articles in vehicles or hand them to persons without first obtaining a permit in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-3, § 1, 3-27-90)  
Sec. 3-19. - Same—Application; fees; expiration. 
(a)  Application. Applicants for a permit to distribute advertisements and handbills in the city shall apply in writing to the city manager or his designated representative, and each such permit application shall be accompanied by a fee based on the following schedule: 
(1)  Commercial applicants, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(2)  Nonprofit organizations, ten dollars ($10.00). 
(3)  Individuals (for noncommercial purposes), thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(b)  Effective period of permit. The permit shall be effective for one (1) week. However, if the applicant is a political candidate, the permit shall be effective for one (1) month. 
(c)  Individuals and organizations distributing non-commercial handbills which contain political, religious, or public policy information or advocacy shall be exempt from the permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-3, § 2, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 2004-O-1A, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 3-20. - Certain information required on each copy of advertising material. 
Each copy [of the handbill, etc.,] distributed must contain the name and address of the person responsible for the advertisement and distribution. 
Non-commercial handbills containing political, religious, or public policy information or advocacy are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-3, § 2, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 2004-O-1A, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 3-21. - Penalty for violation. 
The violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any person convicted thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), and each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-3, § 4, 3-27-90)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 86-O-12B, §§ 1—6, enacted Dec. 31, 1986, has been codified as superseding Ch. 4, with the exception of former § 4-5 which has been redesignated as § 4-6. Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 86-O-12B, Ch. 4 was derived from Ord. No. 82-O-7A, §§ I, II(A), (B), III(A), V, VI, VIII(B), enacted July 13, 1982. 
Cross reference— Use of alcoholic beverage in city parks, § 15-23. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Code, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.; public intoxication, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, § 42.08. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, all definitions of words, terms, and phrases set forth in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as it exists now or as it may be hereafter amended, are hereby adopted and made a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 1, 12-31-86)  
Sec. 4-2. - Location restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell any form of alcoholic beverage within three hundred (300) feet of any church, public hospital, or public or private school. The measurements shall be taken in accordance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, and Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission ("TABC") Rules. In the event that two (2) or more permissible methods of measurement are permitted by the TABC, the most restrictive measurement method shall control. 
(b)  Cocktail lounges shall be permitted on properties zoned Main Street District ("MSD") according to the regulations contained in the Land Use Ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Package stores and mixed beverage sales shall be permitted on properties zoned "C-3" that have a property line adjacent to or within three hundred (300) feet of Highway 281 or 1431. Said use shall also conform to the regulations contained in the Land Use Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 3, 12-31-86; Ord. No. 96-O-6C, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 2004-O-9E, § II, 9-27-2004; Ord. No. 2010-O-04A, § II, 4-26-2010)  
Sec. 4-3. - Hours of sale. 
In this section, the terms "beer" and "mixed beverages" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04. 
(1)  The extended hours prescribed in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05(c) are effective in the City of Marble Falls, Texas to allow the holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license to sell, offer for sale, and deliver beer between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(2)  The extended hours prescribed in Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.03(c) are effective in the City of Marble Falls, Texas to allow the holder of a mixed beverages late hours permit to sell and offer for sale mixed beverages between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 4, 12-31-86; Ord. No. 2010-O-10B, § II, 11-2-2010)  
Sec. 4-4. - Consumption in public prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place, for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in any public place for the purpose of consuming the same in such public place, at any time on Sunday between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon, and on all other days at any time between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 5, 12-31-86)  
Sec. 4-5. - Consumption on premises of private clubs restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any private club to cause, permit or allow any person to consume or be served any alcoholic beverage on the club premises at any time on Sunday between the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon, or any other day at any time between the hours of 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 6, 12-31-86)  
Sec. 4-6. - Prohibited in public school athletic events. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or carry into any enclosure, field or stadium, where athletic events sponsored or participated in by any public school are being held, any alcoholic beverage or to have any alcoholic beverage in his possession while in or on such enclosure, field or stadium. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-7A, § VII(H), 7-13-82)  
Secs. 4-7—4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local permit fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A.; Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36. 
 
Sec. 4-21. - License required. 
No person shall manufacture, sell, distribute, or store any intoxicating liquor, malt liquor, or other alcoholic beverage, or engage in any other activity with relation to the same for which a permit is required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, within the city, without first obtaining a license to do so from the city. The fee for such license shall be an amount equal to one-half (1/2) the permit or license fee charged by the state under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 2, 12-31-86)  
Sec. 4-22. - State permit required. 
No license required under the terms of this chapter shall be issued to any person until he shows that he holds a state permit for the particular phase of the liquor traffic in which he desires to engage in the city and until the fee required by the city for such license has been paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 2, 12-31-86)  
Sec. 4-23. - Revocation. 
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city council upon violation of any applicable provision of this chapter or the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 2, 12-31-86)  
Sec. 4-24. - Nontransferable. 
Any license under the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable or assignable except with the written permission and approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 86-O-12B, § 2, 12-31-86)  
Sec. 4-25. - Requirements for on-premises consumption. 
Verification of the ratio of the sales of goods or services to alcoholic beverages sales shall be made by a certified public accountant as a condition of each renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2004-O-9F, § II, 9-27-2004; Ord. No. 2010-O-04A, § III, 4-26-2010)  
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS, ENTERTAINMENTS, AND TEMPORARY USES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-O-4A, § II, adopted April 15, 2014 , amended the title of ch. 5 to read as set out herein. Previously ch. 5 was titled amusements and entertainments. 
Cross reference— Permit required to provide entertainment in city parks, § 15-20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5-1—5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CARNIVALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Circuses, carnivals and zoos, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4447v. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-16. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the word "carnival" shall be defined as the operation or exhibition of any aggregation of riding or skill devices, not constituting an amusement park, side shows, concessions or other features, ordinarily operated or exhibited at what is commonly known and accepted as a traveling or itinerant carnival show. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § I, 3-23-82) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-17. - Supervision of rides, devices. 
Each ride or skill device shall be operated under the direct and full-time supervision and attendance of a person eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIIA, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-18. - Use of alcohol, controlled substances by operators, attendants. 
No ride or skill device shall be operated or attended by a person who is intoxicated or who is believed to be under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances, prescription or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIIB, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-19. - Hours of operation. 
No permitted operation shall be operated in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on any day, or between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:00 p.m. on any Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIIC, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-20. - Area to be free of litter, debris. 
The permitted operator shall, on a continuing basis, police the general area of operation for litter and debris. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIID, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-21. - Inspections authorized; discontinued use of unsafe attractions. 
The permitted operator shall allow the city administrator or his designated agent to conduct any "on-site" inspection that is deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city administrator or his designated agent is authorized to require the permitted operator to discontinue use of rides, skill devices or other attractions which may be found to be unsafe and to require the permitted operator to cordon off and make inaccessible areas within which an unsafe or unhealthy condition may exist. The permitted operator shall not allow the use of or any access to any ride, skill device or area which may have been found to be an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public until direct permission from the city administrator or his designated agent has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIIE, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-22. - Standard Amusement Device Code adopted; enforcement. 
The Standard Amusement Device Code, the 1979 Edition with 1982 amendments, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, is hereby adopted in its entirety. The city administrator or his designated agent shall be responsible for the enforcement of these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IV, 3-23-82)  
Secs. 5-23—5-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 5-36. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or exhibit, or to assist in the operation or exhibition within the city limits any circus, wild west show, dramatic or theatrical show, medicine show, vaudeville show, minstrel show, moving picture show or any carnival merry-go-round, ferris wheel, whip, skyride, hobbyhorse, bat-a-ball, tilt-a-whirl, pony ride, kiddy train, mechanical bull or other riding or skill device of such character, with or without name, where any such operation or exhibition is given in or under a tent, awning, canopy, enclosure within a temporary structure, outside of a building or in the open air without first obtaining a permit from the city administrator's office. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § II, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-37. - Term. 
The term of any permit required by this division shall in no case be for a period longer than: 
(1)  One (1) day and one (1) night in any one (1) year in the case of a circus or wild west show; 
(2)  Two (2) weeks in any one (1) year in the case of a dramatic or theatrical show; 
(3)  One (1) week in any one (1) year in the case of a medicine show, vaudeville show, minstrel show, or moving picture show; 
(4)  One (1) week in any one (1) year, unless sponsored for compensation by one (1) or more civic, charitable or other local organization in which event for a period of time no longer than two (2) weeks in any one (1) year, in the case of a carnival or other related outdoor amusement ride or skill device of such character. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIA, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-38. - Fee. 
A permit required by this division shall not be issued until the applicant pays to the city a permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day of proposed operation. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIB, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-39. - Revocation, suspension. 
The city administrator may revoke or suspend the permit of any person holding a permit under this division, for good cause shown, after notice and hearing. Good cause shall include: 
(1)  Any material misrepresentation in the application for a permit or any fraud in its procurement; 
(2)  Any cause which would have prevented the granting of the permit in the first place; 
(3)  Misconduct of the permittee such as the violation of any unlawful act prohibited by this article, or any other law involving honesty, good faith, responsibility or moral turpitude; or 
(4)  The violation of any of the conditions of the permit issued under this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIC, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-40. - Games of chance; denial of permit. 
No permit shall be issued to an operation when any game of chance is operated in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IID, 3-23-82)  
Sec. 5-41. - Public liability insurance. 
Before any permit shall be issued for any operation permitted in this article, the applicant shall file with the city, and thereafter keep in full force and effect for the term of the permitted operation, a policy of public liability insurance to be approved by the city administrator and the city attorney. Such policy shall be performable in the county insuring the public against any damage, loss or injury that may result from the operation of such permitted activity. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-3C, § IIE, 3-23-82) 
State Law reference— Amusement Ride Safety Inspection and Insurance Act, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 21.53.  
Secs. 5-42—5-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, adopted Feb. 4, 2020, repealed the former art. III, §§ 5-50—5-63, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2014-O-04A , § II, adopted April 15, 2014. 
 
Sec. 5-50. - Policy, intent, and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. Special events are of infrequent occurrence and temporary nature and may be associated with promotions, holidays, festivals, etc. Special events may be allowed by a special event permit granted by the city manager or his designated representative. 
(b)  Intent. The city recognizes the need to encourage and promote events for the greater good, cultural diversity and promotion of the city. This article is intended to provide a safe and orderly means for special events to be held within the corporate limit of the city. All regulations of this article are deemed necessary for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the volunteers, members, and their patrons. 
(c)  Definitions. The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Athletic event shall mean an occasion in which a group of persons collect to engage in or watch a sport or form of exercise on private or public property not designed for such activity and/or on a city street, sidewalk, alley, or other street right-of-way, which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws or controls. Athletic events include, but are not limited to, bicycle and foot races. 
Applicant shall include the person, or other entity applying for the special event permit. 
First Amendment activity means an expressive and associative activity on public right-of-way or public property that is protected by the United States and Texas Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly, and the right to petition, but does not include commercial advertising, revenue-generating activities, fundraising, or a parade as defined herein. 
Force majeure means and includes fire, casualty, strikes, lockouts, labor trouble, inability to procure materials or supplies, failure of power, governmental authority, inclement weather, acts of God, war or terrorism or the potential or actual threat thereof, public safety or public welfare considerations, riots, or local, national, or international emergencies, or other reason of like nature. 
Parade shall mean a march or procession consisting of any number of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, on any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other right-of-way, which obstructs delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws and controls. 
Park means all parks and bodies of water contained therein, squares, drives, parkways, boulevards, trails, beaches, playgrounds, playfields, greenbelts, parking lots, community centers and other park, recreation and open space areas and buildings and facilities comprising the parks and recreation system of the city under the management and control of the City of Marble Falls. 
Permit application fee shall mean the fee to be paid by the special event permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the city. Such fee shall be set by the city council. 
Permittee shall mean a person or entity to whom a special event permit is granted. 
Public space means and includes streets, avenues, ways, boulevards, drives, places, alleys, sidewalks, and planting (parking) strips, squares, triangles and right-of-way for public use and the space above or beneath its surface, whether or not opened or improved. 
Special event means a temporary event, gathering, or organized activity, including but not limited to parades, bike and foot races, block parties, street fairs, concerts, carnivals, festivals or other similar events or attractions that include one or more of the following: 
(1)  Commonly held outdoors; or 
(2)  Interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or 
(3)  Require special city services, including, but not limited to, street closure(s), provision of barricades, refuse services, stages, special parking arrangements, special electrical services or special safety services; or 
(4)  Are held on city property. 
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to use by the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-51. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or promote a special event without first having obtained a special event permit from the city. 
(b)  The following are exempt from the provisions in this article: 
(1)  Funeral or dignitary processions; 
(2)  Groups required by law to be so assembled; 
(3)  Pedestrian processions along a route that is restricted to sidewalks and crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic regulations and controls; 
(4)  An event wholly contained on private property specifically designed or suited for the event and which holds a certificate of occupancy for such including adequate parking; and 
(5)  Activities and events deemed by the city manager or his designated representative to not require a special event permit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for the conduct of, a special event to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the special event permit. 
(d)  Applicant, in tendering its application and in accepting and receiving a permit, agrees and contracts with the city that it will comply with all of the terms of the permit for the purpose of maintaining and assuring the health, safety and welfare of the residents, visitors and businesses of the City of Marble Falls. 
(e)  The event permit shall be maintained at all times on the premises where the special event is taking place, and shall be made available to any city official upon request. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-52. - Application and issuance of permit. 
(a)  A person seeking a special event permit shall file an application with the city manager, or designee, upon forms provided by the city within ninety (90) days and no more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days before the commencement of the proposed event. Each application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as adopted by city council and described in Appendix C, Master Fee Schedule, of this Code. The city manager or designated representative may consider event applications submitted after filing deadlines where good and compelling cause is shown. A site plan shall be included with the application showing the location and activities to take place and including, but not limited to: barricades and road closures, first aid and emergency services stations, vendors, portable restrooms, and trash receptacles. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated representative shall issue the special events permit once the application has been approved after review and consultation with appropriate city departments which may include police, fire, public works, building and planning, parks and recreation, and others as determined by the city manager or designated representative, and the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(c)  The city manager, or designee shall be responsible for issuing the permit and assuring compliance with the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-53. - Permit required. 
(a)  The city manager or designated representative may require in a special event permit application, among other provisions, reasonable terms or conditions as to the time, place and manner of the event; the implementation of a plan presented by the applicant and approved by the city for crowd control, traffic control, and security; compliance with health and sanitary regulations for the event; coordination with the fire department or medical personnel for emergency treatment and evacuation of people who may need immediate care, cardio-pulmonary resuscitation or ambulance service; emergency communication; fire suppression equipment with structures; maintenance of unobstructed emergency passageways; and, where traffic congestion may be anticipated, encouraging the use of public transit and car pooling. In determining conditions, the city manager or designated representative shall consider anticipated impacts of the event based on an assessment of the event, including size, scope, complexity, and history as well as the event's or event organizer's successful implementation of conditions included in previous permits. Conditions shall be based upon projected impacts on public safety, public places and public services, but shall not be based upon the programming content of the event or message that the proposed event may convey. In order to accommodate other concurrent events, the rights of abutting owners, and the needs of the public to use streets or parks, the conditions may include, but are not limited to, reasonable adjustments in the date, time, route or location of the proposed event; accommodations of pedestrian or vehicular traffic using the street; and limitations on the duration of the event or the operating hours associated with the event. 
(b)  Applicant must send notices, and provide documentation of notification, of the event to abutting property owners when in the city manager's judgment, the special event is of a scope and nature that will impact those owners. 
(c)  Applicant must provide copies of any and all additional regulatory approvals to the city prior to the event. The event must comply with all city, state and federal laws including, but not limited to: adopted building, fire, electrical codes; noise ordinance; proper disposal of animal waste; water usage and disposal of wastewater; trash disposal and signage. Separate permits from the city may be required for any or all of the above matters. 
(d)  No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained as part of the permit application. 
(e)  Rides and/or attractions associated with special events shall conform to the statutory rules and regulations set forth in Chapter 21, Article 21.53 of the Texas Insurance Code, designated the Amusement Ride Safety Inspection and Insurance Act, as amended. Copies of inspection reports will be required. Additional requirements as set out in Article II, Carnivals, are also required. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-54. - Denial or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Denial. A special event permit may be denied based upon a determination of any of the following: 
(1)  The proposed event would unreasonably disrupt the orderly or safe circulation of traffic or would present an unreasonable risk of injury or damage to the public, health or safety; 
(2)  The proposed event is proximate to another previously permitted or previously scheduled event, so that the combined impacts and required public services exceed what the city, after reasonable efforts have been made to accommodate both events, can reasonably provide; or the proposed event would interfere with construction or maintenance work in the immediate vicinity, or unreasonably infringe upon the rights of abutting properties; 
(3)  The applicant fails to comply with, or the event will violate, any city ordinance or any other applicable law; 
(4)  The applicant makes or allows the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application; 
(5)  The applicant has violated this article or the special event permit requirements, or has had an event permit revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
(6)  The applicant refuses to agree to, abide by, or to comply with all conditions of the permit and refuses to pay any additional costs as may be required by the city; 
(7)  Insurance requirements for the special event cannot or have not been met; 
(8)  The applicant has, on prior occasions, damaged city property and has not paid in full for such damage; or 
(9)  The event would severely hinder the delivery of normal or emergency public services or constitutes a public threat or public nuisance. 
(b)  Revocation. The city manager or designated representative may cancel or revoke a permit already issued upon written notice to the applicant stating the grounds for revocation if any one (1) or more of the following acts or omissions occur: 
(1)  The applicant, in the information supplied, has made misstatement of a material fact; the applicant has failed to fulfill a term or condition of the permit in a timely manner; or the check submitted by an applicant in payment of the fee for a permit has been dishonored; 
(2)  Insurance requirements for the special event have not been met; 
(3)  The applicant requests the cancellation of the permit or cancels the event; 
(4)  An emergency or supervening occurrence requires the cancellation or termination of the event in order to protect the public health or safety. The city shall refund the permit fee in the event of a revocation caused by an emergency or supervening occurrence; the city shall refund the balance of the fee less its costs incurred if the cancellation occurs at the request of an applicant who is in compliance with this article; and/or 
(5)  If it is determined that any of the provisions of this article, city ordinance, or state law is being violated or will be violated by the event. 
(c)  Prior to denial of a permit, the city manager, or designee shall consider alternatives provided by the applicant to the time, place, or manner of the special event that will allow the event to occur without posing a threat to health or safety, or otherwise violate state or local law. 
(d)  The city manager or designated representative shall act upon a complete event application within thirty (30) business days after the filing thereof. If the application is not approved, applicant will be notified via mailed letter and/or electronic communication notification, of the reasons for the permit denial. Applicants may appeal a denied permit application to the city manager within five (5) business days of receipt of the denial notification. Upon such appeal, the city manager may reverse, affirm, or modify in any regard the determination. The city manager will respond to applicant with the appeal results within five (5) business days of appeal receipt. 
(e)  An applicant that has appealed a permit denial in accordance with subsection (d) may appeal the denial of the permit by the city manager or designated representative to the city council. An appeal to the city council must be received by the city within five (5) business days of receipt of the denial notification. The appeal will be considered by the city council at the next convenient regular council meeting. 
(f)  The city may, in its sole discretion, postpone, cancel, suspend, or close any special event or revoke a special event permit for any force majeure event. The city shall have no liability for such postponement, cancellation, suspension, or closing. Further, the city shall have no liability for failure to postpone, cancel, suspend, or close a special event for a force majeure event or any other reason. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-55. - Indemnification. 
The applicant, permittee, and/or event sponsor(s) shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the city, its officers, directors, employees, agents, successors, contractors, subcontractors, assigns, sponsors, and volunteers from and against any and all liens, claims, demands, loss, liability, cost (including but not limited to attorneys' fees, accountants' fees, engineers' fees, consultants' fees and experts' fees), expense, damage, and causes of action for damages because of injury to persons (including death) and injury or damage to or loss of any property or improvements arising from or caused, in whole or in part, by the acts and/or omissions of the applicant, permittee, event sponsor(s), their officers, directors, agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors, volunteers, and participants in the special event. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-56. - Fees/cost. 
(a)  Fees, other than cost for policing the event, if any, as specified in this article, shall be established by city council. In the event the city determines, upon a review of the application, that a special event may require the special attention and involvement of city personnel or facilities, the city shall so notify the applicant. Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to pay the anticipated additional costs to the city incurred as a result of the special event within thirty (30) days of the date upon which the city invoices the applicant for the anticipated costs. 
(b)  When the presence of law enforcement officers and/or private security, emergency medical service (EMS) and the fire department is necessary for special events, the applicant shall be responsible for the cost of providing said personnel, cost will be determined through the application process. 
(c)  The cost or a portion of the cost of providing additional city services may be requested by the applicant and provided as in-kind services by the city upon approval from the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-57. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  The applicant for a special event permit shall furnish the city with proof of commercial general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limits per occurrence, and an endorsement naming the City of Marble Falls as an additional insured must be provided. 
(b)  Certificates of insurance shall be submitted to the city for approval no less than fifteen (15) business days prior to the event. Acceptability of insurance is subject to approval by the city attorney. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to lower or increase the amount of insurance based upon the type of event, equipment, machinery, location, number of people involved, provision of alcohol, and other pertinent factors or risks associated with the special event. 
(d)  Other insurance. If a special event includes vehicles, aircraft, boats, or other equipment, devices, or activities that are excluded from coverage in the general liability insurance policy, or create a special or increased risk, then separate additional liability insurance coverage for the applicable exclusion(s) must be provided with the same combined single limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage as outlined in the paragraphs above. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-58. - Applicant parking requirements, trailers. 
(a)  Applicants shall describe in the site plan that parking and public transportation for the special event has been provided. The number of spaces deemed sufficient, as determined by the city manager, will be determined by the nature of the event, number of people attending, and event staff during peak times. When adequate parking is not available at or immediately adjacent to the site, off-site parking with attendee transportation plans shall be submitted. 
(b)  The city shall have authority, when reasonably necessary to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street, highway, or part thereof adjacent to the site of the special event. 
(c)  Trailers or other vehicles may be temporarily occupied as living quarters at the site of such special events. Such vehicles and trailers shall be parked not less than three hundred (300) feet from any residential district, and shall otherwise comply with all city ordinances and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-59. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspections may be required to show compliance with city ordinances, the special event permit and public health, safety and welfare. Failure of a permittee to allow an inspection is grounds for revocation of the special event permit or delay to the commencement of the event. 
(b)  Permittee must comply with and remedy or correct any conditions or situations identified by the inspector in a timely manner for the event to proceed as planned. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-60. - First Amendment activity. 
(a)  Persons organizing a First Amendment activity that is preplanned, scheduled, and promoted for a future date are required to obtain a special event permit from the city and must file an application at least seven (7) days before the intended event date. 
(b)  First Amendment activities will be exempt from special event application fees and costs associated with policing the event. First Amendment activities are exempt from the insurance requirements set forth in section 5-57. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Sec. 5-61. - Nondiscrimination. 
The city shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this article based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender related grounds. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02A , § II, 2-4-2020)  
Secs. 5-62—5-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY USES 
 
Sec. 5-75. - Temporary uses. 
Temporary uses are intended to permit occasional, temporary uses and related activities that are intended to operate on a frequent and on-going basis over a period of time that is longer than that permitted pursuant to article III. Temporary use permits are issued at the discretion of the city manager, or his/her designee, when compatible with other nearby uses. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 5-76. - Application and authorization. 
(a)  Application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the city. Such application shall include a site plan and description of the use, desired period of time for the temporary use permit (not to exceed one (1) year), written authorization from the legal property owner providing consent to use the property and any necessary on-site facilities, and such additional information as the city may require to evaluate the use and to make the determinations required by these provisions. Application shall designate a person in charge that is responsible for the cleanliness of the site, and the site's compliance with all rules and regulations during working hours, and shall provide contact information for the designated person in charge in the application. 
(b)  Application shall be made at least twenty (20) days prior to the request date for commencement of the temporary use. The city manager or his/her designee shall make a determination whether to approve conditionally or deny the use within ten (10) days after the date of application. 
(c)  Authorization of a temporary use shall be by issuance of a building permit and /or a temporary use permit. 
(d)  A temporary use authorized pursuant to these provisions shall not be exempted or relieved from compliance with any other ordinance, law or license applicable to such use. 
(e)  A temporary use permit may be renewed by the city manager or his/her designee, upon request of the applicant, for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(f)  In the event that a temporary use permit is denied, such denial may be appealed to the city council within ten (10) days of the date of the denial. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 5-77. - Determinations. 
The city manager or his/her designee may authorize a temporary use only when, in his/her judgment, the following determinations can be made: 
(1)  The temporary use will not impair the normal, safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site or an adjoining use. 
(2)  The temporary use will be compatible with nearby uses in the general vicinity. 
(3)  The temporary use will not impact public health, safety, convenience, create traffic hazards, congestion or otherwise interrupt or interfere with the normal conduct of uses and activities in the vicinity. 
(4)  The temporary use shall not create a public nuisance or risk harm to persons or property. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 5-78. - Required conditions of temporary use. 
(a)  Each temporary use site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter or other evidence of temporary use upon completion or removal of the use. 
(b)  A temporary use conducted in a parking facility shall not occupy or remove from availability more than twenty-five (25) percent of the parking spaces required for the permanent use. 
(c)  The city may establish such additional conditions as necessary. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 5-79. - Temporary use types. 
The following types of temporary use may be authorized: 
(1)  Model homes or apartments and related real estate sales and display activities located within the subdivision or residential development to which they pertain. 
(2)  Subdivision sales offices located within the subdivision. 
(3)  Contractor's office, storage yard or equipment parking and servicing on the site of an active construction project. 
(4)  Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits. 
(5)  Mobile home residences for occupancy by supervisory or security personnel on the site of an active construction project. 
(6)  Parking lot sales, including swap meets, farmers markets, flea markets, outdoor special sales or similar activities, limited to locations in commercial, mixed use, or industrial districts and shall not be operated more than three (3) days in the same week or more than five (5) days in the same month. 
(7)  Seasonal retail sale of agricultural or horticultural products. 
(8)  Mobile food courts, limited to locations in commercial, mixed use, agricultural, or industrial zoning districts, with the exception of the main street district. Mobile food courts shall be limited to selling food products only. 
(9)  Additional temporary uses determined to be similar to the foregoing by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(10)  Temporary signs relating to temporary uses. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 5-80. - Supplemental temporary use standards. 
(a)  Parking lot sales. 
(1)  Location standards. Parking lot sales must meet all applicable zoning requirements applicable to the zoning district in which it is located and as required by this chapter. 
Parking lot sales shall not be located less than two-hundred (200) feet from residential zoning districts. 
(2)  Development standards. 
a.  Vendors shall be allowed to engage in the business of vending only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or as otherwise approved by the city manager or his/her designee. All stands, trailers, other vending operations and related facilities must be removed from the premises during non-operating hours unless otherwise approved by the city manager or his/her designee. 
b.  A minimum twenty (20) foot wide fire apparatus access route shall be provided around the periphery of any parking lot sale, if required by the fire chief or designee. 
c.  No vendor participating in the sale shall impede access to the entrance or driveway of an adjacent building, or operate within the public right-of-way. 
d.  All potentially hazardous foods shall be kept at safe food temperatures as required by the state food establishment rules. 
e.  All vendors selling food or beverages must provide at least one (1) appropriately sized trash receptacle adjacent to or as a part of their stand/operation. 
f.  When ten (10) or more vendors are proposed for a site, there must be on-site bathroom facilities provided. This requirement can be met through one (1) of the following methods: 
1.  Bathroom facilities within a building(s) on the premises authorized by written consent of the building owner/tenant. 
2.  Bathroom facility trailer or mobile trailer with bathrooms and self-contained water and wastewater facilities within it, maintained by a licensed company. 
3.  Port-o-potties located on the premises, at the farthest reasonable distance from public right-of-way or parking areas, and maintained by a licensed company. 
g.  Vendors shall be allowed one (1) single temporary detached sign to advertise. The sign must remain temporary and no permanent installation shall be allowed unless permitted under the city sign ordinance. One (1) sign may be attached to a structure per vendor. The sign should be anchored or stabilized to prevent wind damage. Overall sign dimensions shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. Sign may be dual sided. 
(b)  Mobile food courts. No mobile food vendor/vehicle shall operate within a mobile food court that does not possess a valid permit as required by chapter 16. 
(1)  Location standards. 
a.  A mobile food court must meet all applicable zoning requirements applicable to the zoning district in which it is located and as required by this chapter. 
b.  Permitted mobile food vendors/vehicles located within the court shall be exempt from having to remove the vehicle from the site during non-operating hours so long as such operation is in compliance with its temporary use permit and applicable chapter 16 regulations. 
c.  Each mobile food court must be located at least two-hundred (200) feet away from any single-family residential use or single-family zoning district, including R-1, RA-1, RE-1, and R-2. The two-hundred (200) foot minimum distance shall be measured from property line to property line. 
d.  Mobile food courts shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a building with a restaurant possessing a certificate of occupancy. 
e.  Mobile food courts must comply with the setback minimum of the zoning district which the site is located, unless a more restrictive setback is required by the city to mitigate any negative impacts to adjacent businesses, residents, or safety, health or welfare of the general public. 
(2)  Development standards. 
a.  Mobile food courts shall be allowed to engage in business only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or as approved by the city manager or his/her designee. 
b.  Each individual mobile food vendor/vehicle must at minimum be removed from the premises once every six (6) months to report to an operating base location for vehicle and equipment cleaning, discharging of liquid and/or solid wastes, refilling of water tanks and ice bins, boarding of food and other servicing operations. A maintenance log sheet documenting all visits must be maintained on the mobile food vendor/vehicle unit at all times for review at the request of the city. 
The Texas Food Establishment Rules ( TFER), Section 229.167(d)(10) states a private home used as living or sleeping quarters may not be used for conducting food establishment operations. 
c.  Mobile food courts must provide a paved parking area, at a ratio of three (3) parking spaces per individual vendor/vehicle, along with a twenty-four (24) foot wide back up lane. 
d.  Mobile food courts must provide outside seating consisting of a table and a seating capacity of four (4), per mobile food vendor/vehicle unit. 
e.  Restrooms must be provided within the mobile food court area. A minimum of at least one (1) restroom for each sex shall be provided within one-hundred (100) feet from each vendor/vehicle. This requirement can be met through one (1) of the following methods: 
1.  Bathroom facilities within a building(s) directly abutting the premises authorized by written consent of the building owner/tenant. 
2.  Bathroom facility trailer, or mobile trailer with bathrooms and self-contained water and wastewater facilities within it, maintained by a licensed company. Facility shall not be located fronting the property, but to the rear of mobile food vendors and if necessary screened from the public right-of-way. 
3.  Port-o-potties located on the premises, not fronting the mobile food court, and to the rear of the vendor area. Potty area must be enclosed with a six (6) foot tall solid screened fence or suitable equivalent, with gate for access and security, and be maintained by a licensed company. 
f.  All vendors/vehicles selling food or beverages must provide at least one (1) appropriately sized trash receptacle adjacent to or as a part of their stand/operation. 
g.  Mobile food vendors/vehicles shall not have permanent connections for electricity, potable water and sewage disposal. Mobile food vendors/vehicles must provide independent self-contained systems to adequately provide these services to each unit. 
h.  All mobile food vendors/vehicles situated on the property shall be located on a minimum surface of four (4) inch compacted granite gravel or equivalent material. 
i.  Mobile food vendors/vehicles shall demonstrate that the vehicle or unit is readily moveable if requested by the city. Any alteration, removal, attachment, placement or change in, under or upon the mobile food vehicle or unit that would prevent or otherwise reduce ready mobility is prohibited. 
j.  Vehicular drive-through service of food and/or beverages shall not be permitted. 
k.  No more than ten (10) individual mobile food vendor/vehicle units are permitted per mobile food court site. Additional mobile food vendor/vehicle units may be authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. 
l.  No mobile food vendor/vehicle unit, structures associated with the mobile food court use, nor any seating areas shall be located in a required setback, buffer yard, access easement, drainage easement, floodplain, driveway, utility easement and/or fire lane unless authorized by the city manager or his/her designee. 
m.  City inspection personnel shall make the appropriate inspections of the location, equipment, vehicles/units and other reasonable inspections concerned with the mobile food court operation to assure compliance with the applicable adopted codes, ordinances, requirements of all state and federal statutes. 
n.  A minimum twenty (20) foot wide fire apparatus access route shall be provided around the periphery of any mobile food court, if required by the fire chief or designee. 
o.  All signage shall comply with the adopted sign ordinance. One (1) permanent detached sign permitted in compliance with chapter 20 shall be allowed for the mobile food court. Individual vendors/vehicles shall be allowed one (1) single temporary detached sign to advertise. The sign must remain temporary and no permanent installation shall be allowed unless permitted under the city sign ordinance. The sign should be anchored or stabilized to prevent wind damage. Overall sign dimensions shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. Sign may be dual sided. One (1) sign attached to trailer or trucks for signage is allowed. No other temporary signs shall be allowed. 
p.  Residing and/or dwelling within a vendor/vehicle unit(s) overnight is prohibited. 
q.  The sale, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverage is prohibited within mobile food courts. 
r.  Mobile food courts must provide complete contact information such as name, address, phone number, and any other information reasonably required by the city manager or his/her designee for a designated on-call person to be a principal point of contact for city staff and the individual vendors/vehicles. 
s.  Failure to comply with these standards may result in termination or suspension of the temporary use permit. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 5-81. - Other standards and conditions. 
Other conditions and standards may be required in the temporary use permit by the city manager, or his/her designee, if such requirements are necessary to mitigate the impact of the temporary use on adjoining property or businesses or in the interest of public health and safety. Such requirements may include limitations on the operation of the temporary use, the time and/or days of operation, the number of participants or vendors/vehicles, and other measures. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Sec. 5-82. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to revoke a temporary use permit upon violation of the conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this article or when temporary uses create, refuse to mitigate, or otherwise have an adverse effect upon the health, safety, or welfare of the public, persons or property. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-04A, § II, 4-15-2014 )  
Secs. 5-83—5-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FILMING 
 
Sec. 5-90. - Findings of fact. 
All of the above premises are hereby found to be true and correct legislative and factual findings of the City of Marble Falls and are hereby approved and incorporated into the body of this ordinance as if copied in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , §§ I, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-91. - City control/city manager authority. 
These Guidelines cover requests for commercial use of city-owned property (including but not limited to streets, rights-of-way, parks, and/or public buildings), commercial use of private property which may affect adjacent public or private property, use of the Marble Falls, Texas name, trademark or logo and/or use of city equipment and/or personnel for commercial uses in all types of motion picture production, including, but not limited to, feature films, television programs, commercials, music videos and corporate films. 
The city possesses and retains exclusive authority to grant a revocable license for the use of its name, trademark, and logo, city-owned property, public streets, rights-of-way, parks and buildings of the city as well as control over the hours of production and the general location of the production. The city reserves the full and absolute right to prohibit all filming or to order cessation of filming activity in order to protect public health, safety and/or welfare. 
The city manager may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way, park, or public building, equipment or personnel for commercial uses in the filming or taping of movies, television programs, commercials, or training films and related activities. In conjunction with these uses, the city manager may require that any or all of the conditions and/or renumeration herein be met as a prerequisite to that use. 
City departments (e.g., police, fire, building) shall be granted access to inspect all structures whether public or private, property, devices and equipment to be used in connection with the filming and taping, as deemed appropriate by the city manager. There may be a charge for the inspection. Any use of fire, pyrotechnics, and/or explosives must be approved by the fire marshal. 
The city manager, in consultation with the chief of police and/or fire chief, shall have the authority to stipulate additional fire or police requirements and level of staffing for same, at any time during a film project if it is determined to be in the best interest of public health, safety and welfare, which cost shall be borne entirely by the applicant. 
The city manager reserves the right to impose additional regulations in the interest of public health, safety and welfare, or if otherwise deemed appropriate by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § II, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-92. - Application for filming permit requirements. 
Before filing an application for filming (application), the office of the city manager must be contacted to discuss the production's specific filming requirements and the feasibility of filming in Marble Falls. Any commercial producer who desires to undertake a commercial production is required to complete and return an application for filming to the office of the city manager within the time frames below: 
(1)  Commercials or episodic television: a minimum of two (2) business days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial activity related to the project. 
(2)  Feature films: a minimum of five (5) business days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial activity related to the project. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § III, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-93. - Fees and charges. 
The city may impose reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs incurred by the city in association with the film project. These fees include but are not limited to the use of city equipment, city owned real estate, city personnel, and the utilization of a public right-of-way or a public area. 
The city shall be reimbursed for all costs of any police, fire, public works, or other city personnel assigned to the project (whether or not specifically requested by the production company). Remuneration rates for the use of any city equipment, including police cars and fire equipment, as well as city-owned property, will be established on a case-by-case basis as determined by the city manager. Off-duty police officers and firefighters shall be paid by the production company at a rate no less than one and one-half (1½) times their hourly rate. 
A security or damage deposit may be required within the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager may, at his/her discretion, require an advance deposit for all costs related to the use of city personnel, property and/or equipment. 
The applicant shall pay all costs in full within ten (10) days after receipt of an invoice for said costs. The city manager may, at any time, elect to waive any charges and fees assessed in association with the project. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § IV, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-94. - Vehicles and equipment. 
A report providing a full and complete list of the number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during the filming, including proposed parking locations, shall be provided with the application. All parking locations including on street parking and use of public parking lots are subject to city approval. The use of exterior lighting, power generators, or any other noise- or light-producing equipment requires on-site approval of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § V, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-95. - Hours of filming. 
Upon approval of the application and following notification of any and all affected property owners, filming will be limited to 7:00 am to 9:00 pm on any given day. Upon request or in an effort to minimize impact on local property owners, business owners and residents, the city manager may provide authorization to film outside of the designated hours. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § VI, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-96. - Notification of neighbors. 
A location schedule shall be submitted with the application. When filming in an area that may disrupt or impeded traffic in a residential or commercial area, the production company is required to notify neighbors and businesses of the planned impact. A short-written description of the schedule is to be provided to the owners and residents of the property in the affected neighborhood(s). The applicant should make a good faith effort to notify each owner and resident of all such property and may be required to provide a sign off sheet with their signatures, addresses and phone numbers to the office of the city manager prior to approval of an application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § VII, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-97. - Certificate of insurance. 
A valid certificate of insurance shall be attached to the application, issued by a company authorized to conduct business in the state of Texas, naming the City of Marble Falls and its agents, officers, elected officials, employees and assigns, as additional insured, in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general liability, including bodily injury and property damage with a five million dollar ($5,000,000.00) umbrella; and automobile liability (if applicable) in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) including bodily injury and property damage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § VIII, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-98. - Damage to public or private property. 
The applicant shall pay in full, within ten (10) days of receipt of an invoice, the costs of repair for any and all damage to public or private property, resulting from or in connection with, the production, and restore the property to its original condition prior to the production, or to better than original condition. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § IX, 8-7-2018)  
Sec. 5-99. - Hold harmless agreement. 
The applicant shall hold the city harmless from any claim that may arise from their use of designated public property, right-of-way, or equipment in conjunction with the permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08A , § XI, 8-7-2018)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMAL SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, adopted Jan. 3, 2012, repealed former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-80, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. Former Ch. 6 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 85-O-10B, §§ 2—16, adopted Oct. 29, 1985; Ord. No. 87-O-1A, §§ 1—16, adopted Jan. 8, 1987; Ord. No. 90-O-7A, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 10, 1990; Ord. No. 98-O-4E, adopted April 28, 1998 and Ord. No. 2007-O-9A, § II, adopted Oct. 22, 2007. 
 
ARTICLE 6.01. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 6.01.001. - Definitions. 
When used in the City Code of Ordinances, the following words and terms, unless the context indicates a different meaning, or unless otherwise specifically defined for application to a portion of this chapter, shall be interpreted as follows: 
Altered means surgical sterilization of an animal. 
Animal means live creatures, both domestic and wild, except humans and fish. "Animal" includes fowls, and reptiles. 
Animal control officer means an employee or agent of the city designated by the city to investigate, administer and enforce the City Code of Ordinances and laws of the state pertaining to the licensing, care and control of animals within the city. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by the city or its authorized agents which is used for the temporary care, confinement, and detention of animals and for the humane disposition and destruction of animals. The term shall also include any private or public facility authorized by the city to serve these purposes on behalf of the city. 
At-large means an animal, other than a protected animal as that term is defined herein, that is off the premises of the owner, and/or not under the control of the owner, either by leash, cord, chain, enclosure or other restraint. The term may also include an animal that is on the premises of the owner, but is not within the direct, constant and immediate presence of a person who controls the animal and is not confined to that premises by means of leash, cord, chain, enclosure or other restraint. 
Bird sanctuary means a safe haven where certain species of birds (as designated by the state and federal environmental statutes) are protected from being destroyed or hunted by people. 
Boarding kennel means an establishment used for the purpose of boarding animals on a temporary basis and where no animals are bred or sold. (See definition of "kennel" below.) Animal grooming parlors, where no animals are to be kept overnight, and/or veterinary clinics shall not be considered to be boarding kennels. 
Breeding kennel means an establishment designed or used for the boarding, selling or breeding of animals where more than an aggregate total of six (6) dogs and/or cats (or any combination thereof) are to be boarded, sold or bred at any single time. Animal grooming parlors, where no animals are to be kept overnight, and/or veterinary clinics shall not be considered to be breeding kennels. 
Commercial sales means sales that are managed and developed primarily for financial profit on a larger than incidental basis. 
Dangerous and/or vicious animal means any animal that is known to carry or be susceptible to the rabies virus and that cannot be effectively vaccinated against that virus with any vaccine approved by the department of state health services. Also included in the definition of "dangerous and/or vicious animal" is any animal or any pet that has attacked, bitten, or physically injured a human, other domestic animal or pet animal, and/or livestock without adequate provocation, or that, because of temperament or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or physically injure human beings or livestock. Any wild animal or any animal that without provocation has bitten or attacked a human being, pet animal, domestic animal and/or livestock shall be prima facie presumed to be dangerous and/or vicious. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, has demonstrated that it presents a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings, or would constitute a danger to human life, physical well-being, or property if not kept under the direct control of the owner. This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. The term "dangerous dog" includes any dog that, according to the records of the city animal shelter, the city department of animal services, or any law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or 
(3)  As otherwise defined by state law. 
Domestic animal includes dogs, cats, domesticated horses, fowl, confined hares and rabbits, and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement, any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective breeding and that does not occur naturally in the wild, any animal that can be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies vaccine, and/or any animal which has an established rabies quarantine observation period. 
Estray includes, but is not limited to, any stray horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, jenny, jack, jennet, hog, sheep, and goat, normally confined and domesticated hares and rabbits, and any species of cattle, as well as other animals that are generally found in agricultural habitats. 
Exotic species means monkeys, alligators, crocodiles, poisonous snakes, reptiles, or birds, born or whose natural habitat is considered to be outside the continental United States, including nonvenomous reptiles, or any other animal (other than domestic cats and dogs) that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals generally found in agricultural habitats. 
Feral means an animal that is not domesticated, cultivated, intentionally bred or generally approachable and/or an animal that is not readily able to be handled by humans. 
Feral cat colony A group of five (5) or more feral, homeless, stray, wild or untamed cats, that has been registered with the animal services department and is maintained by a feral cat colony manager, that congregate, more or less, together as a unit and, although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any cat that congregates with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of it. 
Feral cat colony manager means a person who provides food and water to a cat colony. 
Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three (3) days or longer. 
Keep means to retain on the premises by any means; to harbor, control, own or have custody or possession of an animal for a period of three (3) days or longer. 
Kennel means a place in which a total of a combination of six (6) or more dogs or cats is kept, boarded, or trained, by the owners of the dogs or cats or by persons providing facilities and care, with or without compensation. Veterinary clinics/hospitals and Humane Society facilities shall be exempt. 
Livestock means animals that are routinely raised on a farm and/or are generally found in agricultural habitats. The definition of livestock does not include horses. 
Maintain means to feed, shelter, protect, provide for and/or bear expense of. 
Normal working day means any other day than on a weekend or holiday. 
Normal working hours means all time from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. during a normal working day. 
Owner means any person, corporation or entity having temporary or permanent custody of, owning, keeping, sheltering, in charge of, controlling, maintaining, having property rights to, or harboring one (1) or more animals covered by this chapter. The temporary feeding of a pet at the pet owner's request while the owner is unable to feed such pet does not cause the individual temporarily feeding the pet to become an owner for purposes of this definition. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership or other entity. 
Pet animal means dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, commercially bred ferrets, birds, nonpoisonous reptiles, and other species of animals which are sold or retained as a household pet, but shall specifically not include skunks, ferrets from natural habitats, nonhuman primates (e.g., monkeys, apes, etc.), or any other species of wild, exotic or carnivorous animal that is susceptible to, but not an animal that may be vaccinated for rabies. The term also includes any animal that may be further restricted in this chapter. 
Pet shop means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation conducting a business at a properly zoned location, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise other than a kennel, that buys, sells or boards any animal(s). 
Poultry/fowl means: 
(1)  All domesticated poultry and fowl; and 
(2)  All game/undomesticated poultry, fowl and birds that are kept in captivity, but excluding poultry, fowl and birds that are protected animals, as that term is defined herein. 
Private breeder means any person or entity who breeds or allows his/her animals, whether purebred or mixed breed, to produce offspring. 
Prohibited animals means any or all animals, including but not limited to venomous reptiles, nonvenomous reptiles over six (6) feet in length, alligators, crocodiles, caimans, elephants, rhinoceroses, skunks, raccoons, nonhuman primates, foxes, coyotes, bats, wolves, bears, or any hybrid of these listed animals. Any individual species and/or subspecies of the following animals: antelope, lions, tigers, ocelots, cougars, leopards, cheetahs, jaguars, hyenas, bears, bobcats, lesser pandas, ferrets born in natural habitats, binturong, ostriches, emus, miniature pigs, apes, llamas, alpacas or such other nondomestic species of animal not common to this area are also a prohibited animal for purposes of this chapter. 
Protected animals means poultry, fowl and birds that are harbored in any city park or park area. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal, other than a protected animal, that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to the enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but is not limited to any animal, other than a protected animal, that: 
(1)  Is found to be at-large; 
(2)  Engages in conduct which establishes the animal as either dangerous and/or vicious; 
(3)  Damages, soils, despoils or defecates on private property, other than the animal owner's property, or on public property, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner of the animal; 
(4)  Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, growling or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others who are in close proximity to the premises where the offending animal is kept, maintained or harbored; 
(5)  Chases vehicles or otherwise molests, attacks or interferes with other animals or persons on public property; 
(6)  Produces odors or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy persons living in the vicinity of the animal(s); 
(7)  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare, by virtue of the number, conditions, and/or types of animals maintained by the owner(s); or 
(8)  Has been found by the municipal court to be a public nuisance animal, by virtue of being a menace/hazard to the public health, welfare, or safety of the citizens of the community, after notice to the owner and after a hearing before the municipal court. 
Quarantine means a period of ten (10) days, which time is generally used for observation of a domestic pet or other animal to determine the health status of that animal in relation to the rabies virus. 
Quarantine by owner means quarantine by an animal owner, with the permission of the city, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The animal must have a current rabies vaccination and be registered with the city. 
(2)  The animal must either be inside a secure enclosed structure, i.e., house or garage, and must remain there for a minimum of ten (10) days; or if the animal is maintained outside, it must be contained within an enclosure from which it cannot escape (e.g., either a fenced area, or inside a covered pen or kennel from which it cannot escape). 
(3)  The animal must be kept away from any other animal(s) and all people, except those who must care for it during its quarantine period. 
(4)  The animal may not be removed from the municipal limits of the city while under quarantine, except if the removal is done by an authorized state, county or local official. 
(5)  The owner shall notify animal control officer and/or the police department immediately if the quarantined animal becomes sick or displays any behavioral changes. 
(6)  The owner shall not subject the quarantined animal to any medical procedure(s) during the quarantine period without first notifying the animal control department. This includes providing the quarantined animal with any vaccination(s). 
(7)  The quarantined animal must be examined by a licensed veterinarian, by no later than the close of business on the first day of home quarantine, and again on the final day of quarantine. The veterinarian shall be informed of the animal's quarantine status. The owner shall be responsible for producing proof of the required veterinarian examinations of any quarantined animal in compliance with this Code. 
(8)  No animal that is at-large or unleashed at the time of exposure related to the rabies virus may be quarantined by owner. Rather, such animals must be quarantined by the city or its designee(s). 
(9)  The owner must allow the animal services department, after giving reasonable notice, to view and confirm the health of the animal during the home quarantine period. 
Rabies vaccination means the vaccination of a dog, cat or other animal (domestic or otherwise) with an anti-rabies vaccine, as approved by the department of state health services and as administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state. 
Registered dangerous dog means a dog that has been determined to meet the criteria of being a dangerous dog as per section 6.08.003 et seq. of this Code, and/or state law, as amended from time to time, and after such dogs have been registered, by obtaining a city registration, pursuant to section 6.08.010 of this Code. 
Restraint means a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device that is under the physical control of the owner or of another responsible person; or attaches an animal to a stationary object or trolley system that isolates the animal from the public and from other animals except for animals owned by or under the control of the owner; or any fence in good repair within the lot line of the premises or within the domicile of the person residing on the premises. 
Running at-large means: 
(1)  Any animal, dog or cat, that is not restrained by means of a leash, chain, or other apparatus of sufficient strength, length or nature to control the actions of such animal, while off the owner's premises. 
(2)  Any animal, except a pet cat and/or a protected animal, that is not confined to premises of the owner in a manner that prevents the animal from escaping from there. 
(3)  Any pet, dog or cat, other than a protected animal, that is creating a nuisance off the owner's property. 
(4)  Animals that are confined within a vehicle in a manner that would prevent that animal's escape and/or that would prevent contact with other persons or animals shall not be deemed to be at-large. 
Secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure that is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the release or escape of an animal; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(4)  Tall enough or covered so that the animal cannot climb out; and 
(5)  Has a perimeter structure that prevents the animal from digging out or going under the side fence or wall. 
Serious injury includes, but is not limited to, bodily injury resulting from severe attack or severe bite from an animal that produces severe pain, trauma, or loss of blood or tissue, and that would cause most prudent and reasonable people to seek medical care for treatment for the injury. 
Severe attack includes, but is not limited to, an attack in which the animal repeatedly bites, scratches, or vigorously shakes its victim and the victim, or a person intervening, has extreme difficulty terminating the attack. 
Severe bite means a puncture, scratch or laceration made by an animal's teeth, that breaks the skin, resulting in a degree of trauma which would cause most prudent and reasonable people to seek medical care for treatment to the wound, without consideration of rabies prevention alone. 
Stray animal (including estrays) means any animal, for which there is no identifiable owner or harborer, that is found to be at-large within the corporate limits of the city. 
Theatrical exhibition means any exhibition or act featuring performing animals. Such exhibitions shall not include resident or nonresident dog and cat shows that are sponsored and sanctioned by the American Kennel Club, United States Kennel Club, Cat Fanciers Association or affiliates thereof, nor shall it include any horse or agricultural animal show or sale. 
Unaltered means an animal not surgically sterilized. 
Vaccination means rabies vaccination, or other vaccinations required by law, for an animal or animals. 
Veterinarian means any practitioner of veterinary medicine licensed by the state to practice in Texas. 
Wild animal means any live monkey, nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. The term "wild animal" does not include: domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm or agricultural animals, and captive-bred species of common cage birds and rodents. 
Wild bird means a bird that normally lives in a state of nature and is not ordinarily domesticated, but specifically does not include pigeons, English sparrows, European starlings, grackles, ravens, red-winged blackbirds, blackbirds, cowbirds, feral rock doves or crows. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-06D, § II, 7-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.002. - Penalties; conflicting regulations. 
Any person found guilty of violating any section of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-9 of the City of Marble Falls Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.003. - Department of animal services; director of animal services. 
(a)  In order to protect the public health and welfare, to provide for the public safety, and to more effectively control, regulate and provide for animals within the city, there is hereby created the department of animal services ("department"), which is a division of the city police department. The department shall consist of the director of animal services and such other officers and employees as may be provided by the city council. 
(b)  There is hereby established the office of director of animal services. The chief of police is hereby designated director of animal services. The director shall supervise the department employees, subject to the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(c)  The director or his designee shall enforce all laws and ordinances in the city pertaining to the registration, keeping, treatment, impounding and regulation of animals within the city. In every case and instance wherein the keeping of, or existence of, animals presents a health hazard or threat to the public health, the director of animal services shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the county health department. 
(d)  The director or his designee shall manage the city's animal shelter, or the city may contract with one (1) or more public or private entities for the purpose of operating an animal shelter to serve the city's needs. The director or his designee shall cause to be kept such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the department as may be required by ordinance, by the city manager, or by the city council. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of members of the department to enforce the ordinances of the city applicable to animals and to avoid the use of unnecessary force on animals while undertaking their responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.004. - Animal control advisory commission. 
There is hereby created an animal control advisory commission for the advising of the City of Marble Falls on the promulgation of animal control ordinances, procedures of enforcement and administration thereof. The animal control advisory commission shall consist of the following members: the city manager and/or his designee, the chief of police and/or his designee, the animal control officer, a local veterinarian and a representative of a local Humane Society and/or a representative from the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.005. - Dead animals and fowl. 
It is unlawful for any person in the city to place, or cause to be placed, or allow to remain in or near their premises or on the premises of any other person, or in any of the streets or other public ways, any dead animal. Specifically, if any person finds dead animals or fowl upon their own property, he/she shall be responsible for proper removal and disposal of same. If a person sees a dead animal or fowl on property that is not owned or controlled by him/her, then he/she is responsible for contacting and notifying the proper authority so that the animals and fowl may be properly removed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.006. - Tampering with traps and equipment of animal services department. 
No person shall remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment belonging to, or set out by, the animal services department or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.007. - Injury or destruction of wild birds. 
(a)  The city is hereby declared a bird sanctuary. Any person who shall willfully kill or injure any wild bird, remove the eggs or young from the nest of a wild bird, or in any manner destroy the eggs or young of wild birds, excluding the pigeon, English sparrow, European starling, grackle, raven, red-winged blackbird, blackbird, cowbird, feral rock dove and crow shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Canaries, parrots, and other exotic non-game birds may be sold, purchased, and kept as domestic pets. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter invokes the application of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, or any other federal, state or local law or regulation related to wild birds or animals, unless such provisions would otherwise apply. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.008. - Harboring wild animals prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor wild animals within the city limits. A wild animal may be impounded or humanely destroyed by the animal control officer or his agent if, in his sole discretion, such action appears to be reasonably necessary and in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.009. - Prohibited, wild animals or wildlife. 
(a)  No person shall possess, keep or have care, custody or control of a prohibited animal, wild animal or wildlife within the city except as provided herein. 
(b)  All persons shall be prohibited from selling, giving, transferring or importing into the city any wild animal. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to approved zoological parks or circuses. Nor shall this section apply to primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, zoological parks owned or operated by a governmental entity or any animal assisting physically handicapped persons. 
(d)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the animal being kept was an infant or injured animal that was not capable of surviving on its own and that such animal was kept for three (3) days or less, or for such reasonable time as was necessary before giving the animal to a licensed wildlife rehabilitator. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.010. - Sale of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, give away, or display for commercial purpose, any live animal, on any roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking lot, or any flea market within the corporate limits of the city; excluding any nonprofit animal welfare group. 
(1)  Enforcement; impoundment. 
a.  In the enforcement of the provisions of this article, any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the authority to impound any animal found in violation of this article. 
b.  The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this article shall be liable to the city in the amount of the impoundment and boarding fees charged the owner pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and any animal so confined pursuant to this article shall be handled and disposed of in the same manner as any animal that is so confined because of being found at-large within this city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.011. - Molesting or releasing animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner, tease, annoy, disturb, molest or irritate an animal that is confined to the owner's premises. It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner of a pet animal or his/her authorized agent, to willfully open any door or gate on any private or public premises for the purposes of enticing or enabling any animal to leave such private or public premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.012. - Animal enclosures. 
All pens, cages, coops, lofts or enclosures wherein animals, fowl or birds are kept shall be securely built and maintained, adequate in size for the kind and number of animals, fowl or birds contained therein and maintained in a sanitary condition; such enclosures shall be cleaned and maintained so as to not become offensive to residents or businesses adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.013. - No animal allowed in place where food is sold or served. 
No owner of any animal and no manager, clerk, owner or operator of any place where food is exposed or offered for sale, served or sold for human consumption, shall permit any animal to enter, be or remain within any interior area of a store, restaurant, cafe, shop, building, structure or place where food is offered for sale, displayed or handled for human consumption within the corporate limits of the city, except for certified assistance animals. Animals may be allowed on outdoor decks or patios of stores, restaurants, cafes, shops, buildings, structures or places where food is offered for sale, displayed or handled for human consumption, so long as such animals never enter the interior area of such locations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.014. - Right to confine at-large dogs, cats, or other animals. 
Any at-large dog, at-large cat, or other at-large animals found upon the private premises of a person other than the owner, may be humanely confined and held until such time as the animal control officer may be notified. Upon such notification, the animal control officer shall respond immediately, and take said confined animal for the purposes of impound as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.015. - Chapter 251, Agriculture Code. 
The City of Marble Falls recognizes the protections placed on certain property and individuals as a result of Chapter 251 of the Texas Agriculture Code. Any defense against prosecution or enforcement of the city's ordinances based upon Chapter 251 shall be as an affirmative defense which is the responsibility of the person alleged to have violated the city's ordinances to plead and prove. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.01.016. - Electronic pet containment devices. 
(a)  An electronic pet containment device (EPC) is a system or device with a collar that controls the movement of a dog by emitting an electrical shock when the animal wearing the collar nears the boundary of the owner's, keeper's or harborer's property. EPC's are not permitted within the City of Marble Falls as a substitute for a physical fence without an approved registration. 
(b)  EPC's in existence at the time of the adoption of this section are "grandfathered," such that the existing electronic/invisible fences are authorized so long as the EPC meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Warning signs shall be erected to inform members of the public that an EPC system is in operation on the property. Such signs shall be placed prominently to members of the public. Such signs shall be prominently displayed on all sides of the property. 
(2)  Only "active" systems may be grandfathered. Active systems are those that are always on, rather than a passive system that initially trains a dog and then is taken down. 
(3)  Such active systems are maintained and are continuously operated so as to prevent the dog from escaping from within the boundaries of the electronic fence. If at any time a dog escapes from the area secured by an electronic fence the grandfathering will become null and void and the owner will be required to comply with the secure enclosure requirements of this section. 
(4)  Each owner of an existing EPC shall have ninety (90) days from the date of the adoption of this ordinance to register their EPC with the city's police department. Registration of an EPC within ninety (90) days is the only method whereby an EPC receives "grandfathered" status. In the event that the owner of an EPC fails to register their pre-existing EPC within the 90-day window, any such "grandfathered" status shall be lost. The owner shall provide the information required in subsection d of this section and upon receipt of the required information and the annual registration fee, the city shall issue the registration. 
(c)  Except for grandfathered EPCs, EPCs are not allowed as a substitute for a physical fence within the City of Marble Falls except upon approval of a variance. If a variance is granted the owner will be issued a registration. To apply for a variance the owner shall submit the information requested in subsection (d) of this section. In addition, each owner of an EPC shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b)(1) through (b)(3) upon issuance of a registration. 
(d)  An applicant shall submit all information required by city staff and in particular the following: 
(1)  Dog age, 
(2)  Dog size and weight, 
(3)  Dog breed, 
(4)  Number of dogs, 
(5)  Location of the property, 
(6)  Size of the property, 
(7)  Adjoining land uses, 
(8)  Zoning district, 
(9)  Proximity of rights of way and pedestrian walk ways, 
(10)  Type of EPC, 
(11)  Other factors that demonstrate that the EPC will secure and prevent the dog from escaping the enclosure in the same manner as a physical fence. 
(e)  Once all required information has been submitted to the city, along with the required fee, staff will make a determination on the variance, taking into account all relevant factors and may grant the variance and issue the registration only if the applicant has demonstrated that the EPC will secure the dog in the same, or better manner, than a physical fence and that the property and the proximity of the property and the location of the EPC make it unlikely that the dog will come in contact with third parties. Each EPC shall be inspected on a yearly basis to ensure its functionality. 
(f)  The staff's decision denying issuance of a registration may be appealed to the city manager. The city may require insurance or bonds naming the city as an additional insured and to cover damages to third parties as a condition to issuance of a registration and may impose any other conditions deemed necessary in the sole judgment of the city. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to operate or utilize an EPC within the city as a substitute for a physical fence without first obtaining a registration in accordance with this section and meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Warning signs shall be erected to inform members of the public that an EPC system is in operation on the property. Such signs shall be placed prominently to members of the public. Such signs shall be prominently displayed on all sides of the property. 
(2)  Only "active" systems may be utilized. Active systems are those that are always on, rather than a passive system that initially trains a dog and then is taken down. 
(h)  The property owner of an EPC is in violation of this section if the EPC is: 
(1)  Turned off or the animal is not wearing a properly operating signaling device; 
(2)  Ineffective for any animal that has learned it can cross the fence line; 
(3)  Intended to be a means of keeping people or animals out of an enclosed area; or 
(4)  Buried in or adjacent to a right-of-way; 
(5)  An EPC is not an acceptable means of control for an animal that is classified as dangerous or vicious; 
(6)  The owner, keeper or harborer of the dog(s) does not possess a valid registration; or 
(7)  Proper warning signage is not maintained. 
(i)  A registration shall be automatically terminated if the animal escapes from within the boundary of the electronic fence twice or more or if the animal covered by the registration is ever classified as dangerous or vicious. A registration may be revoked by the city upon a showing that the EPC is not being operated or maintained in accordance with the conditions of the registration or in compliance with this section. If revoked, a new registration for an EPC may not be applied for by the holder of the terminated registration, or any related party, for two (2) years thereafter. 
(j)  All registrations shall be renewed each year and prior to their one (1) year expiration date. Except for grandfathered registrations, renewals shall be processed in the same manner as new registration applications. Grandfathered registrations shall be renewed by the owner by submitting updated information required in subsection (d) of this section to the city. 
(k)  The fees for registrations under this article shall be set by the city council, and are as shown in the animal registration fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in Appendix A (Fee Schedule) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-06D, § III, 7-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.02. - VACCINATION AND REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 6.02.001. - Vaccination required. 
Every owner of a dog or cat over four (4) months of age shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies, in compliance with applicable state law. Any person establishing residence within the city shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement within ten (10) days of establishing residency. If an unvaccinated dog inflicts a bite, scratches, or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits, a rabies vaccine shall not be administered to the dog until that animal is released from quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.002. - Certificate of vaccination. 
Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a certificate of vaccination. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy of the certificate and one (1) copy shall be provided to the owner. The vaccination certificates shall contain all information required by state law, including but not limited to the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat; 
(2)  The date of vaccination; 
(3)  The type of rabies vaccine used; 
(4)  The year and number of the rabies tag provided to the owner; and 
(5)  The breed, age, color and sex of vaccinated dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.003. - Rabies tag. 
Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination, the owner of the vaccinated dog and/or cat shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated animal a metal tag, serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance of the certificate of vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.004. - Registration tag and collar. 
Upon payment of the annual registration fee, where applicable, the city shall issue to the owner a registration certificate and metal tag having stamped the number corresponding with the number of the certificate. Such tag shall at all times be securely attached to a collar or harness around the neck of the registered animal. In case a tag is lost, a duplicate will be issued by the city police department, or its designee, upon presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the registration fee. Tags shall not be transferable from one animal to another, and no refunds shall be made. In lieu of wearing a registration tag and collar, the owner of an animal may satisfy such requirement if the animal is identifiable through a surgically implanted microchip. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.005. - Guard dog permit. 
(a)  All dogs that are kept solely for the protection of persons and property, residential, commercial or personal, shall obtain a guard dog permit from the city police department. The annual fee for a guard dog permit shall be set by the city council, and is as shown in the animal registration fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.02.005 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. The area or premises in which any guard dog is confined shall be conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two (2) inches high stating, at a minimum: "Guard Dog on Premises." 
(b)  The area or premises protected by a guard dog shall be subject to inspection by the city police department to determine that the animal in question is maintained and secured at all times in such a manner so as to prevent the guard animal from coming in contact with the public. 
(c)  Guard, search or other trained dogs or trained animals that are used by federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement agencies are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.006. - Revocation of registration. 
(a)  The director of animal services or his/her designee may revoke any cat or dog registration, after an informal hearing held by the director or his designee, for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Impoundment of a cat or dog by the city two (2) or more times during any twelve (12) month period; 
(2)  Two (2) or more convictions of a person for any violation of this chapter, when such convictions relate to the cat or dog that is being considered for revocation of its registration; 
(3)  Any combination or subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, totaling three (3) incidents or more, over any period of time. 
(b)  Upon revoking the registration of any cat or dog, the animal services department shall notify the owner of the cat or dog of such action in writing. Written notification shall be deemed made when a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the cat's or dog's owner, is deposited in the U.S. mail. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of ten (10) calendar days after written notification of revocation is deposited in the U.S. mail, as provided above, the cat or dog that has had its registration revoked shall no longer be kept, maintained or harbored within the city's corporate limits, and each 24-hour period that an animal with a revoked registration remains in the city shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(d)  Upon revocation of a registration, an owner of the animal with the revoked registration shall notify the animal services department of the location to which the animal is being removed outside of the municipal limits. 
(e)  An animal owner may appeal the decision of the director of animal services to revoke a registration of a dog or cat as a result of the informal hearing held by the director or his designee, by writing and requesting that the decision be appealed to and reviewed by the city manager or his designee. The city manager's decision may be appealed by the owner to the municipal court of the City of Marble Falls within fifteen (15) days of the city manager's decision. The municipal court shall consider the relevant issues de novo. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.007. - Enforcement. 
(a)  While primary enforcement duties rest with animal control officers, the provisions of this chapter may be enforced by peace officers, code enforcement officers and such other persons as are designated by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct, resist or oppose any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In the enforcement of this chapter, any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the authority to tranquilize, trap or shoot any animal to protect themselves, to protect a third person or to protect another animal from attack or threat of imminent injury or to prevent such animal from enduring further pain or suffering as a result of disease or injury. 
(d)  Any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to pursue and apprehend an at-large dog, cat, livestock or other animal considered a nuisance onto private property without first requesting permission from the owner of the property before entering the property or without obtaining a search warrant. 
(e)  Any peace officer or animal control officer is empowered to demand the exhibition by the owner of an animal's current vaccination information and/or the registration for such animal, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  The owner of each animal located within the city is required to produce the registration and current vaccination information for each animal in his ownership, possession or control, upon demand by an animal control officer or peace officer. Failure to do so will result in enforcement of this Code, as set forth herein. 
(g)  It is further provided that any agent of the animal control officer, based upon a warrant, or after gaining lawful permission, may enter upon the premises where any animal is kept or harbored in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner and demand to examine such animal, and to take possession of such animal, when in his opinion, it requires humane treatment, and humanely destroy such animal upon the recommendation of a veterinarian. The seizure and/or subsequent destruction of the animal shall be done only by obtaining lawful permission, or by obtaining a warrant for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.008. - Annual registration and fees. 
(a)  Registration tag required. No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog and/or cat over the age of four (4) months within the city, unless a registration has been obtained for the dog and/or cat owned. 
(b)  Administration of registration and registration tag. The city will furnish registration(s) as provided for herein. Registration(s) shall be available at the following locations: 
(1)  The city police department; and 
(c)  Application. Written application(s) for dog and/or cat registration(s) shall be made upon a printed application form provided by the city and shall state the name and address of the owner of the dog(s) and/or cat(s), and the name, breed, color, age and sex of each dog and/or cat being registered. Applications may be obtained at the locations provided for above in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Conditions for registration. Dog and/or cat registration tag(s) shall be issued upon payment of a registration fee and upon presentation of a rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian showing that such vaccination was given in compliance with state law. 
(e)  Registration fee and terms of registration. 
(1)  If the owner presents documentation prepared and signed by a veterinarian licensed by the state which demonstrates that the dog and/or cat to be registered has been altered, the annual fee for such registration shall be set by the city council, and is as shown in the animal registration fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.02.008 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter; 
(2)  Owners of an unaltered dog(s) and/or cat(s) shall be required to file an application for a new registration for the dog(s) and/or cat(s), each year. The annual fee for such registration shall be as set by the city council, and is as shown in the animal registration fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.02.008 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter; 
(3)  No registration fees shall be due or paid for any dog and/or cat that is owned by a citizen sixty-five (65) years of age or over, if such animal is altered. The annual fee for unaltered animals owned by citizens sixty-five (65) years of age or over shall be set by the city council, and is as shown in the animal registration fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.02.008 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.02.009. - Nonresident owners. 
Registration requirements set out herein do not apply to nonresidents in transit within the corporate city limits possessing, keeping or harboring domestic dogs or cats, provided such animals shall not be kept or harbored within the city limits longer than thirty (30) consecutive days, and that the animals are kept under restraint as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.03. - KENNELS 
 
Sec. 6.03.001. - Permit required; exceptions. 
Permits shall be required for the operation of all kennels within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.03.002. - Duration of permit; permit fees. 
Permits issued under this article shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issuance. The fees for permits under this article shall be set by the city council, and are as shown in the animal registration fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.03.002 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.03.003. - Facility requirements for kennels. 
Upon inspection by the animal services department of premises that are to be operated as a kennel, a permit will be issued if, in the opinion of the animal control officer, all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The kennel facility is adequate for the number and type of animals to be kept therein. 
a.  The kennel facility is of a sufficient size as to allow all animals in the kennel to move about freely, considering the maximum possible size of the individual animal's height and weight that may be kept within the kennel. 
b.  Adequate food and fresh water is continuously provided so that each and all animals kept in the kennel shall be maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration. 
c.  The kennel premises are kept in a sanitary condition and reasonably free of animal waste, parasites, insects, rodents and flies that could be harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of the general public. 
d.  Nothing about the operation of the kennel poses any public or private nuisance within the city's corporate limits. 
(2)  The animals and the kennel facility shall, at all times, be kept free of odor or stench which is offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(3)  The animals in the kennel shall at all times be maintained in a manner that does not pose a danger to the health of the animals themselves, to adjacent animals within the kennel, or to visitors or workers in the kennel facility. 
(4)  The animals in the kennel shall not cause noise(s) or other disturbances which are offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary sensibilities on adjoining, adjacent or neighboring premises. 
(5)  If an applicant for or a holder of a kennel permit has been issued citations for violation of this chapter on two (2) separate occasions, or possesses or controls animals covered by or to be covered by the kennel permit that have been impounded on two (2) separate occasions, the kennel permit may be revoked (or the application for renewal of same be rejected) by the city. 
(6)  In the case of a boarding kennel, no animal may be bred or sold or transfer of ownership of an animal be otherwise effected from within the boarding kennel. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.03.004. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  Any kennel permitted under this chapter found to be in violation of any municipal zoning law, health law or any other applicable ordinance of the city or of the state, or found to have a facility maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of mind of persons residing in the immediate vicinity because of the animals owned, controlled or housed by the kennel on the premises, may have all applicable permits suspended by the animal services department, pending a final informal hearing of information and evidence related to the offenses alleged. The informal hearing on such matters shall be before the director of animal services or his designee. 
(b)  Upon suspension of the permits, the animal services department shall notify the permit holder of such action in writing. Written notification shall be deemed made when a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the permit holder is deposited in the U.S. mail. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after written notification of suspension is deposited in the U.S. mail, as provided above, the permit holder shall no longer keep, maintain or harbor animals within the city's corporate limits, and each 24-hour period that an animal with a suspended registration remains in the city shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(d)  Upon suspension of the permit, the holder of the revoked permit shall notify the animal services department of the location to which the animal(s) are being removed. 
(e)  A permit holder may appeal the decision of the director of animal services to suspend a permit, after the informal hearing is held by the director, by appealing the decision, in writing, to the city manager or his designee. If the city manager determines that grounds exist for permanent or extended suspension and/or termination of the kennel permit, his/her decision on the matter is final and is not subject to further appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.03.005. - Commercial animal sales permit. 
(a)  All persons engaged in the commercial sale of any animals, domestic or otherwise, including, but not limited to, pet stores and stores in which pets and animals are not the central item of sale within the store, such as department stores, drugstores and convenience stores, must apply for a commercial animal sales permit at the animal services department. The commercial animal sales permit shall be issued provided the applicant meets all the provisions of this section and shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. The annual fee shall be set by the city council and is as shown in the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.03.005 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(b)  Those persons currently engaged in the commercial sales of animals as described in this section are required to apply for the commercial animal sales permit prior to engaging in the sale of any animal within the city. 
(c)  Upon inspection of the premises by the animal services department, the permit shall be issued if, in the sole discretion of the animal control officer, all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The facility is adequate for the number and type of animals to be kept therein. 
a.  The facility is of a sufficient size as to allow all animals in the facility to move about freely, considering the maximum possible size of the individual animal's height and weight that may be kept within the facility at any time. 
b.  Adequate food and water is continuously provided so that each and all animals in the facility kept shall be maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration. 
c.  The facility's premises are kept in a sanitary condition and reasonably free of animal waste, parasites, insects, rodents and flies that could be harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of the general public. 
d.  Nothing about the operation of the facility poses any public or private nuisance within the city's corporate limits. 
(2)  The animals and the facility shall, at all times, be kept free of odor or stench which is offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(3)  The animals in the facility shall at all times be maintained in a manner that does not pose a danger to the health of the animals themselves, to adjacent animals within the facility, or to visitors or workers in the facility. 
(4)  The animals in the facility shall not cause noise(s) or other disturbances which are offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary sensibilities on adjoining, adjacent or neighboring premises. 
(5)  If an applicant for or a holder of a commercial animal sales permit has been convicted of a violation of this chapter on two (2) separate occasions, the commercial animal sales permit may be revoked by the city, and issuance of or renewal of a commercial animal sales permit may be refused. 
(d)  The commercial animal sales permit may be revoked by the animal services department if, upon investigation, it is determined that the permit holder has failed to adhere to any of the above conditions listed in this section. Once the commercial animal sales permit has been revoked, neither the individual nor the store whose permit has been revoked may reapply for a period of six (6) months, and they shall not engage in the sale of animals in the manner described in this section for that period. 
(e)  Upon revocation of the commercial animal sales permit, the animal services department shall notify the permit holder of such action in writing. Written notification shall be deemed made when a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the permit holder, is deposited in the U.S. mail. 
(f)  Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after written notification of revocation is deposited in the U.S. mail, as provided above, the permit holder shall no longer keep, maintain or harbor animals within the city's corporate limits, and each 24-hour period that an animal with a revoked permit remains in the city shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(g)  Upon revocation of the commercial animal sales permit, the holder of the revoked commercial animal sales permit shall notify the animal services department of the location to which the animals are being removed. 
(h)  A holder of a commercial animal sales permit may appeal the decision of the director of animal services to revoke a permit, after the informal hearing is held by the director, by requesting, in writing, that the city manager or his designee hear an appeal of the director's decision. If the city manager determines that grounds exist for permanent or extended revocation or termination of the commercial animal sales permit, his/her decision on the matter is final and is not subject to further appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.04. - IMPOUNDMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6.04.001. - Impoundment. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the city shall not impound any animal unless there is a proper facility in which to keep the animal. For the purposes of this section, a proper facility is one that adequately provides for the needs of the animal and for the protection of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.002. - Authorized; fees. 
(a)  Animals owned or harbored in violation of the city code of ordinances or laws of the state may be taken into custody by an animal control officer or other designated official and impounded under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Owners of impounded pets are required to pay all fees and other costs related to the impoundment as set by the city council and as detailed in this article. Fees for the impoundment of pets shall be set by the city council, and is as shown on the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.04.001 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.003. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Dogs, cats and estrays impounded without identification. All dogs, cats and estrays impounded by the animal services department or brought to the animal shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that animal, and which animals do not have identification, shall be held for a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours, during which time period the owner may present proof of ownership at the shelter in order to reclaim the animal. After paying all applicable fees and costs incurred during and/or related to the impoundment of the animal, including registration fees, the owner or harborer may reclaim the dog/cat/estray. In the event that an animal is not claimed after seventy-two (72) hours in the shelter, that dog/cat/estray shall become the property of the city or its agent/designee. 
(b)  Dogs, cats and estrays impounded with identification. All dogs, cats and estrays impounded by the animal services department or brought to the animal shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that animal that are wearing traceable identification, micro-chipped or where an owner/harborer of the animal is otherwise known by the department, may be held by the shelter, or its assignee, for a minimum of ten (10) business operation days of the facility, from the date the animal enters the facility, during which time the animal services department, or its agent/designee, will attempt to notify the owner/harborer (as shown on the identification or as otherwise determined by the department) of the impoundment of the animal. Holidays and days that the facility is closed (i.e., is not generally open to the public) are specifically excluded from the minimum ten-day holding period noted herein. The owner/harborer of such animal that is impounded with identification may claim the animal from the shelter or its designee at any time during the ten (10) day confinement period, after compliance with the requirements noted herein. Unless: 
(1)  The owner/harborer of an animal that is impounded with identification has: 
a.  Notified the animal services department in writing (which shall include but is not limited to notification to the department by facsimile), on or before the close of business on the tenth (10th) day of impoundment, of his/her intention to claim the impounded dog/cat/estray; and 
b.  Provided the animal services department, within the body of the writing noted in subsection a. above, of the date certain by which time the owner will reclaim the impounded dog/cat/estray; and 
c.  Satisfied all applicable fees and other animal services department requirements necessary for claiming the impounded animal; and 
(2)  The arrangement proposed by the owner and/or harborer of the impounded animal related to timely retrieval of the animal and payment of impoundment costs has been approved by the director of animal services. 
The impounded animal(s) shall be deemed voluntarily surrendered by the owner/harborer, and shall become the property of the city, or its agent/designee, as of the start of business on the eleventh (11th) day of impoundment, and the city may dispose of the animal as it deems appropriate, based upon the circumstances at hand. 
(c)  Animals surrendered by owner/harborer. In addition to the voluntary surrender of an animal that is not timely claimed from impoundment, as noted above, the animal surrendered by the owner/harborer to the animal services department or its agent/designee shall become the property of the city immediately upon completion of the owner/harborer surrender form. Fees for the owner/harborer surrendered animal shall be set by the city council and are as shown in the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.04.002 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(d)  Animals other than dogs, cats or estrays. All animals, other than dogs, cats, estrays or animals holding current restricted animal permits in the city that are impounded by the animal services department or its agent/designee, or brought to the animal shelter by a person other than the owner/harborer, shall become the property of the city unless such ownership by the city is prohibited by state or federal law. 
(e)  Disposition of animals not claimed or adopted. Any animal that cannot be adopted or transferred to a proper and appropriate agency or person shall be euthanized by means approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association and/or the Texas Veterinary Medical Association or by other state-approved method. The euthanasia is to be administered in compliance with the laws of the state. All animals listed as endangered or protected shall be transferred to the proper authority at the earliest possible date or otherwise maintained in accordance with state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.004. - Release of animals held on complaint. 
If a complaint has been filed in municipal court against the owner and/or harborer of an impounded animal for a violation of this chapter, the animal shall not be released except on the order of the animal services department, which may also direct the owner and/or harborer to pay any penalties for violation of this chapter, in addition to payment of all impoundment fees and costs incurred in accordance with this chapter. Surrender of an animal by the owner and/or harborer thereof to the animal services department does not relieve or render the owner and/or harborer immune from the decision of the court related to that animal, nor from the fees, fines or other costs that may result from a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.005. - Unauthorized removal of animal from confinement; interfering with officers. 
(a)  Removal of animal from confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or allow to escape from any place of confinement any dog, cat or other animal which has been ordered to be confined by the animal services department, without the express consent of the animal services department. 
(b)  Interfering with officers. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or attempt to interfere with the animal control officer, police officer or to interfere or attempt to interfere with any person acting for the city in the taking up, handling, and/or impounding of animals in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.006. - Animals at-large. 
(a)  Except as provided for in section 6.06.013, it shall be unlawful for any person owning and/or harboring an animal to permit such animal, other than a protected animal, to run at-large as that term is defined by section 6.01.001 of this chapter. 
(b)  Any officer or citizen of the city is authorized to take up and deliver to the animal services department any animal, other than a protected animal, found running at-large that may be found at-large in the corporate limits of the city, subject to the applicable provision of the law. 
(c)  The animal control officer or his agent(s) and city peace officer(s) are authorized to impound any animal, other than a protected animal, that is believed to be in violation of this chapter. In the event the animal, other than a protected animal, is on [private] property or property of the animal's owner, the animal control officer, his/her agent, or peace officer may enter the property, other than a private dwelling, for the purpose of impoundment or issuance of a citation, or both, subject to the applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.007. - Confinement of female dogs and cats during estrus. 
The owner/harborer of any unneutered female dog or cat in the state of estrus (in heat) shall confine the animal that is in heat during such period of time, by enclosing the animal in a house, building or other secure enclosure. The area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animal(s), except for the purpose of intentional breeding of the animal by the owner/harborer. An owner/harborer who is not compliant with this requirement shall be ordered to immediately remove the animal that is in heat from other person's or public property, and to place the animal in confined quarters. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal services department shall be a violation of this article and the dog or cat that is in heat, but is not confined, may be impounded as prescribed in this chapter. All expenses incurred as a result of this confinement shall be paid by the owner/harborer of such animals. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.008. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)  All animal(s) adopted from the animal shelter shall be neutered. If the animal has not been neutered before it leaves the animal shelter, then the person adopting the animal shall sign an adoption contract with the city stating that he/she will have the adopted animal neutered and provide the date by which the surgery must be performed. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the person adopting an animal to provide proof of neutering of each adopted animal to the animal services department within thirty (30) days after the date for neutering of the animal(s), as shown on the contract for adoption. 
(c)  The fees for the adoption of impounded pets shall be set by the city council, and is as shown on the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.04.008 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(d)  Failure to comply with this section or failure to comply with the terms of the adoption contract shall give the animal control officer the right to recover the adopted animal in question and revoke the owner's adoption contract. Such failure shall also constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 2012-O-06D, § IV, 7-3-2012)  
Secs. 6.04.009—6.04.030. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 6.04.031. - Running at-large. 
It is unlawful for any owner or person in control of any horse, mule, donkey, jack, jenney, cattle, hog, goat or sheep (estray) to permit any such animal to run at-large on land that is not owned or otherwise controlled by the owner or harborer (e.g., via a lease or permit), or on any street, alley or other public property or place within the city's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.032. - Authorized impoundment; procedures. 
It shall be the duty of the animal services department to impound any and all estrays and other livestock that may be found running at-large and upon any street or alley or upon any unenclosed lot in the city, or otherwise found running at-large, and to confine such estrays and other livestock for safekeeping or destruction or other disposal by the city, as is deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of the city. Upon impoundment, the animal services department shall prepare a file, to be located in the animal services department, related to the incident of impoundment. Each entry shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person who notified the animal control department of the estray and other livestock being at-large; 
(2)  The date, time and location of the estray and other livestock when found; 
(3)  The location of the estray and other livestock until disposition; and 
(4)  A description of the animal impounded, including its breed, color, sex, age, size, all markings of any kind and other identifying characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.033. - Advertisement of impounded livestock. 
When an estray or other livestock has been impounded, the animal services department shall make a diligent search of the register of recorded brands in the county for the owner of the estray or other livestock. If the search does not reveal the owner, the animal services department shall advertise the impoundment of the estray in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least twice during the next fifteen (15) days following impoundment and post a notice of the impoundment of the estray or other livestock on the public notice board of city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.034. - Claiming of animal by owner. 
The owner of an estray or other livestock may recover possession of the animal at any time before the animal is sold under the terms of this article if: 
(1)  The owner has provided the animal services department with an affidavit of ownership of the estray or other livestock containing at least the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the owner; 
b.  The date the owner discovered that the animal was missing; 
c.  The property from which the animal strayed; 
d.  A description of the animal, including its breed, color, sex, size, all markings of any kind and any other identifying characteristics; 
(2)  The owner has paid all fees to those entitled to receive them. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.035. - Fees. 
For each and every estray or other livestock taken and impounded there shall be paid to the city by the owner or his agents the fees established by the city council, as set forth in section A6.04.035 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter, for each and every day that the animal remains in the custody of the animal services department. The owner shall also pay for any veterinarian care or drug fees incurred for the animal(s) while in the custody of the animal services department, as well as all costs associated with feeding, grooming and housing and maintaining the estray or livestock. Additionally, the owner shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for all costs related to advertising pursuant to this chapter related to estrays and livestock recovered by the city and returned to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.036. - Sale of impounded livestock. 
(a)  If the ownership of an estray or other livestock is not determined within fourteen (14) days following the final advertisement required by this article, title to the estray or other livestock rests with the city and the animal services department shall then cause the estray or other livestock to be sold at a public auction. If there are not any bidders, ownership is forfeited to the city. 
(b)  Title shall be deemed vested in the animal services department for the purposes of passing a good title, free and clear of all claims, to the purchaser at the sale. The disposition of the proceeds derived from the sale at public auction will be as follows: 
(1)  Pay all handling fees to those entitled to receive them; 
(2)  Execute a report of sale of impounded stock; and 
(3)  The net proceeds remaining from the sale of the estray or other livestock after the handling fees have been paid shall be delivered by the animal services department to the city's finance office. Such net proceeds shall be subject to claim by the original owner of the estray or other livestock, as provided herein, after payment to the city of all costs incurred by it in keeping and handling the estrays and sale of same. 
If the bids are too low, the animal services department shall have the right to refuse all bids and arrange for another public auction or sealed bidding procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.037. - Recovery of sale proceeds by owner. 
(a)  Within twelve (12) months after the sale of an estray or other livestock under the provisions of this article, the original owner of the estray may recover the net proceeds of the sale that were delivered to the finance office if: 
(1)  The owner has provided the animal services department with an affidavit of ownership of the animal(s) sold; 
(2)  The animal services department has accepted the affidavit of ownership; and 
(3)  Any proceeds remain after city costs are paid in full. 
(b)  After the expiration of twelve (12) months from the sale of an estray or other livestock as provided by this article, the sale proceeds shall revert to the city. If the animal was forfeited to the city due to no bidders at the auction, then the city is not to be liable to the owner for any proceeds of the sale, since no proceeds were received. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.038. - Use of livestock while impounded. 
During the period of time an estray or other livestock is held by one who impounded the estray or other livestock, it may be used by any person for any legal purpose that does not harm or otherwise endanger the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.04.039. - Death or escape of livestock while impounded. 
If the estray or other livestock dies or escapes while held by the person who impounded it, the person shall report the death or escape to the animal services department. The report shall be filed in the record of the impoundment related to the animal reported as dead or escaped. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.05. - ANIMAL BITES; RABIES CONTROL 
 
Sec. 6.05.001. - Reporting of bites and scratches. 
Every physician and medical practitioner who treats a person within the city for any animal bite/scratch/laceration, or any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten or scratched a person within the city, shall, within twelve (12) hours of learning of this situation, report such occurrence to the city police department, giving the name, age, sex and precise location of the bitten/scratched person and such other information as the officer or department may require. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.05.002. - Reporting of suspected rabies cases. 
Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies, or any person who suspects rabies in any animal, shall immediately report the incident to the animal services department, stating, to the best of the informant's knowledge, where such animal may be found. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.05.003. - Quarantine or disposition of animal. 
(a)  Dogs, cats or other pet animals. Any dog or cat or other pet animal that has bitten or scratched a person shall be quarantined for observation for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite/scratch. The procedure and place of quarantine and observation shall be designated by the animal control officer or his/her designee, in compliance with state law. If the animal is not quarantined by confinement on the owner's premises, then confinement shall be in an approved quarantine facility or veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at the owner's expense. Stray dogs and cats, or those animals whose owners cannot be located, shall be confined for a period of ninety-six (96) hours and, if unclaimed during that time, may be destroyed and the brain of such animal immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for rabies examination. The owner of any animal that has been reported to have inflicted a bite/scratch/laceration on any person shall, on demand, produce the animal for impoundment, as prescribed in this article. Home quarantine, as defined in this article, may be allowed only in those situations where permitted by state law and as agreed to by the animal services department. Refusal to produce the animal involved in the biting/scratching/laceration incident shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and each day of such refusal to produce the animal shall constitute a separate and individual violation, subject to the penalties as stated in section 6.01.002. 
(b)  Other animals. Any wild, exotic, dangerous or vicious animal, excluding pet animals, as defined in this chapter, and/or any animal considered high risk by state law, that has bitten or scratched a person, shall be caught and humanely killed and the brain submitted for rabies examination. Wild animals that are classified as "low risk animals" shall be handled as dictated by state law in the event that they inflict bites or scratches upon a person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.05.004. - Animals not to be killed or disposed of. 
No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid dog or cat; any dog or cat suspected of having been exposed to rabies; or dog or cat that has bitten or scratched any person, except as otherwise provided herein; nor shall such dog or cat be removed from the corporate city limits of Marble Falls without the express written permission of the animal control officer or other designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.06. - ANIMAL CARE 
 
Sec. 6.06.001. - Duty to provide care. 
(a)  It is a violation of this chapter for an owner, harborer or custodian of any animal to fail to provide the animal(s) in his/her care or custody with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, potable water, adequate shelter and protection from weather, i.e., artificial shade in the summertime, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, grooming when lack thereof would adversely affect the health of the animal, and humane care and treatment. 
(b)  Adequate shelter shall be construed to mean a structure that is enclosed by at least three (3) walls or sides and a roof, which structure is located such that the animal is protected from weather conditions. 
(1)  The shelter must provide protection from the weather, i.e., sun, wind, precipitation (in whatever form), or other inclement weather conditions. 
(2)  If there are no artificial heat sources, the structure shall be small enough to allow the dog or cat to warm the interior of the structure and maintain its body heat, but large enough to permit normal postural adjustments, or standing. 
(3)  The enclosure shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair. 
(4)  Plastic air shipping containers and/or pet carriers shall not be used as outdoor shelters. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.002. - Cruel treatment. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to willfully or maliciously strike, beat, cruelly treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overwork, intentionally run down with a vehicle, or otherwise cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to an animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious, dangerous or trespassing animals. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to abuse an animal or cause, instigate or permit any dog fight, cock fight, bull fight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.003. - Abandonment. 
It shall be a violation of this article for a person to abandon an animal in his care, control, ownership, or custody. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.004. - Offering animal as prize or inducement. 
(a)  No person shall give away any live animal, reptile, fowl, livestock or wildlife as a prize for or an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition; or an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer is for the purpose of attracting trade. This prohibition shall apply to carnivals, fairs and circuses. 
(b)  The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to fish or to animals given as prizes at a rodeo contest or livestock show or as part of a project conducted by a recognized educational agricultural program such as FFA or 4-H. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.005. - Poisonous substances; traps. 
No person shall place any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, in a manner that makes it likely to be eaten by any domestic animal or person. This section is not intended to prohibit use of herbicides, insecticides or rodent and vermin control materials. No person shall utilize steel leg-hold traps within the city limits. This provision is not intended to include humane traps nor restrict the use of them. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to administer poison to an animal belonging to another. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any domestic animal or person. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or with criminal negligence injure another's animal by leaving a poisonous substance of any kind in any place within the city. 
(3)  The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to an exterminator using poisons as part of a pest control program, nor shall it apply to persons using commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents. For purposes of this section, the term "exterminator" shall mean an individual licensed by the Texas Structural Pest Control Board, unless he/she is exempt from such licensing. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.006. - Theatrical exhibits. 
All theatrical exhibits as defined herein shall, in addition to other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Facilities shall be subject to inspection by an animal control officer upon his/her request, during reasonable hours. 
(1)  The animal services department must be notified of all displays or performances, including date, time and exact location, at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of a display or performance. 
(2)  Animal quarters shall be of sufficient size to allow each animal to stand up, lie down and turn around in a natural position without touching the sides or top or any other animal or waste. 
(3)  Each enclosure shall be maintained in a comfortable and healthy temperature level as well as have adequate ventilation. 
(4)  No animal shall be made to perform by means of any prod, stick, electrical shock, chemical or physical force or by causing pain or discomfort. Any whip or riding crop must be used so as to not cause injury to the animal. 
(5)  No animal shall be caused to fight, wrestle or be physically matched against any other animal or person. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.007. - Safety of animals in motor vehicles. 
(a)  A person may not transport an animal in a motor vehicle on public roadways or areas open to the public unless: 
(1)  The animal is enclosed within the vehicle; or 
(2)  If the animal is transported in an unenclosed vehicle, including a convertible, pickup truck, flatbed truck, or motorcycle, the animal shall be confined in a secure and appropriately sized vented container or confined in a manner that prevents the animal from falling or jumping from the vehicle or otherwise being injured. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety or welfare. An animal control officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable force to remove the animal from the vehicle whenever it appears that the animal's health, safety or welfare is or will be endangered if the owner of the vehicle cannot be located after reasonable attempts. The animal shall be taken to the animal shelter or to a veterinarian if the animal is in distress. A written notice bearing the name of the officer removing the animal, a telephone number where he can be contacted and the location where the animal may be claimed by the owner shall be attached to the vehicle. Any person violating this section shall bear the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment cost and disposal of the animal, including the removal from a vehicle in addition to any criminal penalty that may be imposed under this section. 
(1)  A peace officer or animal control officer who removes an animal from a vehicle, or enclosed space in accordance with this subsection shall not be liable for damage caused to the vehicle and/or property contained therein. 
(c)  Instances where occupants of motor vehicles are involved in a traffic accident or other vehicle related incidents that result in animals being left uncontrolled or unattended, animal control officer or police officers of the city are authorized to take welfare custody of such unattended animals. In the interest of the health, safety or welfare of such animals, officers are authorized to transport such animals to the city's animal shelter, a veterinarian, humane shelter, or an animal emergency clinic. Information shall be provided to the animal's owner as to the animal's disposition. Animal owners shall bear full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment costs or other associated costs. 
(d)  Duty of motor vehicle operator to report an accident involving animals. 
(1)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle within the city, strikes any animal shall report the accident to the police department within a reasonable time if the stricken animal is on or near the roadway so that it constitutes a potential traffic hazard. It shall be an affirmative defense to any violation under this section that the incident occurred while the operator was responding to an emergency and that the incident was reported as soon as possible. 
(2)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or the local humane society. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.008. - Restraint requirements for dogs on private property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), a person may not restrain a dog with a chain or tether unless the person is holding the chain or tether. 
(b)  The prohibition in subsection (a) does not apply to a temporary restraint, which temporary restraint shall not be longer than is necessary for the owner to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained occurring: 
(1)  During a lawful animal event, veterinary treatment, grooming, training, or law enforcement activity; 
(2)  During a period that is necessary to protect the safety or welfare of a person or the dog, if the dog's owner or handler remains in visual proximity to the dog throughout the period of restraint; 
(3)  While the owner is engaged in, or actively training for, an activity for which the license issued is associated with the use or presence of a dog. 
(c)  If temporary restraint is allowed as per subsection (b), above, then during any such temporary restraint, a person may not restrain a dog: 
(1)  In a manner that does not allow the dog to have access to necessary food, shelter and water; 
(2)  In a manner that allows the dog to move outside the person's property; 
(3)  In the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which: 
a.  The actual or effective temperature is below thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit; 
b.  A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority, or jurisdiction; or 
c.  A hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction by the National Weather Service; 
(4)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(5)  Within five hundred (500) feet of the premises of a school; 
(6)  By use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the dog's movement. A restraint unreasonably limits a dog's movement if the restraint: 
a.  Uses a collar that is pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or one that is not properly fitted to the dog; 
b.  Is a length shorter than the greater of: 
1.  Five (5) times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip the of dog's nose to the base of the dog's tail; or 
2.  Ten (10) feet; 
(7)  Is in an unsafe condition; or 
(8)  Is in a manner that causes or may cause injury to the dog. 
(d)  A person restraining a dog with a chain or tether, whether the chain or tether is held by the person or attached to an inanimate object during a period of temporary restraint, shall attach the chain or tether to a properly fitting collar or harness worn by the dog. A person may not wrap a chain or tether directly around the dog's neck. A person may not restrain a dog with a chain or tether that weighs more than one-eighteenth ( 1/18 ) of the animal's body weight. A chain or tether used to restrain a dog must, by design and placement, be unlikely to become entangled. 
(e)  Should a violation of this section occur, at the discretion of a peace officer or animal control officer, after attempting to locate the animal's owner, a peace officer or animal control officer may enter onto private property for the sole purpose of removing the animal. If professional services are required to remove the animal, the owner is responsible for any and all costs associated therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.009. - Enclosure for dogs. 
(a)  An outdoor enclosure used to keep four (4) or more dogs, other than puppies less than six (6) months old, must be located at least fifty (50) feet from an adjacent residence or business, excluding the residence or business of the owner or handler of the dogs. 
(b)  An outdoor enclosure used as the primary living area for a dog, or used regularly as an area for the dog to eat, sleep, drink, and eliminate, must have at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of space for each dog six (6) months of age or older. 
(c)  All dogs left in an outdoor enclosure must have access to necessary food, shelter, and water. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.010. - Selling dyed animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, raffle, offer or give as a prize, premium or an advertising device or cause to be displayed in any store, shop, carnival or other public place an animal or fowl of any kind that has been dyed or otherwise colored artificially. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.011. - Trapping and shooting. 
(a)  Trapping prohibited. It shall be unlawful to set, trigger, activate or otherwise use, or cause to be set, triggered, activated or used, any steel jawed, leg-hold trap or for any person, other than animal control officers, to set or otherwise use other trapping devices including "live traps" used for the capture of any animal. Consistent with the provisions herein, the animal control division is authorized to utilize humane "live traps" and may conduct trapping operations or provide or authorize such devices use to property owners as may be needed throughout the city. This subsection is not intended to prohibit the prudent use of traps on one's own property to control varmints and rodents. 
(1)  Any city resident that has a humane box type trap and wants to use that trap for trapping of stray and/or nuisance domesticated dogs and/or cats within the corporate city limits, shall obtain a trap permit. This permit shall be issued to this individual for use only on his/her premises. The fee for a trap shall be set by the city council, and is as shown on the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.06.011 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. Any dogs and/or cats caught in these traps must be surrendered to the city animal services department. No steel jaw leg hold traps in the city limits shall be permitted. 
(b)  Hunting prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot, intentionally injure or kill any wild bird, animal, mammal or reptile within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot or kill, within the city, any domestic bird, animal, mammal, reptile or pet that is not owned by such person. This subsection shall not be construed or interpreted to prohibit the destruction of poisonous snakes or to prohibit animal control division from utilizing certain firearms in emergency field conditions where such actions are provided for by law or policy. 
(c)  Domestic animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a domestic animal within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be a defense to prosecution that the domestic animal shot was a vicious animal and presenting an immediate threat to personal or public safety. This subsection shall not be construed or interpreted to prohibit animal control division from utilizing certain firearms in emergency field conditions where such actions are provided for by law or policy. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for the trapping of animals if it is shown that the object of trapping is the capture of feral cats and such operations are being conducted in connection with a feral cat colony as defined herein and further that affixed to the top of animal activated live traps, a yellow six (6) inches by six (6) inches metal tag bearing in contrasting color the name of the corporation, address and telephone number. Live traps that require human monitoring and activation shall have no tag requirements. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that section 229.002 of the Local Government Code related to the regulation of the discharge of a weapon applies to the hunting or shooting activity complained of. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.012. - Slaughtering of animals. 
Animals may be slaughtered for human or animal consumption within the city, provided it is done at a location that is shielded from sensory perception of the general public, and provided it is done in a manner designed to cause the animal's death as quickly as possible without needless suffering. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.013. - Keeping of cats outdoors. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a cat which is not spayed or neutered to permit or allow such cat to be outside while not on a leash under the direct and continuous supervision and control of a person. The owner of a spayed or neutered cat may allow such cat to be outside provided that such animal has a collar which identifies the animal, the animal's owner, and contact information sufficient to contact the owner. In lieu of wearing a collar with identifying information, the owner of an animal may satisfy such requirement if the animal is identifiable through a surgically implanted microchip. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.06.014. - Zoning restrictions. 
No provision of chapter 6 of the City of Marble Falls Code of Ordinances is intended to violate or otherwise override or supersede the City of Marble Falls Zoning Ordinance. In the event of a conflict between any provision contained within chapter 6 and the city's zoning ordinance, the zoning ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.07. - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 6.07.001. - Nuisance. 
Any animal found causing excessive and continuous noise, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking or biting other animals, or trespassing upon school property shall be deemed a public nuisance, and such animal may be impounded as set out herein and/or humanely destroyed after a hearing and determination by the City of Marble Falls Municipal Court. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.07.002. - Creating health hazard. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal, other than a protected animal, on any property located within the corporate limits of the city when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance, as defined by public nuisance animal in section 6.01.001, or menace to public health or safety. Any person who harbors or keeps on his/her premises, or in or about premises under his/her control, an animal, other than a protected animal, and who allows his/her premises to become a hazard to the general health and welfare of the community, or who shall allow his/her premises to give off obnoxious or offensive odors and/or noises due to the activity or presence of such animals, other than the presence of a protected animal, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  Status update on potential hazard posed by protected animals. In order to monitor whether protected animals continue to pose no hazard to the citizens of the city, the city manager, or his designee, shall periodically report to the city council concerning the status of the protected animals and shall indicate whether, in his opinion, the protected animals continue to pose no apparent health risk, nuisance to humans, and whether the population of such protected animals remains at a reasonable level. In addition, the city manager will report to council upon the city's receipt of credible, documented complaints related to the presence or activities of protected animals in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.07.003. - Authority to destroy injured or diseased animals. 
(a)  The animal services department or its designated representative is authorized to destroy any injured or diseased animal, whether such animal is on public or private property, when the recovery from such injuries or disease is in serious doubt, and after a reasonable effort has been made to locate and notify the owner of the condition of such animal. 
(b)  The animal services department or its designated representative is authorized to destroy any animal that is known to be wild or feral, or due to its temperament or vicious behavior, constitutes a threat to the public or the animal services department, its representatives, employees, or designees. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.07.004. - Attacks on public employees. 
Should any dog or other animal kept, maintained or harbored within the city attack, bite, scratch, injure or cause an injury to an employee of the city, county, state, federal government, a public utility, phone or cable television company, while in the performance of the employee's official duties, the owner or custodian of such dog or other animal may be cited for keeping, maintaining or harboring a nuisance. Upon conviction of the offense, the person found guilty shall be fined as provided in section 1-9 of the City of Marble Falls Code of Ordinances. Any subsequent conviction for an attack by the same animal shall be grounds for the court ordering that such animal shall be delivered to the animal services department and euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-06D, § V, 7-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.08. - DANGEROUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 6.08.001. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the general police power, the authorities granted to cities and towns by the state constitution, the city's Home Rule Charter, and the state through its Health and Safety Code, chapter 822 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.002. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. It is intended to be applicable to dangerous dogs, as defined herein, by ensuring responsible ownership and handling of such dogs by their owners through registration, confinement, and acquisition of liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.003. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words, terms, and phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous dog, as used in this article, means any dog that, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, has demonstrated that it presents a risk of serious physical harm or death to human beings, or would constitute a danger to human life, physical well-being, or property of others (including other animals) if not kept under the direct control of the owner. This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. The term "dangerous dog" includes any dog that, according to the records of the City of Marble Falls, the City of Marble Falls Police Department or any other municipality or law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and which enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and which enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person or that person's property or the property of others; or 
(3)  As otherwise defined by state law and this Code, as amended from time to time. 
Direct control means immediate, continuous physical control of a dog such as by means of a leash, cord, secure fence, or chain of such strength adequate to restrain the dog and controlled by a person capable of restraining the dog, or safe and secure restraint within a vehicle. If the controlling person is at all times fully and clearly within unobstructed sight and hearing of the dog, voice control shall be considered direct control when the dog is actually participating in training or in an official showing, obedience, or field event. Direct control shall not be required of dogs actually participating in a legal sport in an authorized area or of government police dogs. 
Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family. 
Impoundment means the taking or picking up and confining of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer or any other public officer under the provisions of this chapter. 
Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting people or other animals. 
Owner, as used in this article, means any person, partnership, corporation or other individual or legal entity temporarily or permanently owning, maintaining, harboring or keeping, or otherwise having responsibility for, the care or custody of any animal, or, in the case of a person under the age of eighteen (18), that person's parent or legal guardian. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) or more consecutive days. This definition shall not apply to any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel. 
Sanitary condition means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
Secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure that is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the release or escape of an animal; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal by posting signs bearing letter not less than two (2) inches high on all sides of the enclosure; 
(5)  Tall enough or covered so that the animal cannot climb out; and 
(6)  Has a perimeter structure that prevents the animal from digging out or going under the side fence or wall. 
Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, led under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.004. - Penalty. 
Persons or entities found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to penalties of this Code, as applicable and periodically amended. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.005. - Procedure for declaring dog as dangerous. 
(a)  An animal control officer or any adult person may request, under oath, that a dog be classified as a dangerous dog, as defined in section 6.08.003, by submitting a sworn, written complaint to the city's animal control officer, on a form approved by the city. Upon receipt of such complaint, the animal control officer shall notify the owner of the dog that a complaint has been filed and that an investigation into the allegations, as set forth in the complaint, may be conducted by the department or its designee. 
(b)  It may be a defense to the determination that a dog is dangerous and to the prosecution of the owner of that dog if, at the hearing, the owner is able to establish that: 
(1)  The threat, injury, or damage done by the dog was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other crime upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog; 
(2)  The person who was injured was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or has in the past been reported for teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; 
(3)  Evidence demonstrates that the person attacked was committing or attempting to commit a crime; 
(4)  The dog was protecting or defending a person from an unjustified threat, attack or assault; or 
(5)  The dog was injured and was responding to pain when it attacked. 
(c)  At the conclusion of its investigation, the city may: 
(1)  Determine that the dog is not dangerous and, if the dog has been impounded during the investigation, the city will waive any impoundment fees incurred and release the dog to its owner; or 
(2)  Determine that the dog is dangerous and order the owner to comply with the requirements for keeping dangerous dogs set forth in section 6.08.009, and, if the dog has been impounded during the investigation, release the dog to its owner after the owner has paid all fees incurred for the impoundment. If all impoundment fees have not been paid within ten (10) business days after a final determination that a dog is dangerous, the animal control officer may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.006. - Notification of dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  Within five (5) business days after declaring a dog as dangerous, the animal control officer shall notify the owner by certified mail (return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner) of the dog's designation as a dangerous dog and shall enclose with the notice a copy of this article detailing the specific restrictions and conditions for keeping the dangerous dog within the city. The animal control officer also shall notify the city manager and the police department of the designation of any dog as a dangerous dog, with such notification including a general description of the dog, the identity of the current owner, the address of the dog's current location, and specify any particular requirements or conditions placed upon the dog owner for the care and control of the dangerous dog. 
(b)  The notice shall inform the dog owner that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the animal control officers' finding and designation within five (5) business days after the date of mailing notice of the dangerous dog declaration. 
(c)  If the animal control officer cannot with due diligence locate the owner of a dog that has been seized pursuant to this article, the animal control officer shall cause the dog to be impounded for not less than ten (10) business days. If, after ten (10) days, the owner fails to claim the dog, the animal control officer may cause the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.007. - Hearing upon request related to dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  The city shall hold a hearing within ten (10) business days after receiving the dog owner's written request for a hearing related to a declaration that a dog is dangerous. The city shall provide notice of the date, time and location of the hearing to the dog owner and the complainant by certified mail. 
(b)  At a hearing, all interested persons shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of the dog's dangerousness. The hearing is before the director of animal services or his designee, who will be the final decision-maker in the matter. Criteria to be considered in a hearing required by this section shall include, but are not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Provocation; 
(2)  Severity of attack or injury to a person or domestic animal; 
(3)  Previous aggressive history of the dog; 
(4)  Observable behavior of the dog; 
(5)  Site and circumstances of the incident; and 
(6)  Statements from interested and/or affected parties. 
(c)  A determination at a hearing that the dog is in fact a dangerous dog as defined in section 6.08.003 shall subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Failure of the dog owner to request a hearing shall result in the dog being finally declared a dangerous dog and shall subject the dog and its owner to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.008. - Appeal of dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  If the director of animal services or his designee determines that a dog is dangerous at the conclusion of a hearing conducted under section 6.08.007, that decision shall be final unless the dog owner applies to the municipal court for any remedies that may be available within fifteen (15) days after receiving notice that the dog has been finally declared dangerous. 
(b)  An appeal of the decision of the municipal court of the city shall be made within twenty (20) days in the same manner as an appeal from civil cases originating in the justice of peace courts within the state, and the municipal court shall order the appellant to post a bond payable to the city in an amount not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to cover costs of caring for the dog pending the outcome of the appeal on the matter. The appellant shall be responsible for the cost of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.009. - Keeping requirements; restraint and confinement; insurance. 
(a)  The keeping of a dangerous dog as defined in section 6.08.003 shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Leash. No person having charge, custody, control or possession of a dangerous dog shall allow the dog to exit its kennel, pen or other secure enclosure unless such dog is securely restrained by a substantial chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of one thousand (1,000) pounds and not to exceed six (6) feet in length. No such person shall permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a restraint or chain outside its kennel or pen unless a person capable of controlling the dog is in physical control of the leash at all times. 
(2)  Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to allow the dog to be outside of its secure enclosure unless it is necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases, the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog's breathing or vision or otherwise be inhumane to the dog. 
(3)  Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or confined in a secure enclosure, as that term is defined herein. The secure enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, light and ventilation for the animal. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall meet the secure enclosure requirements as defined in section 6.08.003. 
(4)  Indoor confinement. No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch or patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(5)  Signs. All owners, keepers or custodians of dangerous dogs shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dangerous Dog." 
(6)  Liability insurance or surety bond. The owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the city proof that he has procured liability insurance or a surety bond in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering any damage or injury that may be caused by such dangerous dog. The policy shall contain a provision requiring that the city be notified immediately by the agent issuing the policy in the event that the insurance policy is canceled, terminated or expired. The liability insurance or surety bond shall be obtained prior to the issuing of a permit to keep a dangerous dog. The owner of a dangerous dog shall sign a statement attesting that he/she shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance policy during the twelve-month period for which a permit is sought, unless he/she ceases to own or keep the dangerous dog prior to the expiration date of the permit period. In the event that the owner proves to the satisfaction of the city that insurance is not available, he/she may pay a nonrefundable cash fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the city. 
(7)  Spay/neuter. The dog must be altered within thirty (30) days of the determination that the dog is dangerous. 
(8)  Notification of escape, bite or attack. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall notify the city's animal control officer and police department immediately if such dog escapes from its secure enclosure or restraint and is at-large. Such immediate notification shall also be required if the dog bites or attacks a person or other animal. 
(9)  Orange collar. The dog, shall at all times, wear a bright, orange collar with registration tags, that is to be visible at a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet. 
(10)  The animal services department may, as a condition of registration for the dog, require of the owner or person harboring the dog, annual attendance of a class on responsible pet ownership conducted by the City of Marble Falls Animal Services Department or its designee. 
(11)  The animal services department may inspect the secure enclosure in which any dangerous dog is maintained, without notice, at any reasonable hour. 
(12)  Any owner, of a pre-determined dangerous dog, who moves into the city limits, must register the animal with the City of Marble Falls Police Department within ten (10) days of bringing the animal into this jurisdiction. 
(13)  Any other requirements imposed by state law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner of a dangerous dog registered with the city to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this article. Any dog found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this chapter shall result in the revocation of the dog's registration and the permit providing for the keeping of such animal, and shall result in fines and penalties against the owner, in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.010. - Registration and tag. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall, within thirty (30) business days after the classification of the dog as dangerous or upon acquisition of such a dangerous dog, obtain an annual registration tag from the city to harbor the dog. The annual fee for such registration shall be set by the city council, and is as shown on the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.08.010 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, a bright, orange collar and a "dangerous dog" tag shall be issued to the owner of the dangerous dog. The tag shall be worn at all times by the dog to clearly and easily identify it as a dangerous dog. 
(c)  The registration for maintaining a dangerous dog shall be presented to an animal control officer upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.011. - Notification of intent to impound. 
(a)  When the animal control officer or his designee intends to impound a dog declared to be dangerous for violation of section 6.08.009, he shall notify the owner or custodian of the dog, by certified mail, of the intended impoundment at least five (5) business days prior to beginning the intended impoundment, except as provided in section 6.08.012. 
(b)  The notice of intent to impound shall inform the owner or custodian of the dog that he may request in writing, within five (5) business days prior to the intended impoundment, a hearing to contest the intended impoundment and finding of violation. 
(c)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), a hearing will be held within ten (10) business days after the request for a hearing. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog's owner or custodian requesting such hearing and any complainant involved. 
(d)  If the owner or custodian of the animal requests a hearing pursuant to subsection (b), no impoundment shall take place until conclusion of the hearing, except as authorized in section 6.08.012. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.012. - Immediate impoundment. 
(a)  A dog declared to be dangerous may be immediately impounded without a pre-impoundment hearing when the animal control officer or his designee, or a peace officer of the city, county or state, determines such immediate impoundment is necessary for the protection of public health or safety. Such immediate impoundment may be ordered for violation of section 6.08.009 or when the dog bites or attacks a person. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of the dog immediately impounded pursuant to subsection (a) shall be notified of the impoundment by certified mail within five (5) business days after the dog's impoundment. 
(c)  The notice of impoundment shall inform the owner or custodian of the dog that he may request, in writing, a hearing to contest the impoundment within five (5) business days after the mailing date of the notice of impoundment. 
(d)  Upon request by the owner or custodian of the dog for a hearing under subsection (c), a hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after such request. Notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be provided by certified mail to the dog owner requesting the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.013. - Impoundment hearing. 
(a)  If, after a hearing on impoundment, the director of animal services or his designee finds no violation of section 6.08.009, or that the dog has not bitten or attacked an individual or other animal, the dog shall be returned to its owner or custodian if already impounded, or shall not be impounded as intended. 
(b)  Incident to the findings and conclusions made at the impoundment hearing, the animal control officer or his designee may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the dog to ensure the health and safety of the public and the animal. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Posting of bond or other proof of ability to respond in damages; 
(2)  Specific requirements as to size, construction and design of a secure enclosure in which to house the dog; 
(3)  Requirements as to type and method of restraint and/or muzzling of the dog; 
(4)  Photo identification or permanent marking of the dog for purposes of identification; and 
(5)  Payment of reasonable fees to recover the costs incurred by the city in ensuring compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.014. - Destruction order. 
(a)  The animal control officer or his designee may order the destruction of a dog that is determined to be extremely dangerous to public health or safety, or that has made an extremely vicious attack upon an individual or other animal(s), or a dog that has been declared dangerous whose owner is unable or unwilling to adequately restrain it. 
(b)  The animal control officer or his designee shall give written notice by certified mail of the intention to destroy such dog to the owner or custodian of the dog, who may request in writing, within five (5) business days after delivery of such notice, a hearing to contest the intended destruction. 
(c)  If no hearing is requested by the owner or custodian pursuant to subsection (b), the dog shall be destroyed pursuant to applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  If a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (b), such hearing shall be held within ten (10) business days after the request, and the dog shall not be destroyed prior to the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  The dog owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required for the city to humanely and safely keep the animal during any legal proceeding and pending the outcome thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.015. - Appeal of destruction order. 
If the animal control officer or his designee orders a dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed, pursuant to section 6.08.014, that decision shall be final unless, within ten (10) days after receiving notice of the destruction order, the dog owner applies to a court of competent jurisdiction for any remedies that may be available. If an appeal is timely filed, the animal control officer shall suspend the destruction order pending the final determination of the court. The appeal hearing must be a trial de novo and shall be a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing the city's destruction order. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.016. - Change of ownership. 
(a)  Any owner of a dangerous dog who sells or otherwise transfers ownership, custody or residence of the dog shall, within ten (10) business days after such change of ownership or residence, provide written notification to the city of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. It also shall be the responsibility of the person transferring ownership or custody of the dog to provide written notification of the dog's classification as dangerous to the person receiving the dog. The previous owner shall furnish a copy of such notification to the city, along with written acknowledgment by the new owner of his receipt of such notification. The animal control officer or his designee shall notify the city manager and the police department of any changes of ownership, custody or residence of the dog within three (3) business days after receiving the required information from the previous dog owner. 
(b)  Any person receiving a dog classified as dangerous must obtain the required registration, tag and secure enclosure inspection prior to acquisition of the dangerous dog. The new owner shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter pertaining to maintaining liability insurance, payment of fees, and maintenance, control and ownership of a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.017. - Continuation of dangerous dog declaration for dogs moved into city. 
Any dog that has been declared dangerous by any agency or department of this city or another municipality, county, or state shall be subject to the provisions of this article for the remainder of the animal's life. The person owning or having custody of any dog designated as a dangerous dog by any municipality, county, or state government shall notify the city of the dog's address and conditions of maintenance within ten (10) days of moving the animal into the city. The restrictions and conditions of maintenance of any dog declared dangerous by this city or another municipality, county, or state shall remain in force while the dog remains in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.018. - Offenses related to dangerous dogs. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person or another animal outside the dog's secure enclosure, which attack causes bodily injury to the other person or animal. 
(b)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with the regulations contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.08.019. - Defenses applicable to attacks by dangerous dogs. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 6.08.018 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the state or the city to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with that position. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 6.08.018 that the person is an employee of a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 6.08.018 that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under chapter 1702 of the Texas Occupations Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.09. - LEASH-FREE ZONE 
 
Sec. 6.09.001. - Zone designated. 
A portion of Johnson Park is hereby designated as a leash-free zone for dogs. The area is generally bounded by Yett Street to the north, Backbone Creek to the south, Whitman Branch to the east and the city wastewater treatment facility to the west. The city manager is authorized to erect signs designating this area of Johnson Park as a leash-free zone and indicating the boundaries thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.09.002. - Dogs within zone exempt from certain provisions. 
Subject to the provisions of this article, dogs within the leash-free zone shall not be subject to the regulations stated in section 6.01.001 (restraint), section 6.04.006 (animals at-large), and section 15-21. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.09.003. - Owner's responsibility; dog subject to regulations upon leaving zone. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of the dog shall be responsible for keeping the dog within the designated leash-free zone at all times. If an unrestrained dog leaves the leash-free zone, then it is subject to all applicable ordinances and regulations, including restraint as defined in section 6.01.001, section 6.04.006, and section 15-21. 
(b)  Unaltered (not spayed/neutered) dogs shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.09.004. - Owner's responsibility for dog's waste. 
The owner or person in control of the dog using the leash-free zone is responsible for removing and discarding the waste of their dog. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.09.005. - Display of registration and vaccination required. 
All dogs within the leash-free zone must display a city registration, if applicable, and vaccination on a chain, collar or harness that shall be worn by the dog at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.09.006. - Owner's responsibility for dog's behavior. 
The owner or person in control of the dog shall be responsible for ensuring that their dog does not harm other persons utilizing the park or any property, including other animals. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.09.007. - Dangerous dogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dangerous dog to authorize, permit, or allow their dangerous dog to enter the leash free zone established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.10. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 6.10.001. - Restrictions on keeping livestock and fowl. 
(a)  Keeping hogs prohibited; exceptions. 
(1)  It is unlawful and constitutes a violation of this chapter for a person to keep any hog in any house, shed, pen, lot, pasture or other enclosure in the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  This subsection does not apply to hogs kept temporarily (i.e., for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) consecutive hours) in shipping pens, when such holding pens are utilized for the purposes of shipment. 
(3)  The keeping of hogs by persons involved in recognized educational agricultural programs, such as FFA and 4-H, is exempt from the blanket prohibition noted in subsection (1) above, but such activities must comply with other applicable provisions in this chapter, for example those related to noises, odors and adequate housing for such animals. 
(b)  Unless otherwise allowed in this section, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep and feed, for any reason, any cattle, sheep, goats or livestock within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls. 
(c)  Property zoned for agricultural use. The prohibition on keeping livestock found in subsection (b) above shall not apply to the property on which the livestock are housed if such property is zoned for agricultural use. 
(d)  Annexed property. The prohibition on keeping livestock found in subsection (b) above shall not apply to property annexed into the city, where livestock was housed on the property prior to its annexation, and livestock have been located on such property continuously since annexation. The number of livestock allowed on such annexed property is capped at the number of livestock that was lawfully located on the property immediately prior to the annexation of the property. 
(e)  AG exempt property. The prohibition on keeping livestock found in subsection (b) above shall not apply to property that is classified as "AG Exempt" property by the appraisal district. The number of livestock allowed on such property is capped at the number of livestock that was lawfully located on the property as of January 1, 2011. 
(f)  "Grandfathered animals". The prohibition on keeping livestock found in subsection (b) above shall not apply to animals lawfully located on the property on January 1, 2011. Such animals may continue to be located on the property. Once a period in excess of ninety (90) consecutive days has elapsed without livestock being located on the property, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any livestock on such property. 
(g)  Recognized educational agricultural programs such as 4-H Club or Future Farmers of America members may, under certain conditions, keep not more than one (1) animal as a club project. Recognized educational agricultural programs such as 4-H Club and Future Farmers of America members may obtain a permit to keep one (1) animal provided the conditions of sanitation set forth in the following sections are met. 
(h)  Keeping livestock and fowl generally. It is unlawful and constitutes a violation of this chapter to keep any horse, cattle, sheep, goat, rabbit or other livestock, including poultry/fowl, at any place in the city if: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) feet of any private residence or dwelling place of a person other than the owner(s) of the animal or fowl; 
(2)  Within one hundred (100) feet of any building or structure that is open to the public, with the exception of open park land; or 
(3)  The animal or poultry/fowl in question are being kept in any manner or location that results in noises, odors, pests, or other conditions associated with the animal or poultry/fowl that would annoy, offend or disturb the reasonable sensibilities of residents or person(s) occupying or visiting the private residences and dwelling places, or the buildings and structures which are open to the public. 
While the distance provisions do not apply to open park land, the other requirements of this section relating to the manner in which animals are kept (i.e., provisions prohibiting annoyances and offensive conditions created by animals therein), shall apply. 
(i)  Exceptions to distance restrictions (other restrictions and regulations not affected). 
(1)  The distance restrictions of this chapter do not apply to property zoned as agricultural. 
a.  According to the zoning ordinance of the city, or to property properly zoned or used as veterinary clinics or facilities or established kennels that are for the purposes of care or boarding of animals and fowl. 
(2)  If the owners/animal locations that are in existence at the time of the adoption of this amended chapter (January 3, 2012) are in full compliance with the distance requirements in effect prior to the amendment, then the distance restrictions of this amended chapter will not be applied to animals/fowl that are owned and living within the city limits prior to the passing of this chapter, provided that the animals/fowl are not within fifty (50) feet of any water supply wells/sources, so long as: 
a.  The use of the animal location is continuous from the date of the adoption of the amended chapter and such use of the location is not interrupted for more than a ninety (90) continuous day period; and 
b.  The number of animals being kept in the animal location is not increased above the number of animals existing at the time the amended chapter is adopted, except for newborn animals that may remain with the mother for a period of three (3) months. 
1.  When all of the above requirements are met, then the distance restrictions noted herein shall only be applied prospectively from the date of final adoption of this amended chapter. Note, however, that at such time as the then-existing animals and/or use of a location ceases or is interrupted for a period over ninety (90) continuous days; then the exemption from these newly amended distance standards is forfeited, and all new animals and/or new locations must meet all requirements of this amended chapter. All other requirements relating to the manner in which animals are kept shall apply and are specifically not excepted from compliance and enforcement. 
(3)  The distance restrictions do not apply to livestock/fowl that are being raised by members of recognized educational agricultural programs, such as 4-H, FFA, or other city-recognized youth groups, providing the animals/fowl are not within fifty (50) feet of the water supply wells/sources used by citizens of the city. All other requirements relating to the manner in which animals, livestock, and fowl are kept shall apply. A permit will be issued to the group member at no charge. Violations of this Code of Ordinances will result in the revocation of the permit, and livestock removal from the city. Hogs being raised by members of recognized educational agricultural programs such as 4-H, FFA or other recognized youth groups will require a written request for an exemption from the city manager with a recommendation from the animal services department. 
(j)  Keeping animals near water supply wells. It is unlawful and constitutes a violation of this chapter for a person, whether for himself or as the agent, representative or servant of other(s), to participate in keeping any animal (other than pet animals) in any pen, pasture, lot, shelter, or enclosure that is located within fifty (50) feet of any water supply wells, or a water supply source from which the city or any citizen of the city obtains its water supply, as per Texas Administrative Code, title 30, Natural Resources and Conservation, section 290.41(c)(1)(C), (D), (F), or in violation of any other applicable state or federal law related to drinking water supplies. 
(k)  The City of Marble Falls recognizes the protections placed on certain property and individuals as a result of chapter 251 of the Texas Agriculture Code. Any defense against prosecution or enforcement of the city's ordinances based upon chapter 251 [of the Texas Agriculture Code] shall be as an affirmative defense which is the responsibility of the person alleged to have violated the city's ordinances to plead and prove. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.10.002. - Picketing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to picket or tie any animal in or along any public street, alleyway, right-of-way, or other public lands for the purpose of grazing or feeding. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.10.003. - Horse enclosures. 
(a)  Substantial enclosures required. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring to keep any horse, foal, or pony within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls shall provide substantial enclosure of no less than two thousand (2,000) square feet for each animal located on the controlled property of the owner of the animal so that no part of such enclosure is less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the dwelling, business office, or store of any other person. All such pens or enclosures shall be consistent in appearance with surrounding structures and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, free from waste at all times. Manure shall be cleaned daily from such pens and disposed of by means other than the sewer or other sanitation facilities of the city. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of flies, insects, rodents or other pests. Feed or hay for horses, kept within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls, shall be stored in rodent-proof compartments. 
(b)  Animal enclosures subject to inspection. 
(1)  The location and conditions of animal enclosures shall be subject to inspection and review by the code enforcement officer, or his representative, the health officer or his representative, the fire marshal or his representative, or other agencies of the City of Marble Falls. Approval for the keeping of such animals may depend upon reasonable objection of adjacent property owners at any time. Exceptions may be allowed in Zoning District "AO" (Agriculture Only), where inspection determines that no offense will be caused to other persons. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.10.004. - Tripping of horses prohibited. 
It is unlawful to trip a horse. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.10.005. - Registration of livestock. 
All livestock kept inside the corporate city limits of Marble Falls must be registered with the animal services department. Owner's information, including two (2) contact emergency phone numbers must be provided. The annual fee for such registration shall be set by the city council, and is as shown on the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.10.005 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.10.006. - Rabbits. 
(a)  Proper hutches required. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring to keep rabbits within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls shall provide hutches conforming in appearance and painting with surrounding structures. Hutches shall provide a minimum area of seven and one-half (7½) square feet of floor space for each grown rabbit and be of the self-cleaning type with floors of one-half (½) inch, or larger, hardware cloth. Droppings will be removed daily and properly disposed of without resort to use of sewer or other sanitation facilities of the city. No hutch will be placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any inhabited residence. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of flies, insects, rodents and offensive odors. 
(b)  Inspection. 
(1)  Inspection and approval for the regulation of the keeping of rabbits and other small animals shall be the same as for horses in subsection 6.10.003(b). 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.10.007. - Chickens. 
(a)  Chickens to be kept in adequate enclosures. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring to keep chickens within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls shall provide enclosures and housing to adequately accommodate these birds without disturbing adjacent property owners. 
(2)  No person, firm or corporation keeping chickens shall permit the same to run or fly at-large, or to trespass on the premises of any other person. 
(3)  No person, firm or corporation shall keep any grown male chicken or other birds that disturb adjacent property owners by the crowing or making of disturbing noises. 
(4)  No person, firm or corporation shall keep chickens within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls for commercial purposes where the birds or their eggs, or both, are sold on the market or to individuals, or where the birds are used for gambling or profit. 
(5)  Enclosures for chickens will include housing which will provide a minimum of four (4) square feet of floor space for each grown chicken and will conform in appearance to the surrounding structures. 
(6)  No chicken house will be closer than fifty (50) feet from any inhabited residence. 
(7)  Chicken houses will be kept clean and sanitary at all times without resort to sewer or other sanitary facilities of the City of Marble Falls. 
(8)  Precaution shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of flies, insects, mites, fleas and other pests. 
(9)  Emission of offensive odors shall be prevented. 
(10)  Sick or dead birds shall be properly disposed of immediately upon detection without resort to use of the sewer or other sanitation facilities provided by the City of Marble Falls. 
(11)  Enclosures shall be constructed as to restrict soil, feathers or dust to the area of the enclosure and same shall not be allowed to blow or wash onto other private or public property. 
(b)  Location of pens for fowl. 
(1)  Any chickens shall be kept in a pen that is located no closer than one hundred (100) feet from any city street. 
(c)  Other similar animals. 
(1)  Adult turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas or other fowl shall not be kept within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls except poultry, fowl and birds that are harbored in any city park or park area. 
(d)  Inspection. 
(1)  Inspection and approval of the keeping of chickens set out herein shall be the same as for horses in subsection 6.10.003(b). 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.10.008. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply where persons temporarily keep animals within the corporate city limits of Marble Falls for short periods of time not to exceed seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, for the purpose of shipment, show, marketing or butchering, provided such animals are under supervision and control at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.11. - BEES 
 
Sec. 6.11.001. - Bee keeping. 
It shall be unlawful to keep bees in any area of the city, except in those areas where the bee hives will be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet or more from the nearest dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner of the bees. The one hundred fifty (150) foot distance requirement may be waived by the police chief with the written consent of the property owner who's dwelling will be nearer than the one hundred fifty (150) foot limit. Such written consent must be granted on an annual basis. It shall further be unlawful to keep bees, regardless of the above limitation, in such numbers on property, other than that of the owner of the bees, in such a way as to interfere with the peaceful occupancy of such other property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.11.002. - Registration of bees. 
The owner of a bee hive shall register each bee hive on a yearly basis. "Bee hives" will be counted on a per queen basis. A structure containing multiple queen bees will require multiple registrations. As a part of the annual registration process, each hive shall be "re-queened" on an annual basis, and proof of "re-queening" shall be required prior to the issuance or renewal of the annual registration. The annual fee for such registration shall be set by the city council, and is as shown on the animal services fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.11.002 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
ARTICLE 6.12. - FERAL CATS 
 
Sec. 6.12.001. - Feral cat colony permit. 
(a)  A feral cat colony manager shall obtain a permit from animal services department to become a feral cat colony manager. It shall be unlawful to manage operate, own, or control a feral cat colony without a feral cat colony manager permit. A feral cat colony manager may manage any number of feral cat colonies. Each feral cat colony must be registered with the city. Registration of feral cat colonies shall be free of charge. All feral cat colony managers feeding colonies prior to the effective date of this chapter shall register each colony within ten (10) business days from the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  To apply for a permit to become a feral cat colony manger, a person must present evidence to animal services department of satisfactory completion of a trap, neuter, and release educational course. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to feed a cat running-at-large outside of the property owned by the person feeding the cat, without first obtaining a feral cat colony manager permit and maintaining proper management and sterilization as required by section 6.12.003. 
(d)  A feral cat colony manager shall implement proper management and sterilization practices as required by the animal services department to maintain a valid permit. 
(e)  Any feral cat colony manager determined to be in violation of proper management and sterilization practices required by the animal services department shall be issued a written warning and allowed a period of time, which shall not exceed ninety (90) days, to come into compliance. Failure to comply within the given time period is a violation of this chapter. 
(f)  The animal control officer may immediately seize and remove all, or parts of any colony for the following reasons: 
(1)  Public health or safety concerns including, but not limited to rabies or other epizootic and certain zoonoses identified by the department of health; 
(2)  Animals creating a public nuisance by interfering with passing vehicles, trespassing on school grounds, or crying or whining in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.12.002. - Duration of permit; permit fees. 
Permits issued under this article shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issuance. The fees for permits under this article shall be set by the city council, and are as shown in the animal registration fee schedule maintained by the city secretary and as set forth in section A6.12.002 of the fee schedule in Appendix A to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.12.003. - Proper management and sterilization. 
(a)  A feral cat colony manager must provide the animal services department with a reasonable estimation of the number of cats in each feral cat colony on an annual basis or as required by the animal control officer. 
(b)  A feral cat colony manager must sterilize at least fifty (50) percent of the unsterilized cats of each permitted feral cat colony annually and show proof to the animal services department of the number sterilized. 
(c)  A feral cat colony manager must provide, on a daily basis, adequate fresh food and water to the cats in the feral cat colonies that the feral cat colony manager has obtained a permit for. 
(d)  A feral cat colony manager must make all reasonable efforts to catch a sick or injured cat within the feral cat colony that the feral cat colony manager has obtained a permit for and take the cat to a veterinarian. 
(e)  A feral cat colony manager shall ensure that all cats which the feral cat colony manager has caused to be sterilized will be vaccinated for rabies and obtain an ear tip amputation performed by a veterinarian. 
(f)  A feral cat colony manager shall submit annual reports to the animal services department as to the estimated number of cats per colony that the feral cat colony manager has obtained a permit for, the number of cats vaccinated for rabies and sterilized, and the location of the veterinary clinic used. 
(g)  A feral cat colony manager must obtain written permission of the landowner or the landowner's agent where the feral cats congregate or are fed to obtain a permit for the feral cat colony and provide a copy of the written permission to animal control. 
(h)  A feral cat colony manager may apply for a waiver of any provision of this section. The ruling of the animal services department on the application is final and non-appealable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 6.12.004. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the animal services director or authorized representative, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter by the holder thereof. 
(b)  The animal services department shall provide written notice of the revocation to the holder by sending the notice certified mail or by personally delivering the written notice to the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, 1-3-2012)  
Appendix A. - FEE SCHEDULE 
ARTICLE 6.01. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. A6.01.016. Electronic pet containment devices: 
Annual registration fee .....$40.00 
_____
ARTICLE A6.02. VACCINATION AND REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS 
Sec. A6.02.005. Guard dog permit: 
Guard dog permit .....$35.00 
Sec. A6.02.008. Registration fees: 
Altered dog/cat: .....$10.00 
(a)  65 years and over .....0.00 
Unaltered dog/cat, per animal, per year .....20.00 
(a)  65 years and over .....20.00 
Service animals .....0.00 
_____
ARTICLE A6.03. KENNELS 
Sec. A6.03.002. Duration of permit; permit fees: 
Kennel permit .....$50.00 
Sec. A6.03.005. Commercial animal sales permit: 
Commercial animal sales permit .....$50.00 
_____
ARTICLE A6.04. IMPOUNDMENT 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY 
Sec. A6.04.001. Authorized; fees: 
Initial impoundment fee, per animal .....$40.00 
(a)  Dog/cat per additional day, per animal .....5.00 
Sec. A6.04.002. Owner surrender fees: 
Animals surrendered by owner/harborer. 
(a)  Owner surrender per pet: 
(1)  City of Marble Falls resident .....$10.00 
(2)  Nonresident .....55.00 
(b)  Owner surrender pets in litter, 8 weeks—3 months: 
(1)  City of Marble Falls resident, per litter .....$25.00 
(2)  Nonresident, per litter .....55.00 
(c)  Owner surrender under eight weeks of age: 
(1)  City of Marble Falls resident, per animal .....$10.00 
(2)  Nonresident, per animal .....55.00 
Sec. A6.04.008. Adoption of impounded animals: 
Adoption fee with mandatory spay/neuter agreement .....$10.00 
DIVISION 2. LIVESTOCK 
Sec. A6.04.035. Fees: 
Livestock and estray impoundment fees (cattle, equine, goats/sheep, swine, exotic fowl): 
(a)  Initial impoundment fee, per head .....$40.00 
(b)  Per head, per additional day .....5.00 
_____
ARTICLE A6.06. ANIMAL CARE 
Sec. A6.06.011. Trapping and shooting: 
Resident trap one-time permit fee .....$5.00 
_____
ARTICLE A6.08. DANGEROUS DOGS 
Sec. A6.08.010. Registration and tag: 
Dangerous dog .....$100.00 
_____
ARTICLE 6.10. LIVESTOCK 
Sec. 6.10.005: 
Registration .....$5.00 
_____
ARTICLE A6.11. BEES 
Sec. A6.11.002. Registration of bees: 
Registration, per hive .....$5.00 
_____
ARTICLE A6.12. FERAL CATS 
Sec. A6.12.002. Duration of permit; permit fees: 
Feral cat colony manager permit .....$0.00 
(Ord. No. 2012-O-06D, App. A, 7-3-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-O-06D, App. A, adopted July 3, 2012, repealed the former fee schedule, and enacted a new App. A as set out herein. The former fee schedule derived from Ord. No. 2011-O-11A, § II, adopted Jan. 3, 2012.  
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; planning, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 26; development code, App. B. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate buildings and construction to aid in fire prevention, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1067 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Construction advisory and appeals board. 
(a)  Membership. The construction advisory and appeals board (hereinafter the "board") created pursuant to section 4.08 of the City Charter and Ordinance No. 2003-O-12B, adopting section 112.1 of the International Building Code, shall be appointed by the city council and shall include: 
1 	Architect (AIA)/Engineer (PE) 
1 	Commercial Building Contractor 
1 	Residential Building Contractor 
1 	Master Electrical Contractor licensed by the state 
1 	HVAC Contractor licensed by the state 
1 	Master Plumber licensed by the state 
2 	Citizens who has no direct financial interest in the building construction industry, real estate development, sales or management or a utility company, except as he or she may have as an owner or occupant of a dwelling 
1 	Commercial Business Owner 
 
(b)  Staggered terms. The members of the first board shall be appointed to staggered terms so that no more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the board is replaced during any twelve-month period. 
(c)  Subsequent appointments to the board. Any person appointed to replace a member of the first board, and all subsequent appointees, shall serve a term of two (2) years, unless the person is appointed to serve for the unexpired term of a seated board member, in which case the period of service shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  Term limitation. No member of the board shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full two (2) year terms. However, the terms may be extended if no qualified replacement is available to serve. 
(e)  Duties and powers of the board. 
(1)  Meetings. The board shall meet at least once a month to conduct business. Meetings may be postponed, however, by a majority vote of the board or the inability to obtain a quorum. 
(2)  Advisory responsibility. By section 112.2 of the International Building Code, the board shall have no authority to waive the requirements of the codes; however, the board shall submit to the council such recommendations for improvement and revision of the codes as it may from time to time deem necessary or proper in light of the development of new materials, methods, or techniques which would result in a safer and more economical construction system or construction work. All requests for use of materials or methods not covered in the codes shall be fully supported by factual evidence or prior approval from a recognized testing agency or other impartial, qualified, non-local authority. 
(3)  Appeals. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or the owner's duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the city's building official to the board, as that decision concerns the building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, energy, and fire prevention codes adopted by the City of Marble Falls. Decisions of the board may be appealed to the city council whose action is final except that due process shall not be denied and further appeal may be made to the nearest court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2D, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 2004-O-3A, § I, 3-22-2004) 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 1.  
Sec. 7-2. - Ubiquitous amendments to International Codes; violations. 
(a)  Any section of any International Code adopted by the city, shall, where applicable, be amended to provide that the applicable name of the governmental entity is the city. 
(b)  Any section of any International Code adopted by the city, shall, where applicable, be amended to provide that fines and penalties for a violation to such International Code shall be those described in section 1-9. An offense under this chapter is a Class C misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 )  
Sec. 7-3. - Conflict of laws. 
(a)  In the event of conflict between the provisions of this article and other sections of this Code, the more stringent provision shall apply. 
(b)  Only the provisions of this article that are not expressly prohibited by state or other law are intended to be adopted. 
( Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 )  
Secs. 7-4—7-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-16. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures in the city. All such buildings and structures hereafter constructed, altered, repaired, equipped, used and occupied, removed or demolished within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to the requirements of this article and to the specifications, rules and regulations contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2, § 1, 2-14-78)  
Sec. 7-17. - Adoption of International Building Code. 
(a)  The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices A through L, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the building code of the City of Marble Falls, and is made a part hereof, as amended. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the International Building Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2, § 1, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 2003-O-12B, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.1, 7-16-2019)  
Sec. 7-18. - Amendments. 
The following amendments to the International Building Code are hereby adopted: 
Section 1612.3. Insert: Date of issuance of FIRM Map is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2, § 1, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 2003-O-12B, § 2, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.2, 7-16-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, adopted October 6, 2015 , amended § 7-18 to read as set out herein. Previously § 7-18 was titled "Changes and additions."  
Sec. 7-19. - Fees. 
(a)  The permit fees under the Standard Building Code shall be as adopted from time to time by ordinance of the city council. 
(b)  The building official is hereby authorized to assess fees in an amount not to exceed three hundred (300) percent of the normal fees for the various permits issued from his office in the event that work requiring permits has been initiated without first obtaining a permit to perform said work; this pertains to all permits that are now and may be hereafter issued from the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2, § 1, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 82-O-10D, § I, 10-26-82; Ord. No. 84-O-2B, § I, 2-16-84; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Secs. 7-20—7-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 7-31. - Adoption of National Electrical Code. 
(a)  The National Electric Code, 2014 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, as amended and as hereafter amended, is hereby adopted and designated as the electric code of the City of Marble Falls, and is made a part hereof. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the National Electric Code, 2014 Edition, is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(c)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said National Electric Code as adopted and the other provisions of this section, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
The National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, as amended and as hereafter amended, published by the National Fire Safety Board is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the City of Marble Falls for regulating the design, quality of materials, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, or use of electrical systems in the City of Marble Falls and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore, a copy of which is on file and is open for inspection by the public in the office of development services and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, published by the National Fire Safety Board, and the City of Marble Falls are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, § 1, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 2003-O-12H, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-11B, § II, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.3, 7-16-2019)  
Sec. 7-32. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official and designees shall have the duty and is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of electric wires or other appliances for electric lights, heat or power in the city and to cause all such wires, appliances or apparatus to be placed, constructed and guarded as not to cause fires or accidents, endangering life or property and to be constructed as to keep to a minimum the loss or waste of electric current. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the building official and designees to enforce all provisions of this article and he is hereby granted the authority to enter all buildings in the city in the performance of his duties between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily, except that in emergency and within the limits of reason, the code enforcement officer may enter buildings for such purposes at other than the designated hours. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the building official and designees to inspect and test all electrical work and equipment or apparatus for compliance with the code. Whenever electric wiring, appliances or apparatus shall be defective or hazardous through improper manufacture or improper or insufficient insulation or for any other reason, he shall at once cause the removal of such defect, at the expense of the owners of such wiring, appliance or apparatus. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, § 3, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 7-33. - Permits. 
No installation, alteration or removal shall be made in or of the wiring of any building or structure for light, heat or power or to increase the load of energy carried by such wires or equipment. No building or structure shall be wired for electric lights, appliances, motors, apparatus or heating devices nor alterations made thereto without a written permit therefore being first obtained from the city license issuing clerk by the person having direct charge of such installation. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, § 4, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 7-34. - Inspection. 
Upon the completion of the wiring, installation or alteration of any building or structure for light, heat, power, appliance or apparatus, it shall be the duty of the person having direct charge of such to notify the code enforcement officer who shall, as early as possible, inspect such wiring, installation, appliance and apparatus. If installed, altered and constructed in compliance with the permit and in accordance with the requirements of this article, he shall execute a certificate of satisfactory inspection which shall contain the date of such inspection and the result of his examination. No such certificate shall be issued unless such electric wiring, motors, heating devices, appliances and apparatus be in strict accord with the rules and requirements and the spirit of this article, nor shall current be turned on such installation, equipment, appliance, motors, heating device and apparatus until such certificate is issued. The amount of fee or charge to be made for such inspection and certificate shall be fixed and determined by ordinance of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, §§ 5, 14, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 84-O-2B, § I, 2-16-84; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 7-35. - Standards. 
All electrical construction, materials, appliances, motors, heating devices and apparatus used in connection with electrical work and the operation of all electrical apparatus within the city shall conform to the rules and requirements of the National Electrical Code current when work is performed or equipment and apparatus installed; however, necessity, good service and results often require larger sizes of wire, more branch circuits and better types of equipment than the minimum which is specified in the National Electrical Code. Therefore, the code enforcement officer will have the responsibility and authority for making interpretations of the rules, for deciding upon the approval of equipment, materials, construction, and for granting the special permission contemplated in a number of the rules and the code enforcement officer, where necessary, shall follow the code procedure for securing official interpretations of the code. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, § 6, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 7-36. - License requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any electrical system regulated by this code without having registered a valid Texas Master Electrical License. The supervising master or journeyman electrician shall be on the job site at all times while electrical work is being performed. The ratio of helpers, apprentice electricians, or otherwise unlicensed electricians shall not exceed three (3) unlicensed electricians to one (1) supervising master or journeyman electrician. A master electrician shall only register his license with one (1) electrical company within the city. 
Exception: Any residential property owner who, at his legal residence, desires to make any installation, alteration, repair, replacement, or remodel of any electrical system regulated by this Code shall be exempt from paying a registration fee but will have to obtain an electrical permit. For this section, legal residence shall be defined as a property for which a property owner can show proof of a homestead exemption. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, § 7, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Secs. 7-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.A, adopted Dec. 14, 2009, repealed § 7-37, which pertained to electricians bond and derived from Ord. No. 78-O-2B, §§ 10, 11, adopted Feb. 14, 1978 and Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, adopted July 23, 1987.  
Sec. 7-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-11B, § II, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, repealed § 7-38, which pertained to same—qualifications and derived from Ord. No. 78-O-2B, § 9, adopted Feb. 14, 1978 and Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, adopted July 23, 1987.  
Sec. 7-39. - Same—Failure to comply. 
(a)  Any person who shall fail to correct any defect in his work or to meet the required standards after having been given notice of the unfit condition by the code enforcement officer, within a reasonable time, shall be refused any other permit until such defect has been corrected and shall be subject to revocation of license for continual defective work or either upon conviction for violation of the provision of this article. 
(b)  Upon failure to comply with this article, the code enforcement officer shall have authority, after due notice, to cut out electric current in the locality concerned. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, §§ 10, 11, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 7-40. - License exemption. 
Any individual desiring to perform his electrical work personally shall not be required to make the required bond or to obtain the required license but shall be required to obtain the regular permit for that particular job. Such work done by an individual must be done by him personally on his own particular job and not be a way of performing a service to the public generally. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2B, § 13, 2-14-78; Ord. No. 87-O-7F, § 1, 7-23-87)  
Secs. 7-41—7-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Water generally, § 26-16 et seq.; sewers generally, § 26-56 et seq.; extension of water and sewer lines, § 26-111 et seq. 
State Law reference— The Plumbing License Law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243—101. 
 
Sec. 7-56. - Adoption of International Plumbing Code. 
(a)  The International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the plumbing code of the City of Marble Falls, and is made a part hereof, as amended. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the International Plumbing Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(c)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said International Plumbing Code as adopted and the other provisions of this section, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. No. 89-O-2A, § 1, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 2003-O-12E, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.4, 7-16-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, adopted October 6, 2015 , amended § 7-56 to read as set out herein. Previously § 7-56 was titled "Adopted."  
Sec. 7-56.1. - Amendments. 
The following amendments to the International Plumbing Code are hereby adopted: 
Section 305.4.1. Insert: 12 inches in both. 
Section P2902.5.3. Insert: double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
(Ord. No. 89-O-2A, §§ 2, 3, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 2003-O-12E, § 2, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2012-O-07C, § II, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.5, 7-16-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-O-2A, §§ 2, 3, adopted Feb. 28, 1989, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as § 7-56.1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 7-57. - Fees. 
The permit and inspections fees under the Standard Plumbing Code shall be as set forth by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-2B, § I, 2-16-84; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 7-58. - Cross-connection control program. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  No water service connection shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) for Public Water Systems Rules (TCEQ Rules) and this article. The city may discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the TCEQ Rules and this article. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance. 
(1)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installations by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester and certified to be operation within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested and certified to be operating within specifications at least annually by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. 
(2)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual-M14) or the University of Southern California, Manual of Cross-Connection Control. 
(3)  Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be kept and submitted to the city within five (5) working days for the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other assembly or device substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly or device is moved from the present location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or device shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this section. The American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual—M14), current addition, University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition, or the current plumbing code of the city, whichever is more stringent. 
(5)  Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be calibrated at least annually in accordance with the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual—M14), current addition, or the University of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current addition. The original calibration form must be submitted to the city within five (5) working days after calibration. 
(6)  A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current endorsement from the TCEQ. 
(c)  Customer service inspections. 
(1)  A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private water distribution facilities. 
(2)  Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conduction a customer service inspection. 
a.  Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that have been licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners. 
b.  Certified waterworks operators, and members of other water related professionals groups who have completed a training course, passed an examination administered by the commission or its designated agent, and hold a current endorsement issued by the commission. 
(3)  The customer service inspection must certify that: 
a.  No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public water system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly. 
b.  No cross-connection between the public water supply and a private water source exists. Where an actual properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. 
c.  No connection exists which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water supply. 
d.  No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than eight (8) percent lead may be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. 
e.  No solder or flux contains more than two-tenths (0.2) percent lead can be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one (1) lead test shall be performed for each inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-11C, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Secs. 7-59—7-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.A, adopted Dec. 14, 2009, repealed §§ 7-59—7-61, which pertained to repeal, severability and enforcement; and derived from Ord. No. 2001-O-11C, adopted Jan. 22, 2002.  
Sec. 7-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-11B, § II, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, repealed § 7-62, which pertained to license and registration required and derived from Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, adopted Dec. 14, 2009.  
Secs. 7-63—7-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Air Conditioning Contractor License Law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8861. 
 
Sec. 7-71. - Adoption of International Mechanical Code. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices A and B, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the mechanical code of the City of Marble Falls, and is made a part hereof, as amended. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(c)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said International Mechanical Code as adopted and the other provisions of this section, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. No. 77-O-2A, 2-14-77; Ord. No. 2003-O-12F, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.6, 7-16-2019)  
Sec. 7-72. - Fees. 
The permit and inspection fees under the Standard Mechanical Code shall be as determined by ordinance of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 77-O-2A, § VI, 2-14-77; Ord. No. 84-O-2B, § I, 2-16-84; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009)  
Sec. 7-73. - Amendments. 
(Reserved.) 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-12F, § 2, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, adopted October 6, 2015 , amended § 7-73 to read as set out herein. Previously § 7-73 was titled "Amendments to the mechanical code."  
Sec. 7-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-11B, § II, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, repealed § 7-74, which pertained to license and registration required and derived from Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, adopted Dec. 14, 2009.  
Secs. 7-75—7-86. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MINIMUM BUILDING STANDARDS CODE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-O-7, § III, adopted July 26, 1994, repealed Ord. No. 80-O-3A, adopted March 11, 1980; and Ord. No. 86-O-12, adopted Dec. 4, 1986, from which were derived provisions formerly codified as Ch. 7, Art. VI, and setting forth the minimum building standards code. Section I of Ord. No. 94-O-7 enacted new provisions which have been set out herein as a new Art. VI by the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, adopted Jan. 25, 2010, amended Div. 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1, §§ 7-86—7-93, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(1)—(7), adopted July 26, 1994. 
 
Sec. 7-87. - Short title. 
This article may be referred to as the "Minimum Building Standards Code." 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-88. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Alley: A public place, lane or thoroughfare between buildings or through a city block, giving access primarily to the rear of buildings. 
Alter or alteration: Any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy. 
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms which is occupied or which is used, designed or intended to be occupied by one (1) family for living and sleeping purposes. 
Apartment house: Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, including flats and apartments. 
Approved: Having the approval of the building official as the result of investigation and tests conducted by him or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific organizations; or having the approval of the appropriate enforcement official of the city as being in compliance with the standards and requirements of any code or ordinances of the city which applies specifically to the item in question. 
Building: A roof supported by walls or columns. 
Building code: The City of Marble Falls Building Code and amendments thereto. 
Building official: The officer and his deputies charged with the administration and enforcement of this article or the official charged with the administration and enforcement of an ordinance that required the abatement procedure to follow, in whole or in part, the provisions of this article as applicable to all residential, commercial and industrial buildings. 
Commercial building: Any building or structure used or designed to be used in whole or part for retail or wholesale business, industrial, manufacturing, religious, educational, amusement or entertainment purposes. 
Court: Except where used with judicial connotation, the term "court" shall mean an open, unoccupied space bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of the building. An inner court is a court entirely within the exterior walls of a building; all other courts are outer courts. 
Dwelling: Any building or any portion thereof which is not an "apartment house," a "lodginghouse," or a "hotel" as defined in this article and which contains one (1) or two (2) "dwelling units" or "guest rooms" used, designed or intended to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for living purposes. 
Dwelling unit: A suite of two (2) or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are used, designed, or intended to be occupied by one (1) family, with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
Efficiency living unit: Any room having cooking facilities used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes and meeting the requirements of section 7-151. 
Existing building: A building erected or one (1) for which a legal building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this article. 
Exit: A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way, including intervening doorways, corridors, ramps, stairways, fire escapes, horizontal exits, exterior courts and yards. 
Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rodents, and vermin by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by other approved means. 
Family: One (1) person living alone or a group of two (2) or more persons living together, whether related to each other by birth or not. 
Floor area: The area included within surrounding walls of a building (or portion thereof), exclusive of vent shafts and courts. 
Garbage: The animal, vegetable and mineral waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Grade (ground level): The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
Habitable building: A building or a portion of a building used, designed or intended to be used for human habitation which meets the requirements of this article as applicable to all residential, commercial and industrial structures. 
Habitable room: Any room meeting the requirements of this article for sleeping, living, cooking or eating purposes, excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connection corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms, and similar spaces. 
Health director: The legally designated head of the Department of Health of the City of Marble Falls. 
Hot water: Water at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Infestation: The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or premises. 
Kitchen: A room used, designed or intended to be used for the preparation of food. 
Maintain: Keep, preserve, erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, equip, use, maintain status quo, permit to deteriorate, or permit to exist. 
Mechanical code: The City of Marble Falls Mechanical Code and amendments thereto. 
Nuisance: The following shall be defined as nuisances: 
(a)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(b)  Any attractive nuisance that may prove detrimental to children, whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators or junked motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(c)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health. 
(d)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. 
Occupied space: The total area of all buildings or structures on any lot or parcel of ground projected on a horizontal plane, excluding permitted projections as allowed by this article. 
Owner: Any person using or having control of the premises concerned, including, but not limited to: a feeholder, lessor, lessee, occupant, vendor under contract of sale, vendee under contract of sale, person in possession, person with right to immediate possession, assignee of rents, receiver, trustee, executor, or person having express, implied, or apparent authority to exercise control of such property as an agent or its owner, as the term owner is defined hereby. Any person listed as owner of any such premises upon the last approved city tax roll previous to the offense date shall be presumed to be the owner for purposes of this article. 
Person: Any individual, corporation, firm, association, trust, partnership or group of two (2) or more persons having a joint or common economic interest, including nonprofit, religious, charitable, and professional entities. 
Repair: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance. The term "repair" shall not apply to any change of construction or additions to a building. 
Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living or sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Rubbish: All combustible and noncombustible waste, except garbage. 
Substandard or substandard condition: Either not meeting or conforming with one (1) or more of the standards or specifications set forth in division 5 of this article or possessing one (1) or more of the conditions or defects set forth in division 6 of this article. 
Window: A glazed opening, including glazed doors, which open upon a yard, court or recess from a court, or a vent shaft open and unobstructed to the sky. 
Yard: An open unoccupied space other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this article, on the lot of which a building is situated. 
Zoning Ordinance: City of Marble Falls Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-89. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide just, equitable and practicable civil and criminal methods to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the city building code, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause might endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-90. - Applicability, scope and effect. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings and structures or portions thereof as herein defined which are now in existence or which may hereafter be constructed in the city. Existing buildings or structures that are altered or enlarged shall be made to conform to the building code of the city. Existing buildings or structures that are moved or relocated shall be considered new construction and shall comply with all requirements of the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-91. - Exemption of city officials from liability. 
All of the regulations provided in this article and the functions and duties of all officers, agents, servants or employees of the city in the enforcement to this article are declared to be governmental and for the benefit of the general public. Any member of the city council and city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this article acting for the city in the discharge of his duties shall not thereby render himself personally liable by the performance of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-92. - Incorporation of references. 
Any reference made in this article to any other law, statute, code, ordinance, rule, regulation, or similar statutory or quasi-statutory material is intended to incorporate such material both as it presently exists and also any future amendments, changes, revisions, repeals, or recodifications of such material, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-93. - Responsibility for condition of premises; notice; service. 
(a)  Each owner remains liable for violation of duties imposed upon him by this article, even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his building and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupants the duty of furnishing required equipment or complying with this article. 
(b)  Each owner or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in such building or structure. 
(c)  Each owner or occupant shall, where required by this article or other applicable ordinances, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as are required, shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation and, where infestation exists, shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
(d)  Each occupant of a building or structure, in addition to being responsible for keeping that part of the building, structure or premises which he occupies and controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, shall dispose of all rubbish, garbage and other organic waste in such manners as is required by applicable ordinances of the city. 
(e)  Each occupant shall, where required by this article or other applicable ordinances, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to keep his premises safe and sanitary. 
(f)  The failure of any such person to receive any notice or order deposited in the United States mail shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this article. Service by mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(g)  The failure of the building official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed upon him by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Secs. 7-94—7-103. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING OFFICIAL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, adopted Jan. 25, 2010, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 7-104—7-107, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(8)—(11), adopted July 26, 1994. 
 
Sec. 7-104. - Duties. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The building official and the building official's authorized representatives shall be authorized to make inspections of all buildings, houses, and premises within the city for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this code are fully complied with. If there is probable cause to suspect that any building or premises is in violation of this code, and: 
(1)  if such building or premises is open and clearly unoccupied, the building official may enter such building or premises for the purpose of inspecting same without prior notice to any person; or 
(2)  if such building or premises is closed or if a reasonably prudent person with a reason to believe that such premises is occupied, the building official shall have recourse to every procedure, right, or remedy provided by law to secure entry for the purpose of inspecting same. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a building or premises shall be "closed" if entry cannot be gained without the use of force, however slight, including, for example, the force necessary to open an unlocked door or climb into an open window; a building or premises shall be "occupied" if occupied for either residential or business purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-105. - Appointment of deputies and inspectors. 
The building official may appoint such number of inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized by the appropriations ordinance and budget. The building official may deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions required for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-106. - Identification. 
The building official and the building official's deputies and inspectors shall be supplied with official identification, and upon request, they shall exhibit such identification when performing any duties imposed and authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Secs. 7-107—7-117. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE FOR DESIGNATION OF A SUBSTANDARD BUILDING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, adopted Jan. 25, 2010, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 7-118—7-122, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(12)—(16), adopted July 26, 1994. 
 
Sec. 7-118. - Commencement of public hearing. 
(a)  Whenever the building official has inspected any premises and has found the existence of a substandard condition, he shall schedule a public hearing before the city council to determine whether the building or structure complies with the standards set out in this article. 
(b)  Prior to the public hearing, the building official shall prepare and submit a report for the city council's review, therein describing: 
(1)  The facts and circumstances that lead the building official to investigate the subject premises and building or structure; 
(2)  The specific defective condition(s), as provided under section 7-167, of the building or structure; 
(3)  The building official's recommendation as to whether the building or structure should be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, and/or demolished; and 
(4)  Any other information the city council directs the building official to include in the report. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-08D, § 2, 8-18-2015 )  
Sec. 7-119. - Notice. 
(a)  Issuance of notice. 
(1)  The building official shall issue a notice of hearing to each owner of the building and to each mortgagee and lienholder of the building and of the property on which it is located, as known and shown by the city and as shown by search of the following records: 
a.  Official public records of real property in the county, specifically in the county clerk's office; 
b.  Appraisal district records for the appraisal district in which the building is located; 
c.  Records of the Texas Secretary of State; 
d.  Assumed name records for the county; 
e.  Tax records of the city; and 
f.  Utility records for the city. 
(2)  The building official shall issue notice of hearing to all unknown owners, if any, by posting the notice as described in subsection (c). 
(b)  Contents of notice. Notice of the hearing described under section 7-118 shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address, if any, or other description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located. 
(2)  A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard, with a general description of the conditions found to render the building substandard and a copy of the report to be provided to the city council under subsection 7-118(b). 
(3)  A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time. 
(4)  A statement specifying the date, time and place of the hearing; and 
(5)  A statement that the owner will be afforded an opportunity to comment at the hearing and will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the minimum standards set out in this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(c)  Service of notice. 
(1)  Notice of the hearing shall be given by certified mail with return receipt requested, delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or by personal service. If the address of any person entitled to notice cannot be ascertained, or if service cannot be made by mail or in person after a reasonable attempt, and for all unknown owners, service shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable. 
(2)  The notice shall be mailed and/or posted before the tenth day before the date of the hearing. Service by certified mail shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(3)  Proof of personal service shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration executed by the person effecting service, declaring the date, time and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice retained by the building official. 
(4)  Notice of the hearing may be filed in the official public records of real property in the county, specifically in the county clerk's office. The notice shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined. 
b.  A legal description of the affected property; and 
c.  A description of the hearing. 
The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after filing of the notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-08D, § 2, 8-18-2015 )  
Sec. 7-120. - Hearing. 
(a)  Conduct of hearing. This section applies to all public hearings before the council to determine whether a building or structure complies with the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Failure to appear. If the owner of the building fails to appear at the hearing after being duly served, the council shall conduct the hearing as if the owner personally appeared. 
(2)  Quorum. A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of holding a hearing, and an affirmative vote by three (3) members of the council shall be required for the rendering of decisions or the issuance of orders authorized under this article. 
(3)  Procedure. The council may establish rules and regulations for the conduct of hearings, if such are consistent with this article and state law. 
(4)  Decisions and orders. 
a.  After all evidence has been presented at the hearing, the council shall determine whether the building or structure complies with the requirements of this article. If more than one (1) building is located on a property and is the subject of the hearing, the council shall make a separate determination for each building. 
b.  If the building or structure is in substandard condition because it does not comply with the provisions of this article, the council may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, and shall specify a reasonable time for the owner to do so. 
c.  If necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the building's occupants, the council shall order the building vacated. If the condition of the building is due to neglect or to intentional or negligent acts by the owner, the council shall order the owner to relocate the occupants at reasonable expense and in a reasonable manner. The council shall specify a reasonable period of time for the completion of the relocation. 
d.  The council shall also order an additional reasonable period of time for all mortgagees or lienholders to comply with the order should the owner fail to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. 
e.  The council shall also order a civil penalty that the city may assess if the owner fails to repair, remove or demolish the building in accordance with the council's order. Such penalty shall not exceed the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day that the building is out of compliance with the order. 
f.  A reasonable period of time to comply with an order of the council is within thirty (30) days from the date of an order: 
1.  To secure the building from unauthorized entry, or 
2.  To repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days. 
g.  If the council finds that the work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the council shall order specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall order the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. 
h.  The council shall not order the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee: 
1.  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
2.  The council finds that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
i.  If the council orders that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building within a time period that is more than ninety (90) days, the council shall order that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee regularly submit progress reports to the building official and appear before the council or the council's designee to prove compliance with the time schedule. 
j.  If the council orders that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building within a time period that is more than ninety (90) days and the landowner, lienholder or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property, within the city that exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in total value, the council may order that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing, or demolishing a building under section 7-136. 
(b)  Contents of order. 
(1)  An order issued by the council shall be in writing, set forth the decisions of the council made pursuant to subsection (a)(4), and inform the property owner or lienholder of the right to appeal the council's decision. 
(2)  An order to repair shall set forth those items that need to be repaired. 
(3)  An order to vacate shall require the building official to post notice to vacate at or upon each entrance and exit of the building or structure in substantially the form described by section (a)(4). 
(4)  An order shall also contain the following statement: 
"It is further ORDERED that if the owner fails to comply with any part of this order by the specified dates, and if any of the mortgagees or lienholders fail to comply with the order in the owner's stead and by the specified dates, the City is hereby authorized at its discretion to vacate, secure, repair, remove and/or demolish the building(s) at its own expense. Alternatively, the City is authorized to assess a civil penalty on the owner in the amount of $1,000 per day for each day that the building continues to be in violation of this order. Such costs or penalty shall accrue interest at a rate of ten percent (10%) per annum. The City shall have all remedies provided by law to recover such costs, penalties and interest, and shall be entitled to place a lien on the property unless it is a homestead protected by the Texas Constitution. 
THE OWNER OR LIENHOLDER HAS THE RIGHT TO APPEAL THE CITY COUNCIL'S DECISION TO THE DISTRICT COURT WITHIN 30 DAYS OF THE MAILING OF THIS ORDER." 
(5)  A copy of the order shall be sent promptly after the hearing by certified mail with return receipt requested or by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. If a notice is mailed according to this subsection and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be deemed as delivered. 
(6)  Within ten (10) days after the date the order is issued: 
a.  A copy of the order shall be filed in the office of the city secretary; and, 
b.  A notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, said notice containing; 
1.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
2.  The date of the hearing; 
3.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
4.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(c)  Failure to comply with order. 
(1)  If the owner of a building declared substandard fails to comply with an order of the council within the allotted time, the building official shall cause a copy of the council's order to be sent by certified mail return receipt requested to each lienholder and mortgagee as was determined pursuant to subsection 7-119(a). This shall constitute notice to the lienholders and mortgagees that the owner has failed to comply with the order. 
(2)  If the lienholders and mortgagees fail to comply with the order within the time allotted to them by the council, the building official may: 
a.  Vacate, secure, repair, remove and/or demolish the building at the city's expense; or 
b.  Assess a civil penalty against the owner of the building, as provided by the council, for failure to comply with the order. 
(3)  The building official is authorized to repair a building only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with minimum standards, and only if the building is a residential building with ten (10) or fewer units. 
(4)  The building official is authorized, if the order requires demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished, or to be demolished and the materials, rubble and debris removed and the lot cleaned. Any such demolition work shall be accomplished, and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner provided in section 7-136. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building or from the demolition thereof over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot shall be paid to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
(5)  The building official is further authorized to ask the city attorney to bring suit against the owner in a Burnet County district court to request that a receiver be appointed to rehabilitate the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 2015-O-08D, § 2, 8-18-2015 )  
Sec. 7-121. - Additional authority to secure substandard buildings. 
(a)  Authority to secure building. The building official may secure or cause to be secured a building at the city's expense if the building official determines: 
(1)  That the building or structure violates the minimum standards for the use and occupancy of buildings in the city regardless of the date of their construction, and 
(2)  That the building or structure is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building. 
(b)  Issuance of notice. Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured pursuant to subsection 7-121(a), the building official will give notice to the owner that the building has been secured. The building official may also give notice to each mortgagee and lienholder, and to any unknown owners, in the same manner as described by subsection 7-119(a). 
(c)  Contents of notice. The notice under this section shall contain: 
(1)  An identification of the building and the property on which it is located; and 
(2)  A description of the violation of the ordinance that is present at the building; and 
(3)  A statement that the city has secured the building; and 
(4)  A statement explaining the owner's right to request a hearing about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building. 
(d)  Service of notice. Notice regarding the securing of the building shall be given by either: 
(1)  Personally serving the owner with written notice; or 
(2)  Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; 
a.  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in the official newspaper of the city; or 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building. 
(e)  Hearing. If, within thirty (30) days after the date a building is secured pursuant to subsection 7-121(a), the owner files with the building official a written request for a hearing, the building official will schedule a hearing before the council to determine whether the actions of the building official to secure the building are upheld, modified or reversed in the same manner as provided by section 7-120. At the hearing the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building. 
(f)  Scheduling of hearing. The council will conduct the hearing within twenty (20) days after the date the request is filed. 
(g)  Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the requestor by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, before the tenth day before the hearing, in the same manner as provided in subsection 7-119(b). 
(h)  Procedure after hearing. After the hearing before the council, or after the expiration of the time allowed for the owner to request a hearing and no hearing has been requested, the building official will mail by certified mail with return receipt requested or through the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. Within ten (10) days after the date the order from the council is issued, the building official will: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
(2)  Publish in the city's official newspaper a notice containing: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the hearing or order; and 
d.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(i)  Liens and collection of expenses. If the city incurs expenses under section 7-121, the city may assess the expenses on and place a lien against the land on which the building is located, in the same manner as provided by sections 7-132, 7-133 and 7-136. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-122. - Appeal. 
(a)  The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of a building or structure the council orders vacated, secured, repaired, removed, and/or demolished is entitled to the right to appeal the council's decision to a district court, provided that the notice of appeal must be filed with the district court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the order is mailed to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee. 
(b)  Under no circumstances may the building official or any other city official take action to remove or demolish a structure or building prior to the expiration of the thirty-day appellate period provided above, nor while any legal proceedings relating to the building or structure of any nature are pending in district or appellate court. 
( Ord. No. 2015-O-08D, § 2, 8-18-2015 )  
Secs. 7-123—7-131. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, adopted Jan. 25, 2010, amended Div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 4, §§ 7-132—7-140, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(17)—(25), adopted July 26, 1994. 
 
Sec. 7-132. - Liens. 
(a)  If the city assesses a civil penalty pursuant to subsection 7-120(c)(2)(b), or if the city incurs expenses under subsections 7-120(c)(2)(a) or (c)(3), or under section 7-121, the city may assess the expenses or penalty on and place a lien against the land on which the building was located, unless the land is a homestead protected by the Texas Constitution. 
(b)  A lien imposed pursuant to this article is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens. 
(c)  The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the official public records of real property in Burnet County, specifically in the office of the county clerk for Burnet County. The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined; a legal description of the land on which the building was located; the amount of expenses incurred by the city or the civil penalty and the balance due. 
(d)  A lien is extinguished when the property owner or other person with an interest in the legal title to the land pays the city the balance due in full. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-133. - Notice and collection of penalty and expenses. 
(a)  If the city incurs expenses under subsections 7-120(c)(2)(a) or (c)(3), or under section 7-121, the building official shall cause a statement to be sent to the owner, setting forth the amount of the expenses and the interest accrued to date. The building official shall thereafter cause an annual statement to be sent to the owner until the expenses and interest are paid in full. 
(b)  If the city assesses a civil penalty pursuant to subsection 7-120(c)(2)(b), the building official shall cause a notice to be sent to the owner that the city has begun assessing the penalty provided by the order. Thereafter, the building official shall cause a monthly statement to be sent to the owner, setting forth the amount of the accrued penalty and interest, until the penalty and interest is paid in full. 
(c)  A civil penalty or assessment for expenses shall accrue interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date of assessment until paid in full. 
(d)  The city shall be entitled to all remedies provided by law for the collection of debt in order to recover penalty, expenses and interest. However, the city shall not foreclose a lien for repair expenses if the property on which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person sixty-five (65) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-134. - Notice to vacate; violations. 
(a)  [Notice.] Every notice to vacate shall be posted at or upon each entrance and exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form: 
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING 
DO NOT OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Marble Falls 
The notice to vacate shall specify the conditions which necessitate the posting and recite the emergency or shall identify the order to vacate and state where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(b)  Compliance; violations. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been posted, except that entry may be made to repair, remove, demolish or secure such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required work has been completed and a certificate of occupancy is issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-135. - Criminal enforcement. 
(a)  An owner who fails to comply with an order of the board shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(b)  Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  A criminal prosecution shall be in addition to any civil remedies to which the city is entitled. The remedies provided by this article shall be in addition to the remedies provided by this chapter or any other applicable ordinance or statute. 
(d)  No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds an estate or interest in any building or structure which has been ordered repaired, removed, secured, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this Code, or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work as ordered or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work. A person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with an order of the board shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-136. - Performance of work and recovery of cost. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Procedure. When any work to repair, remove, secure, vacate, or demolish is to be done pursuant to this code, the building official shall cause the work to be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract under the direction of the building official, or he may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he may deem reasonably necessary. 
(2)  Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from the remediation fund, and may be made a special assessment against the property involved. 
(b)  Remediation fund. 
(1)  The city council shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the remediation fund. Payments shall be made out of said fund upon the order of the building official, with the concurrence of the city manager, to defray the costs and expenses incurred by the city in doing or causing to be done the necessary remediation of substandard buildings and structures. The city council may appropriate such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the remediation, and any sum so appropriated shall be deemed a loan to the remediation fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections hereinafter provided for. 
(2)  The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred by the city in the remediation of any building pursuant to the provisions hereof, and upon the completion of the work, the building official shall cause to be prepared and filed with the city secretary a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost thereof, a description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to section 7-133 hereof. 
(3)  The city council may thereupon order that said costs, including administrative costs, be made a personal obligation of the feeholder and/or assess said charge against the property involved under the applicable provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, the State of Texas. 
(4)  If the city council orders that the charge shall be a personal obligation of the feeholder, it shall request the city attorney to collect the same on behalf of the city by use of all appropriate legal remedies; if the city council orders that the charge shall be assessed against the property under the applicable provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, the State of Texas, and the Charter of the City of Marble Falls, it shall confirm the assessment and cause the same to be recorded in the real property records of Burnet County, and thereafter said assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-137. - Discontinuation. 
After any premises have been ordered repaired or demolished under section 7-120 hereof, the building official shall regularly reinspect same. If at any time the building on such premises is no longer substandard to the extent that the life, land, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof is endangered, the building official shall immediately withdraw his prior order and issue a certificate reflecting such action to the feeholder of such property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-138. - Change in feeholder. 
(a)  A change in feeholders of any property upon which proceedings are pending under the article shall not affect the validity of such proceedings if either: 
(1)  The new feeholder has been a party served with notice at each stage of the proceedings; or 
(2)  The new feeholder has been given notice as required by section 7-119 hereof. 
(b)  It shall be presumed that the new feeholder has been given notice under section 7-119 hereof, as required by law. If, however, the new feeholder shows that he has not been so served, all pending proceedings under this article are invalid and must be recommenced. A change in feeholders made for the purpose of delaying or avoiding proceedings under this article shall not affect the validity of such proceedings." 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Secs. 7-139—7-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 7-150. - Rooms. 
(a)  Ceiling heights. Habitable rooms, storage rooms, and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches (7'6?). Kitchens, hallways, corridors, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. If any room in a building has a sloped ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than seven (7) feet. 
(b)  Floor area. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one (1) room which shall have not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of floor area. Every room which is used for both cooking and living or both living and sleeping purposes shall have not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area. Every room used for sleeping purposes shall have not less than seventy (70) square feet of floor area. When more than two (2) persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of two (2). 
Exception: Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The unit shall have a living room of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet of floor area. An additional one hundred (100) square feet of floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two (2). 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this article shall be provided. 
(4)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
(c)  Width. No habitable room shall be less than seven (7) feet in any dimension and no water closet space less than thirty (30) inches in width, and a clear space shall be provided in front of the water closet of not less than twenty-four (24) inches. No heating appliance shall be installed, reinstalled, or permitted to exist nearer than twenty-four (24) inches from any water closet, bathtub, or shower located in the same space. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(26), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-151. - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Windows. All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural light by means of windows and sky lights with an area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of twelve (12) square feet. 
All bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of windows or sky lights with an area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of three (3) square feet. 
Not less than one-half of the required window or sky light area shall be capable of being opened to provide ventilation. 
Required windows shall open directly onto a street or public alley or a yard or court located in the same lot as the building. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Required windows may open onto a roofed porch where the porch: 
a.  Abuts a street, yard or court; 
b.  Has a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet; and 
c.  Has the longer side at least sixty-five (65) percent open and unobstructed. 
(2)  A required window in a service room may open onto a vent shaft which is open and unobstructed to the sky and not less than four (4) feet in smallest dimension. No vent shaft shall extend through more than two (2) stories. 
For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one-half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Mechanical ventilation. An approved system of mechanical ventilation or air conditioning may be used in lieu of windows capable of being opened. Such system shall be capable of providing two (2) air changes per hour in all guest rooms, dormitories, habitable rooms and public corridors. One-fifth of the air supply shall be taken from the outside. In bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside, capable of providing five (5) air changes per hour, shall be provided. 
(c)  Vent shaft. A required window in a service room may open into a vent shaft which is open and unobstructed to the sky and not less than four (4) feet in least dimension. No vent shaft shall extend through more than two (2) stories. 
(d)  Hallways. All public hallways, stairs, and other exit ways shall be adequately lighted at all times in accordance with the building code. 
(e)  Screens. In any dwelling unit all openings capable of being used for ventilation shall be fitted with screening and frames which are tight fitting and free from breaches. It shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution that such dwelling unit was equipped with mechanical ventilation satisfying this section, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(27), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-152. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a water closet, a lavatory and a bathtub or shower. 
(b)  Hotels and roominghouses. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, there shall be provided on each floor for each sex at least one (1) water closet and lavatory and one (1) bath accessible from a public hallway at the rate of one (1) for every ten (10) guests, or fractional equivalent thereof in excess of ten (10). Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "Men" and "Women." 
(c)  Kitchen. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. No wooden sink or sink of similarly absorbent material shall be permitted. 
(d)  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water, except water closets shall be provided with cold water only. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved type. 
(e)  Bathrooms. Walls and floors of water closet compartments and bathrooms except in dwellings shall be finished in accordance with the building code. 
(f)  Room separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this article shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. A room in which a water closet is located shall be separated from food preparation or storage rooms by a well-fitted door. 
(g)  Installation and maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(28), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-153. - Structural requirements. 
(a)  General structural elements. Buildings or structures may be of any type or construction permitted by the building code, as amended. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and loads for which they are designed. All structural elements shall be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the building code, as amended. Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the applicable requirements of the building code, as amended. 
(b)  Shelter. Every building shall be weather-protected so as to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude excessive dampness. 
(c)  Protection of materials. All wood shall be protected against termite damage and decay as provided in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(29), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-154. - Heating, electricity, etc. 
(a)  Heating. Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining room temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit at a point three (3) feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the building code, as amended, the mechanical code, as amended, and all other applicable laws. No unapproved fuel-burning heater shall be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. 
(b)  Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type. 
Where there is electrical power available within three hundred (300) feet of the premises of any building, such building shall be connected to such electrical power. In every existing residence, each room shall have a minimum of one (1) duplex receptacle for each twenty (20) linear feet measured around the wall space of the room. The linear measurement shall not include doors and windows that reach to the floor. Every habitable room, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and hallway, except living room, shall contain at least one (1) supplied electric light fixture. In additions or extensions to existing buildings, the number and location of receptacle shall comply with the National Electrical Code. 
(c)  Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas and for fuel-burning appliances shall be provided as required in the building code, as amended, the mechanical code, and in this article. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation system, it shall be maintained in an operable condition during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(30), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-155. - Exits. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances as required by the building code, as amended. 
(b)  Every sleeping room below the fourth floor shall have at least one (1) window or exterior door approved for emergency exit or rescue. Where windows are provided, they shall have a sill height not more than forty-eight (48) inches above the floor. 
(c)  Windows with an area of not less than five (5) square feet with no dimension less than twenty-two (22) inches shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(31), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-156. - Fire protection. 
All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire-resistive construction as required by the building code for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property or in fire zone and shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by the building code and the fire code. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(32), 7-26-94)  
Secs. 7-157—7-166. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DEFECTIVE CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 7-167. - Generally. 
The following are defective conditions in buildings or structures: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
(2)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (1½) times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code, as amended, for new buildings of similar structure, purpose of location; 
(3)  Whenever any portion of any building or structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such occurrence and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code, as amended, for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
(4)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged or to collapse, thereby injuring persons or damaging property; 
(5)  Whenever any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of the specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings; 
(6)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled, twisted or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction; 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure or any portion thereof, because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause, is likely to collapse partially or completely. 
(8)  Whenever for any reason the building or structure or any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used; 
(9)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base; 
(10)  Whenever a supporting member, other than columns, of a building or structure is thirty-three (33) percent or more damages or deteriorated or there is fifty (50) percent damage to or deterioration of its nonsupporting member, or a column is ten (10) percent or more damaged or deteriorated; 
(11)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance; 
(12)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure as provided by the building regulations of this city as specified in the building code, as amended, or in violation of any law of this state or ordinance of this city relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings; 
(13)  Whenever any building, structure or any member or portion thereof does not have the fire-resistant qualities and characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like size, height and occupancy in the same location; 
(14)  Whenever a building or structure, because of inadequate light, air, sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined by the health director to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease; 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistant construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus or other cause, is determined by the fire chief, fire marshal, or designee to be a fire hazard; 
(16)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence; 
(17)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public; and 
(18)  Whenever any potion of a building or structure has been so damaged by flood that the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(a)), 7-26-94; Ord. No. 2010-O-01A, § 2.A, 1-25-2010)  
Sec. 7-168. - Structural hazards. 
The following are structural hazards in buildings and structures: 
(1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations; 
(2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports; 
(3)  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(4)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are split or that lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(5)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
(7)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(8)  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, lean or settle due to defective material or deterioration; and 
(9)  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(b)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-169. - Inadequate sanitation. 
The following are conditions of inadequate sanitation in buildings and structures: 
(1)  Lack of improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit; 
(2)  Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories, bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel; 
(3)  Lack of or improper kitchen sink; 
(4)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in hotel; 
(5)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit; 
(6)  Lack of adequate heating facilities; 
(7)  Lack of or improper operation of required ventilation equipment; 
(8)  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light or ventilation required by this article; 
(9)  Room and space dimensions less than required by this article; 
(10)  Lack of required electrical lighting; 
(11)  Excessive dampness of habitable rooms; 
(12)  Infestation by insects, vermin or rodents; 
(13)  General dilapidation or improper maintenance; 
(14)  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system; and 
(15)  Lack of adequate solid waste, garbage and rubbish storage. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(c)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-170. - Hazardous wiring. 
All wiring except that which conformed to applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(d)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-171. - Hazardous plumbing. 
All plumbing except that which has been maintained in good condition and which is free of cross connections and siphoning between fixtures, and S-traps or other improperly vented traps. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(e)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-172. - Hazardous mechanical equipment. 
All mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which has been maintained in a good and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(f)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-173. - Faulty weather protection. 
Faulty weather protection is: 
(1)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster; 
(2)  Deteriorated, missing, or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundation or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
(3)  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall covering, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other necessary protective covering; and 
(4)  Broken, rotted, missing, split or buckled exterior wall covering or roof covering. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(g)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-174. - Hazardous or unsanitary premises. 
Premises (including any portion of the lot on which a structure is located) on which any accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials, or similar materials or conditions exist are deemed to be hazardous or unsanitary. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(h)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-175. - Inadequate maintenance. 
Any building or portion thereof which is an unsafe building under the building code, as amended, is deemed to be evidence of inadequate maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(i)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-176. - Inadequate exits. 
All buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this article except those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and which have been adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. When an unsafe condition exists through lack of or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(j)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-177. - Inadequate firefighting equipment. 
All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by this article, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire extinguishing systems or equipment has been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increased in occupancy load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(k)), 7-26-94)  
Sec. 7-178. - Improper occupancy. 
All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-7, § I(33(l)), 7-26-94)  
Secs. 7-179—7-235. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSING CODE 
 
Sec. 7-236. - Adoption of Standard Housing Code. 
The specifications, rules and regulations entitled "Standard Housing Code, 1985 Edition," as adopted at the annual meeting of the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the city secretary's office, are hereby adopted as the housing code of the city as fully as if copied at length in this article.  
Secs. 7-237—7-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 7-251. - Adopting chapter 366. 
The City of Marble Falls, Texas, clearly understands the technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, does adopt and will fully enforce chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-252. - Area of jurisdiction. 
The rules stated in this article shall apply to all the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-253. - On-site sewage facility rules. 
Any structure discharging sewage into an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the city must comply with the rules adopted in section 7-254 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-254. - On-site sewage facility rules adopted. 
The rules ("Design Criteria For On-Site Sewage Facilities" and Administrative Rules 30 TAC 285.1—285.91) promulgated by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission for on-site sewage systems are hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of the city having duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under said rules. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-255. - Incorporation by reference. 
The design criteria (30 TAC 285.1—285.91) and all future amendments and revisions thereto are incorporated by reference and are thus made a part of these rules as if copied at length in this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-256. - Amendments. 
The city, wishing to adopt more stringent rules for its on-site sewage facility order, understands that the more stringent conflicting local rule shall take precedence over the corresponding Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission requirements if local rules provide greater public health and safety protection. Listed below are the more stringent rules adopted by the city: 
(a)  Permits shall be required for all on-site sewage facilities regardless of the acreage of the site involved. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-257. - Duties and powers. 
The code enforcement officer of the city is hereby declared the designated representative for the enforcement of these rules within its jurisdictional area. The appointed individual(s) must be approved and certified by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission before assuming the duties and responsibilities of the designated representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-258. - Collection of fees. 
All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-259. - Appeals. 
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision to the city council in accordance with section 7-1 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-260. - Penalties. 
This article adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities, including, but not limited to, those found in chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code and 30 TAC chapter 285. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 7-261. - Relinquishment of order. 
If the city council decides that it no longer wishes to regulate on-site sewage facilities in its area of jurisdiction, the city council shall follow the procedures outlined below: 
(a)  The city council shall inform the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission by certified mail at least thirty (30) days before the published date of the public hearing notice that it wishes to relinquish its on-site sewage facility order. 
(b)  The authorized agent shall post the required public notice in a newspaper regularly published or circulated in the area of jurisdiction at least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated date of action by the authorized agent. 
(c)  The authorized agent shall send a copy of the public notice, a publisher's affidavit of public notice, and a certified copy of the minutes to the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. 
(d)  The executive director shall process the request for relinquishment and may issue an order relinquishing the authority to regulate OSSF's within the authorized agent's jurisdiction or may refer the request to relinquish to the commission. 
(e)  Prior to issuance of a relinquishment order the local governmental entity and the executive director shall determine the exact date the authorized agent would surrender its authorized agent designation to the executive director. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-6A, § 3, 6-23-98)  
Secs. 7-262—7-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 7-291. - Title, purpose, scope. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code" of the City of Marble Falls, and shall be referred to herein as "this code". 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards and regulations to help safeguard and preserve life or limb, property, and pubic welfare by regulating the use and maintenance of the exterior of all structures, buildings, and properties within the city. 
(c)  Scope. This code shall apply to all zoning districts, land, properties, structures, and buildings within the city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, nonresidential, improved or unimproved land, properties, structures, and buildings. 
(d)  Other ordinances. If other ordinances of the city conflict with this code and the standards and regulations established herein, the stricter standard (or regulation) shall prevail. 
(e)  Intent. It is the intent of this code to regulate and control public nuisances and other conditions and circumstances, as herein set forth, that adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public; it is not intended that this code be interpreted or enforced to required the city to intervene in matters which are primarily personal in nature and which may appropriately be resolved between or among private interests without material danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-11E, § II, 1-8-2002)  
Sec. 7-292. - Definitions. 
Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meaning within the context with which they are used. The following terms are defined and shall apply to all sections of this code unless defined elsewhere in the Code. 
Building means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, which has enclosing wall of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter. 
Building official means the building official of the city or designee. 
Carport means an open-sided shelter for storage of a vehicle and/or lawn care equipment with a roof detached or attached to the side of a building. 
Carrion means dead or decaying animal, fowl or fish. 
Code enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer for the city or its designee. 
Commercial motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used for: 
(1)  Transportation of property; or 
(2)  Delivery purposes. 
Enforcement authority means the City Manager of Marble Falls or the person or department to whom the city manager may delegate the enforcement responsibility. 
Hazardous waste means toxic, caustic, or flammable materials. 
Infectious waste means waste containing pathogens or biologically active material capable of transmitting disease such as animal and human blood or body parts, microbiological, and pathological waste, needles, syringes, and sharps. 
Junk means used metals, materials, equipment, appliances, furniture, tires, engines, and parts, and other manufactured or raw goods that are so worn, deteriorated, or obsolete as to make the item unusable or inoperable in their existing condition, or is a potential safety or health hazard. 
Light truck means a commercial motor vehicle that has a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of one and one-half (1½) tons or less. 
Nuisance means: 
(1)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of the building or upon an occupied premise, including but not limited to any abandoned well, shafts, basements, excavations, discarded refrigerators, unsecured vacant building, motor vehicles, unprotected swimming pools, or any structurally unsound fences or structures, or any gasoline, chemicals, lumber, trash, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive children. 
(2)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health and is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities, allowing sewage on lots, grounds. Yard or any other place in the city, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city and state. 
(4)  Uncleanliness, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation to the codes and ordinances of the city and state. 
(5)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, public health, safety or welfare, or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city and state. 
(6)  Graffiti of any type. 
(7)  Keeping, storing, or accumulating rubbish, including newspapers, refrigerators, furniture, tires, cans, etc. on premises in a neighborhood for ten (10) days or more, unless rubbish or object is completely enclosed in a building or is not visible from a public street. 
(8)  Maintaining premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or disease-carrying pests. 
(9)  Sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage, or other organic waste deposited, stored, discharged or exposed in such a way as to be a potential instrument or medium in disease transmission to a person or between persons. 
(10)  A vehicle or container that is used to transport garbage, human excreta or other organic material and that is defective and allows leakage or spilling of contents. 
(11)  A collection of water in which mosquitoes are breeding in the city limits. 
(12)  A place or condition harboring rats or breeding flies in a populated area. 
(13)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisdiction or as defined by codes or city ordinances. 
(14)  Overcrowding a room with tenants. 
Objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter means any matter or object which is offensive to ordinary sensitivities of a person, is not conducive to high aesthetic appearance and quality of a home or neighborhood, or is a health or safety hazard or a potential health or safety hazard. 
Open storage means the unscreened storage of new or used materials, salvaged items, vehicle parts, or any item that will cause deterioration of property values. 
Owner means any person claiming the ownership or title of real property, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Holder of fee simple title. 
(2)  Holder of life estate. 
(3)  Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five (5) years or more. 
(4)  A buyer in possession, or having right of possession under a contract or deed. 
(5)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in possession or control or having right of possession or control of real property. 
(6)  Any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing, or operating of property. 
Outdoor coverings means a water and sun resistant fabric or covering designed and manufactured for outdoor use and is designed specifically for the object that is being protected that can/does enclosed open spaces, patios, outdoor furniture, or vehicles. 
Outdoor furniture means furniture manufactured for outdoor areas and designed or used for outdoor gatherings, lounging, dining and/or similar uses. Outdoor furniture includes chairs, tables, settees or loungers that will not be damaged by exposure to rain, sun or other outdoor elements. The definition shall not include park type benches and chairs constructed of heavy metal, concrete or stone materials that are normally placed or anchored in a permanent location on the property. 
Outdoor grill means a grill, pit, smoker or outdoor fireplace used and designed for outdoor cooking. 
Playground equipment means items designed for the recreational use of children, including but not limited to swing sets, slides, seesaws, playhouses, playscapes, trampolines, and climbing apparatuses. 
Pool means a permanent swimming pool, spa, hot tub over eighteen (18) inches deep if public or semipublic, and three (3) feet deep if private, located at ground level, above the ground or below ground, filled or empty. 
Premises means any parcel, lot or tract of land, including any structure, building, landscaping, trees, or other structure or improvement located thereon. 
Recreational vehicle means and includes, but is not limited to aircraft, campers, camping trailers, motor homes, travel trailers, utility trailers, "RVs," travel buses or conversion, travel or camper vans, watercraft, or any other type of vehicle designed or used primarily for recreation, travel, or vacation use, including a trailer on which such a vehicle may be mounted. 
Refuse/rubbish means all decaying and nondecaying solid waste (except body waste) including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, cans, papers, boxes, glass, and other matter commonly understood as rubbish. 
Screening wall means wood, vegetation, or a combination of both at least six (6) feet in height. 
(1)  Screen walls shall mean a solid, opaque screening fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. 
(2)  Vegetation consisting of solid hedgerow or evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a minimum of six (6) feet. 
(3)  Any combination of the above; or 
(4)  Any other form of compatible and appropriate screening as approved by the city. 
Semitrailer means a vehicle designed or used with a motor vehicle so that part of the weight of the vehicle and its load rests on or is carried by another vehicle. 
Service vehicle means a service vehicle is any licensed vehicle used for commercial purposes, which may include a truck or a van, the primary purpose of which is to support the commercial purpose, including but not limited to maintenance, service or repair work for vehicles, buildings or grounds, construction, towing, sale or delivery of commodities, passengers, materials, equipment or tools or the transportation of personnel or workers to or from a site. 
Structure means any residential building, nonresidential building, dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit, detached garage, shed, awning, fence, screening wall, sign, swimming pool, excavation, any edifice, erection of material, or any other improvement placed or located on any property within the city. 
Tenant means any person or agent who occupied a structure or property. 
Trailer means a vehicle that: 
(1)  Is designed or used to carry a load wholly on its own structure which does not exceed eighteen (18) feet in length; and 
(2)  Is drawn or designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck-tractor means a motor vehicle: 
(1)  Designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle; and 
(2)  Not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be drawn. 
Unsafe building means a building which is dilapidated, substandard, structurally unsound or dangerous and unfit for human habitation and is a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare, or is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
Unwholesome matter means any condition, object, or matter, whether decaying or nondecaying which may produce injury, disease or death to human beings, directly or indirectly. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-11E, § II, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2012-O-08B, §§ 1—8, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 7-293. - Enforcement and inspection. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for the provisions of this article shall be the city manager or the city or the person or department to whom the city manager delegates the enforcement responsibility. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce this Code, or whenever the enforcement authority has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any property a condition or violation which is unsafe, dangerous or hazardous or detrimental to the public interest, the enforcement authority may enter upon such property at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided that if such structure or property is occupied, the enforcement authority shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such entry is refused, the enforcement authority shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-11E, § II, 1-8-2002)  
Sec. 7-294. - Responsibility. 
(a)  Owner. Every owner of the premises shall maintain such premises in compliance with this Code. An owner shall not let, rent, or lease a premises for occupancy or use, which does not comply with the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Owner and tenant. Every owner and every tenant of the premises shall maintain the premises in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition, including the disposal of rubbish, garbage, organic and inorganic waste, junk, or other waste in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-11E, § II, 1-8-2002)  
Sec. 7-295. - Exterior grounds. 
(a)  Trash, debris, and objectionable matter. All exterior property shall be maintained in clean, safe, and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to allow paper, wood, rocks, junk, appliances, furniture, dead grass, branches, trash debris, carrion, improper composting, rubber tires, bottles, scrap metal, vehicle parts, construction materials, fill materials, hazardous waste, i.e. chemicals, oils, solvents, gasoline, paints, pesticides, cleaners, batteries, and other unwholesome matter, to accumulate or remain on any piece of property to include easements so as to create a potential harborage, or breeding place for rats, vermin, or insects, or in such a manner as to be oppressive or injurious to the public health or unpleasant and disagreeable in sight or odor to persons residing or occupying the premises or adjacent premises or to persons who may be in a public place or public right-of-way. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. 
(1)  All property shall be maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant foul, and offensive water thereon, or within or under any structure located thereon. 
(2)  No filling or excavation shall be performed or constructed on any property without city determination that there will be no adverse effect on an existing or planned drainage pattern on an adjacent property. It is appears that drainage problems may result from filling, excavation, improvements, or landscaping, plans must be submitted by the property owner with an engineer's seal. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to drain swimming pool backwash onto public or private property. It is also unlawful to drain swimming pool water containing chemicals onto adjacent private property or public property to include alleys. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to impede the flow of water into any gutter or drainage ditch. 
(5)  If dirt used for fill appears to the enforcement authority to be contaminated, the city may require proof of noncontamination. 
(6)  The draining or discharging of pesticides, grease, petroleum products, paints, sewage, septic tank, or grease trap waste, and toxic chemicals onto any property, streets, alleys, or sewers is prohibited. 
(c)  Sidewalks. All sidewalks, walkways, steps, and driveways located on all private property shall be maintained in a state of good repair. The owner and tenant of private property adjacent to all public sidewalks, walkways, and steps shall keep such sidewalks, walkways, and steps free of mud, debris, or other obstructions that would impair or prevent their use. 
(d)  Insect and rodent control. Every owner and every tenant of a building, structure, or property shall prevent any condition which can provide harborage and breeding of insects, rats, ants, vermin, mosquitoes, or other pests which can create a hazard or a nuisance to said building, structure, or property or are otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(e)  Glare and direct illumination. Exterior lights placed or erected on private property shall be shielded, placed or erected so as not to create a traffic hazard or a public nuisance. They shall be located so as to not produce direct illumination across the bounding property line. 
(f)  Trees, shrubs, and plants. Trees, shrubs, and plants that are dead or which are considered by the enforcement authority to be hazardous to persons or property shall be removed by the owner. 
(g)  Weeds and grass. See Chapter 13. Nuisances. Article IV. weeds, grass and other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation. 
(h)  Animal pens. The regulating of animals can be found in the Code of Ordinances, 
chapter 6. 
(1)  All animal pens, runs, exercise areas, fenced areas, houses, structures and enclosures shall be kept clean, sanitary, free from odor and excrement, insects, and other unsightly or objectionable matter which constitutes a public nuisance or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Pens and housing for animals shall be kept in a state of good repair. 
(i)  Accumulations of firewood, lumber, boxes, etc. Any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, pipes, firewood, or any other character of materials which may be used as a harborage by rats, rodents, or other vermin, or in which evidence of rats, rodents or other vermin is found shall be separated from a fence owned by adjacent property owner at a minimum of three (3) feet; and elevated not less than six (6) inches above ground, with a clear intervening space underneath. 
(j)  Fences. 
(1)  All fences shall be maintained structurally sound and not be out of vertical alignment more than twenty (20) percent. 
(2)  All damaged, rotting, removed or missing portions, shall be replaced with comparable materials to the remaining portion of the fence and shall be kept free from deterioration. 
(3)  A fence that has deteriorated to a condition that it is likely to fall shall be repaired, replaced, or removed. 
(4)  Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts, columns, or other structural members. 
(5)  All damaged or missing parts of chain link or metal fences shall be replaced or repaired. 
(k)  Accessory structures. 
(1)  Carports, awnings, patio covers, detached garages, sheds, storage buildings, benches, and other accessory structures shall be maintained structurally sound, and free of deterioration. 
(l)  Open storage. 
(1)  Open storage of material and equipment. 
a.  Commercial/industrial. All properties located within a commercial development with open storage of materials, equipment, vehicles, etc. shall screen such storage from residential property and from public view. 
b.  Residential. Open storage shall not be permitted in the front yard or on a front porch on any residential dwelling. Open storage shall be allowed in the back yard and shall be screened from adjacent properties and streets by a six-foot screening wall as described in section 7-292, definitions. Open storage shall include furniture other than furniture designed for outdoor use, household items, products of a commercial trade or business enterprise, whether such items are used or new, items of salvage such as scrap metal, papers, cans, lumber, recyclables and building materials not currently being used or held for immediate use upon the premises and other similar materials. 
(2)  Open carports. A carport cannot be used for any purpose other than motor vehicle or trailer parking and for items designed for outdoor use. It shall be unlawful to store household items such as stoves, refrigerators, weight benches, and any other items not specifically authorized herein. Items stored in carports must be designed for outdoor use. 
(m)  Burned structures. Whenever any building, structure or other property on the premises is partially burned, the owner or person in control shall, within thirty (30) days after completion of investigation by the fire rescue department, removed from the premises all refuse, debris, charred and partially burned lumber and material. The owner or person in control may request a waiver from the building official to satisfy any insurance claims. If such building or structure shall be burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner or person in control shall, within sixty (60) days, after completion of investigation by the fire rescue department, remove from the premises all the remaining portion of the building or structure. If the building or structure is to be repaired, work shall begin within sixty (60) days and progressively be completed in one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(n)  Parking and storage of vehicles. 
(1)  Residential properties. 
a.  Vehicle parking. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in charge of property zoned residential, duplex, townhouse or multifamily uses to permit the parking, standing, or storing of buses, trucks, tractors, service vehicles, motor homes, motorcycles, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, boats, personal water craft, aircraft, recreational vehicles, golf carts, go carts, trailers, house trailers, campers, camper shells, wheeled towing frames, semitrailers, truck beds mounted on chaises, mobile homes, all vehicles motorized and non motorized, within a front yard, except on the standard driveway of a lot with a garage/carport driveway connection to the street. For lots not having a garage/carport driveway connection, vehicles shall be parked in an area not larger than twenty (20) feet x forty (40) feet within the front yard. Any of the above referenced vehicles or equipment may be located to the rear of the required front yard line, but must not be visible from the right-of-way. 
Vehicles or equipment shall not block public sidewalks and must be in a good state of repair, have current registration and inspections (if applicable), be maintained in such condition as not to be unsightly, and must be parked or stored in a safe manner so as to protect the health and safety of all persons. Vehicles meeting the definition of either a junked or abandoned vehicle shall be governed by article [chapter] 13 of this Code. 
b.  Service vehicles. Overnight parking of two (2) service vehicles per residence is allowed, however the service vehicles must be two and one-half (2½) tons or under rated capacity. A service vehicle may be parked on a street, a driveway, or on an area designated for parking. 
c.  Recreational vehicles. Parking of recreational vehicles shall be limited to two (2) such vehicles per residence. Recreational vehicles must be parked in a driveway or an area designated for parking. Two (2) additional recreational vehicles may be allowed per residence provided that the recreational vehicle is stored to the rear or backyard of the residence and not visible from the right-of-way. At no time shall there be more than a maximum of four (4) recreational vehicles parked at any residence at one time. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any recreational vehicle upon any public street, alley or public right-of-way within the city, except that a recreational vehicle may be parked on a residential street for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. A recreational vehicle belonging to a person visiting a residential dwelling may be parked on a residential street for a period not to exceed five (5) consecutive days. 
In the event that both recreational and service vehicles are parked at a residence, no more than three (3) recreational or service vehicles shall be allowed and each vehicle must be parked in the driveway or area designated for parking or located to the rear of the required front yard line and must not be visible from the right-of-way. Of the three (3) vehicles, no more than two (2) of the vehicles may be recreational vehicles. 
(o)  Carts and recycling bins. All garbage and trash shall be placed inside cart(s) or recycling bin(s). Carts shall be kept closed to prevent littering and to render contents inaccessible to insects, rodents, and other animals. Each cart(s) or recycling bin shall be placed within three (3) feet of the curbside for collection the night before day of collection after 6:00 p.m., or day of collection no later than 5:00 a.m. Each cart(s) or recycling bin must be stored within the property no later than 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection. 
(p)  Reserved. 
(q)  Outdoor furniture, playground equipment and barbeque grills. It shall be unlawful to store more than one (1) setting of outdoor table and chairs full time in a residential front yard. In residential districts, this limitation shall apply to the front yard and street side yard of corner lots which are located at the intersection of two (2) improved streets. All playground equipment, outdoor grills, and fire pits must be in safe and operating condition. Only furniture and coverings designed for outdoor use shall be allowed. All other coverings and furniture shall be prohibited. Additional settings of table and chairs may be allowed for continuous periods of time not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-11E, § II, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008; Ord. No. 2012-O-08B, §§ 9—13, 11-20-2012)  
Secs. 7-296—7-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-O-12C, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 26, 2004, pertaining to the International Residential Code, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions were added as Art. X, §§ 7-301 and 7-302. 
 
Sec. 7-301. - Adoption of International Residential Code. 
(a)  The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices A through K, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the residential code of the City of Marble Falls, and is made a part hereof, as amended. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(c)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said International Residential Code as adopted and the other provisions of this section, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-12C, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.7, 7-16-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, adopted October 6, 2015 , amended § 7-301 to read as set out herein. Previously § 7-301 was titled "Adopted."  
Sec. 7-302. - Amendments. 
The following amendments to the International Residential Code are hereby adopted: 
Section R101.1 Insert: City of Marble Falls. 
Table R301.2 (1) Insert: R 301.2 (1). 
a.  Insert: Negligible. 
b.  Insert: Twelve inches. 
c.  Insert: Moderate to Heavy. 
d.  Insert: 90 M.P.H. 
e.  Insert: 28. 
f.  Insert: Seismic Design Category A. 
g.  Insert: The date of original entry into the flood insurance program is adopted by reference; and the date of current FIRM map is hereby adopted by reference. 
h.  Insert: No. 
i.  Insert: See www.ncdc.noaa.gov/tpsf.html. 
j.  Insert: See www.ncdc.noaa.gov/tpsf.html. 
Section 608.16.5 Insert: double check valve backflow prevention. 
Section P2603.5.1 Insert: Twelve inches in both locations. 
Section P3103.1 Insert: six inches. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-12C, § 2, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2012-O-07C, § II, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.8, 7-16-2019)  
Secs. 7-303—7-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-O-12G, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 26, 2004, pertaining to the International Energy Conservation Code, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions were added as Art. XI, §§ 7-311 and 7-312. 
 
Sec. 7-311. - Adoption of International Energy Conservation Code. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 7-312, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices A. and B. as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the energy code of the city, and is made a part hereof, as amended. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(c)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said International Energy Conservation Code as adopted and the other provisions of this section, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-12G, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-11B, § II, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, adopted October 6, 2015 , amended § 7-311 to read as set out herein. Previously § 7-311 was titled "Adopted."  
Sec. 7-312. - Amendments. 
The following section of the International Energy Conservation Code is hereby revised as follows: 
Section R406.4 Maximum Energy Rating Index: 
In conformity with Acts 2015, 84th R.S., ch. 541, General and Special Laws of Texas (to be codified at Tex. Health and Safety Code § 388.003), the Maximum Energy Rating Index for Climate Zones 2 and 3 are amended and shall be applied as follows; all other ratings remain unchanged: 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX, EFFECTIVE DATE 
2 	65 or lower from September 1, 2016, to August 31, 2019; 
2 	63 or lower from September 1, 2019, to August 31, 2022 
2 	59 or lower on or after September 1, 2022 
3 	65 or lower from September 1, 2016, to August 31, 2019 
3 	63 or lower from September 1, 2019, to August 31, 2022 
3 	59 or lower on or after September 1, 2022 
 
;adv=6;(Ord. No. 2003-O-12G, § 2, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-11B, § II, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-O-03B, § II, adopted March 7, 2017 , adopted provisions as follows: "The City of Marble Falls shall be categorized as climate zone 2."  
Secs. 7-313—7-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 7-321. - Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code. 
(a)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices A and B, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the fuel gas code of the City of Marble Falls, and is made a part hereof, as amended. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(c)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said International Fuel Gas Code as adopted and the other provisions of this section, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.9, 7-16-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, adopted October 6, 2015 , amended § 7-321 to read as set out herein. Previously § 7-321 was titled "Adopted."  
Sec. 7-322. - Amendments. 
(Reserved.) 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 )  
Secs. 7-323—7-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - TECHNICAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 7-331. - Adoption of technical construction standard specifications. 
(a)  The Technical Construction Standard Specifications of the City of Marble Falls, 1 st Ed., consisting of the Standard Specifications and the Standard Details (collectively the "TCSS Manual"), dated August 2017, as may be amended from time-to-time, is hereby adopted. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the TCSS Manual is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection and a copy shall be maintained on the city's website. 
(c)  All facilities constructed within the existing public right-of-way and utility easements, or newly dedicated right-of-way and utility easements which are intended to be dedicated to the city, shall comply with the applicable provisions of the TCSS Manual as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of the TCSS Manual shall be fully applicable and binding. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between the TCSS Manual and the laws of the state, or a federal requirement, the state or federal requirements shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over this article. 
(e)  The TCSS Manual shall be comprised of the construction requirements and standard details for trenching and backfilling, concrete, water system, sewer system, streets, sidewalks, and driveways, storm drainage, and as otherwise set forth in the TCSS Manual. The TCSS may also include any additional provisions or requirements of the city that pertain to the construction of site improvements such as streets, parking lots, driveways and sidewalk paving, storm drainage structures, utility lines and facilities, screening walls/fences, retaining walls, landscaping and irrigation improvements, street lighting or signage, restricted access (gated) entrances to any type of development, and other similar improvements. 
(f)  The city manager or designee shall have the authority to determine whether or not the engineering plans for any type of site improvement are in conformance with the city's TCSS Manual. 
( Ord. No. 2017-0-O9D, § II, 9-19-2017 )  
Secs. 7-332—7-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE 
 
Sec. 7-341. - Adoption of International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(a)  The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted, and designated as the swimming pool and spa code of the City of Marble Falls, and is made a part hereof, as amended. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-02C , § II, 2-18-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-O-02C , § II, adopted Feb. 18, 2020, set out provisions intended for use as § 7-332. For purposes of future expansion of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 7-341.  
Chapter 7.5 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-O-3, §§ 1—10, adopted Mar. 10, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion herein as Ch. 7.5, §§ 7.5-1—7.5-10, was at the discretion of the editor. Sections 11 through 14, providing for severability, repeal, publication and effective date have been omitted from codification. 
 
Sec. 7.5-1. - Citation. 
This chapter shall be cited as the cemetery ordinance of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 1, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 7.5-2. - Definitions. 
Cemetery or city cemetery. The property owned and managed by the City of Marble Falls, Texas, located at the southwest corner of the intersection of South Fourth Street and Avenue S., and so designated. 
Person. Any person, firm, corporation or association. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 2, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 7.5-3. - Sales/purchase price and payment limitations. 
(a)  Any available lot in the cemetery may be purchased by a person upon payment of the sum of nine-hundred dollars ($900.00) for residents or one-thousand one-hundred dollars ($1,100.00) for non-residents for each lot. A payment plan consisting of two (2) payments, an initial payment of fifty (50) percent and the remaining fifty (50) percent within six (6) months, is available to those demonstrating a hardship, subject to subsection (b). Failure to make final payment within six (6) months will result in loss of the lot and an administrative fee of half of the initial payment. 
(b)  The full purchase price shall be received by the city prior to any burial service or installation or construction begins. 
(c)  Any available niche in the columbarium may be purchased by any person in accordance with the following table: 
Inside niches 
Rows 1, 2, 6, and 7 .....$1,300.00/per niche 
Rows 3, 4, and 5 ..... 1,600.00/per niche 
Outside niches 
Rows 1, 2, 6, and 7 .....$1,100.00/per niche 
Rows 3, 4, and 5 ..... 1,400.00/per niche 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 3, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 2003-O-8C, § II(a), 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2004-O-1D, § II, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2004-O-9A, § II, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 2011-O-10A, § 2, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. 2014-O-08G, § 2, 9-2-2014 )  
Sec. 7.5-4. - Application of other city ordinances and state laws. 
All ordinances of the city or state law relating to and defining public offenses shall, insofar as the same shall be applicable, be in full force and effect in the city cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 4, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 7.5-5. - Operation of motor vehicles and parking. 
No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle within the cemetery except over a roadway open for vehicular traffic, or obstruct any path or driveway within the cemetery open to vehicular traffic. No person shall use the cemetery grounds or any driveway therein as a public thoroughfare or operate any motor vehicle through said grounds except for purposes of making deliveries in the cemetery or visiting any grave site. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 5, 3-10-88) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25.  
Sec. 7.5-6. - Regulations governing improvements to and use of the city cemetery. 
(a)  All opening and closing of any burial site shall be at the sole cost, expense and responsibility of the funeral home, its employees or agents conducting interment. 
(b)  Any funeral home, its employees or agent, shall provide the city twenty-four (24) hours prior notice of interment, so that the identity of the party being interred and ownership of the site shall be determined, and so that the plot may be staked for opening and closing. 
(c)  All improvements, construction and/or installation of any monument base, foundation, curbing, bench, memorial, etc. shall have prior approval by the city's code enforcement personnel. All improvements shall be made of stone, brick, cement, or rock. 
(d)  Curbing shall be erected only after prior approval of the city's code enforcement personnel, providing prior written assurance that the site will be covered with approved material for the prevention or retardation of weed growth. 
(e)  Improvements that become damaged or have deteriorated to the point that it is no longer functional in the opinion of the city may be repaired or removed by the city after such condition has existed for sixty (60) or more days. Prior to removal the city shall post a notice of intent to remove the improvement at the cemetery lot where the improvement is located and such notice shall remain posted for at least thirty (30) days prior to removal of the improvement. 
(f)  All new gravesites must be marked by the deed holder or next of kin within one (1) year of interment with a minimum of a 2-0 x 1-0 x 0-4 grass marker with the first name, last name, and date of death. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 6, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 88-O-10, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 99-O-5F, § II, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2003-O-8C, § II(b), 8-25-2003; Ord. No. 2003-0-10H, § I, 10-27-2003; Ord. No. 2014-O-08G, § 2, 9-2-2014 )  
Sec. 7.5-7. - Fencing prohibited. 
No fencing of any kind shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 7, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 7.5-8. - Hours of operation/open to the public. 
The city cemetery shall be open to the public only between the hours of sunrise to sunset (dawn to dusk), seven (7) days per week throughout the entire year. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 8, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 7.5-9. - Immunity and hold harmless. 
Upon the purchase of any cemetery lot, the purchaser shall in writing hold the city harmless from any claim or cause of action which may arise due to vandalism, theft or damage to any memorial, monument or other personal property committed by any third party, other than negligent acts committed by the city, its employees or agents. The party performing the opening and closing of each burial site shall hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any claim or action which may arise from any damage to the site, surrounding sites, monuments, foundations or memorials by reason of such opening and closing of the site, including all costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 9, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 88-O-10, § 2, 10-11-88)  
Sec. 7.5-10. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each day the violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. Furthermore, any repeat offender shall be prohibited from any further access to the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 88-O-3, § 10, 3-10-88)  
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; emergency medical services vehicle, Ch. 9; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; police, Ch. 18; drought contingency plan, § 26-48 et seq. 
State Law reference— Texas Act of 1975, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6889—7. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Director—Office created; authority generally. 
(a)  There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(b)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 8-2. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility or such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Ord. No. 83-0-12, § 1, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-2. - Same—Powers, duties, responsibilities. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the director shall include maintaining an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this chapter, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city; 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations; 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city's emergency management plan; 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy; 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(8)  The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 4, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-3. - Participation in county-wide program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 3, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-4. - Local organization established in emergency plan. 
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this ordinance. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 5, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-5. - Unlawful operation of warning signals. 
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 6, 12-13-83) 
State Law reference— False alarms, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.06.  
Sec. 8-6. - Conflicting provisions—Chapter supersedes existing conflicting ordinances, etc. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 7, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-7. - Same—Conflicts with state, federal statutes or military orders. 
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 8, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-8. - Nonliability of city, persons, providing public shelter during emergencies. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 9, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-9. - Expending public funds; binding city by contract, etc. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 10, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-10. - Unlawful obstruction of organization; false representation as member of organization. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 11, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 8-11. - Oath. 
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-O-12, § 12, 12-13-83)  
Chapter 9 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-O-08D , § II, adopted Aug. 21, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 8, §§ 9-1—9-4, and enacted a new Ch. 9 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 90-O-1A, §§ A—D, adopted Jan. 9, 1990; Ord. No. 93-O-10, §§ A—D, adopted Oct. 26, 1993; Ord. No. 2008-O-09G, § 2, adopted Oct. 13, 2008; and Ord. No. 2011-O-05A, § 2, adopted May 7, 2011. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 8; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Emergency Medical Services Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 44470. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Emergency medical services. 
(a)  The City of Marble Falls shall provide for emergency medical services within the city limits (the "service area") of the city by contracting for such services with an emergency medical services provider according to terms and conditions the city determines will provide emergency medical services equal to or better than the requirements set out in Chapter 773 of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(b)  The emergency medical services provider selected by the city may respond to any emergency calls outside of the service area when requested to do so, but calls within the service area shall have priority. 
(Ord. No. 2018-O-08D , § II, 8-21-2018)  
Chapter 9.5 - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-O-3D, adopted March 24, 1998, enacted new fair housing provisions which have been included herein as replacing former provisions codified as Ch. 9.5, and which derived from Ord. No. 95-O-11F, adopted Nov. 28, 1995. 
Cross reference— Department of housing and community development, § 2-76; housing official, § 7-104 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9.5-1. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, age; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 1, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless the context requires otherwise: 
(a)  Age means the calendar age of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
(b)  Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
(c)  Director means the director of the human relations department or authorized assistant. 
(d)  Discriminatory housing practice means an act which is unlawful under this chapter. 
(e)  Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
(f)  Family means a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
(g)  Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
(h)  Marital status means individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person. 
(i)  Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of eighteen (18). 
(j)  Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
(k)  Physical or mental handicap means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
(l)  Physical or mental impairment shall include: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)  Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
(m)  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(n)  Senior adult means a person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 2, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-3. - Interpretation and effect. 
This chapter shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as mended for the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them to Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this act, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by Federal Court interpretations of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 3, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-4. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted, it shall be unlawful: 
(a)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(b)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(c)  To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicated any preference, limitation of discrimination based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood or age, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(d)  To represent to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(e)  To induce or to attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 4, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-5. - Discrimination in housing financing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of such person or such persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of the present or prospective owners, leasers, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 5, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-6. - Discrimination in providing brokerage service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 6, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-7. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because such individual, group or business has complied with the provisions of this chapter or has exercised in good faith rights under this chapter, or has enjoyed the benefits of this chapter, or because such individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the director. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 7, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-8. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that: 
a.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time; and, 
b.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period; and, 
c.  Such bona fide private individual does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such persons behalf, under any voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time; and, 
d.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental service of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and, 
e.  The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than for (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwelling if: 
(1)  He has within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principle in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or, 
(2)  He has within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or, 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by five (5) or more families. 
(c)  Nothing is this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operated for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, which such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar occupying such housing accommodation. 
(f)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital status. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall bar a person who owns, operated, or controls rental dwellings whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels or property, from reserving any grouping of dwelling for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to he prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this policy. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 8, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-9. - Violations. 
No person shall violate any provision of this chapter or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this policy. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 9, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 9.5-10. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The director of human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this chapter. The director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city employees. 
(b)  Complaints generally: 
(1)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory practice or believed that he will be irrevocable injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as the "charged party") may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person upon request. 
(2)  The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  All complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred to as the "respondent") who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(4)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(5)  If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  Investigation and conciliation: 
(1)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt and fill investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes accepted for investigation purposes, the director or investigator shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charged comes within the provisions of this policy. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not come within the provisions of this policy, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not. 
(2)  If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the court shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(3)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the director shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this chapter. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the director, the commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence is a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(4)  Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the human relations commission of the city must, upon a majority vote, refer the case to other agencies as appropriate. 
(d)  Penalty. If a discrimination housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred to municipal court, the respondent shall be assessed a penalty of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation. 
(Ord. No. 98-O-3D, § 10, 3-24-98)  
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, adopted on July 14, 2008 specifically changed all references in the Code from City Fire Department to City Fire Rescue Department. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; emergency management, Ch. 8; authority of officers of Fire Rescue Department to direct traffic, § 25-33. 
State Law reference— Fire regulations, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1068. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Arson; reward for help in conviction. 
(a)  The city hereby offers a reward of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 37-O-4A, §§ 1, 2, 4-14-37)  
Secs. 10-2—10-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; officers generally, § 2-31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-16. - Office created. 
The office of fire marshal of the city is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1A, § I, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-17. - Appointment; qualifications; duties. 
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the mayor. The fire marshal shall be skilled in investigations, inspections and management and shall devote his time to educating the public in fire safety while enforcing federal, state and local laws as they pertain to fire prevention. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1A, § II, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-18. - Authority to take testimony, summon witnesses, administer oaths. 
(a)  The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation of a fire is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony on oath of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this chapter, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmation to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1A, § III, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-19. - Authority to order disconnection of utilities in case of serious fire hazard. 
When the fire marshal or his agent determines that the condition of any premises creates a serious fire hazard dangerous to human life, he may order the utility company or companies to disconnect the utility service until the hazardous condition is removed. In cases of emergency or in situations where the utility company does not respond to or comply with the order of the fire marshal or his agent, the fire marshal or his agent shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause the disconnection of the utility service. Any person whose property is affected by the act or order of the fire marshal shall have the right of direct appeal to the office of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1A, § IV, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-20. - Investigations—Private, separation of witnesses. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigations are held. Witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1A, § IIIB, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-21. - Same—Misconduct of witnesses. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during the investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as provided in this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1A, § IIIC, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-22. - Fees. 
Fire marshal inspection fees shall be determined by ordinance of the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-2A, § I, 1-16-84; Ord. No. 2006-O-11C, § 2, 12-11-2006)  
Secs. 10-23—10-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of the bureau of fire prevention means the fire marshal. 
Corporation counsel means the city attorney. 
Municipality means the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § III, 2-26-85; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-37. - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 10-37.1, the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices A through J and L, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by this article, is hereby adopted as the code of the City of Marble Falls for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Marble Falls and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code is incorporated herein by reference and shall be filed in the office of development services for permanent record and inspection. 
(c)  In the event of conflict between the provisions of this article and other sections of the Code of Ordinances of the city, the more stringent provision shall apply. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said International Fire Code as adopted and the other provisions of this article, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and taking precedence over the former. 
(d)  Only the provisions of this article that are not expressly prohibited by state or other law are intended to be adopted. 
(e)  Any section of the International Fire Code, shall, where applicable, be amended to provide that the applicable name of the governmental entity is the City of Marble Falls. 
(f)  Any section of any International Code adopted by the City of Marble Falls, shall, where applicable, be amended to provide that fines and penalties for a violation to such International Code shall be those described in Section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. An offense under this Chapter is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § I, 2-26-85; Ord. No. 2003-O-12D, § 1, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-11C, § 1, 12-11-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.10, 7-16-2019)  
Sec. 10-37.1. - Amendments; limits. 
The following amendments to the International Fire Code are hereby adopted: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Marble Falls. 
Section 102.1; add #5: 
102.1 Construction and design provisions. 
5. The provisions of this code apply to buildings built under the IRC and IBC. 
Amend Section 102.4 to read as follows: 
102.4 Application of other codes. The design and construction of new structures shall comply with this code, and other codes as applicable, and any alterations, additions, changes in use or changes in structures required by this code, which are within the scope of this and other codes shall be made in accordance therewith. 
Add Section 104.7.3 to read as follows. 
104.7.3 Third Party Plans Review. The Fire Code Official may require any plans submitted to be reviewed by an outside professional engineer or appropriate specialist when, in the opinion of the code authority, there exists special technical knowledge to conduct a satisfactory review of the plans and such special knowledge is not available among the fire department staff. Fees associated with outside plan reviews are the sole responsibility of the submitting party. The person or firm conducting the plan review must be an unbiased third party who meets the approval of the submitting party and the City of Marble Falls. 
Add Section 106.2.3 as follows: 
106.2.3 Re-inspections. The Fire Marshal or his designated representative shall inspect all buildings, premises, or portions thereof as often as may be necessary. An initial inspection and two re-inspections shall be made free of charge. If the Fire Marshal or his designee is required to make follow-up inspections after the initial inspection and two re-inspections to determine whether a violation or violations observed during the previous inspection have been corrected, a fee shall be charged. The occupant, lessee, or person making use of the building or premises shall pay said fee or fees within 30 days of being billed as a condition to continued lawful occupancy of the building or premises. 
Add Section 106.2.4 to read as follows: 
Section 106.2.4 Investigation fee. An investigation shall be made whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced without first obtaining a permit. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. The investigation fee shall be double the amount of the permit fee required by this code not to exceed $2,000.00. 
Amend Section 109.3 to read as follows: 
Insert: Misdemeanor, $2,000.00, 0 (zero) days. 
Add Section 109.4.2 to read as follows: 
109.4.2 Re-inspections. The Fire Marshal or his designated representative shall inspect all buildings, premises, or portions thereof as often as may be necessary. An initial inspection and two re-inspections shall be made free of charge. If the Fire Marshal or his designee is required to make follow-up inspections after the initial inspection and two re-inspections to determine whether a violation or violations observed during the previous inspection have been corrected, a fee shall be charged. The occupant, lessee, or person making use of the building or premises shall pay said fee or fees within 30 days of being billed as a condition to continued lawful occupancy of the building or premises. 
Add Section 113.4.2 to read as follows: 
113.4.2 Re-inspection fees. A fee established by ordinance shall be collected for any re-inspection in excess of two inspections to enforce or ensure compliance with a provision of this chapter. The fee must be paid within 30 days or prior to any further inspections being conducted at the site. 
Amend Section 503.3 to read as follows: 
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
(1)  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
(2)  Signs - Signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Code Official. 
Add Sections 503.4.2 through 503.4.5 to read as follows: 
503.4.2 An operator of a motor vehicle shall not stop, stand, or park an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in a fire lane to temporarily load or unload merchandise or passengers. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle, or to allow a vehicle owned by him to stop, stand, or park, within any fire lane, on either public or private property. Persons who park a vehicle or allow a vehicle to be stopped, stood or parked in such area, whether it is on public or private property, may be cited for and charged with a violation. Proof that a person owned a vehicle shall constitute prima facie proof that the person parked the vehicle or allowed the vehicle to be parked in such area. 
503.4.3 Presumption. In a prosecution under this section, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and place where the offense occurred. If any vehicle found by a person authorized to enforce this chapter to be in violation of this chapter is unattended at the time of the violation is discovered and the identity of the operator is not apparent, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered as owner shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
503.4.4 Liability. No law-enforcement officer, fire officer in charge or the fire officer's delegate or fire marshal or fire marshal's deputy, enforcing this chapter, and no one who removes a vehicle from a prohibited area as described in this chapter or stores such a vehicle, having been directed to remove or store such vehicle by a person authorized to enforce this chapter, shall be liable for criminal prosecution for any conduct directly relating to the enforcement of this chapter or be liable to any person for negligence, resulting in the injury to or loss or destruction of any real or personal property if such negligence arises out of the enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that such persons shall be liable for loss or destruction of any real or personal property caused by acts or omissions amounting to gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct. 
503.4.5 Enforcement. The Fire Marshal or any member of the Marble Falls Fire Rescue designated by the Fire Marshal, the Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department are hereby authorized to issue parking citations for any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction found parked, whether attended or unattended in or upon a designated fire lane and may have such obstruction removed by towing it away. Such vehicle or obstruction may be redeemed by payment of the towage and storage charges at the owner's expense. 
Amend Section 505.1 to read as follows: 
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property and from all rear alleyways/access. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained. 
Add Section 506.3 Elevator key box to read as follows: 
506.3 Elevator Key Box. A key box of an approved type shall be installed near elevators to hold keys necessary for access to elevator machinery and controls. For elevators with Phase I recall, the key box must be located on the designated recall floor, above the recall switch. When no recall feature exists, the elevator key box should be located above the elevator call button, approximately six feet above the floor level or other approved location by the Fire Code Official. The elevator key box may contain keys for the machine room door, secondary level door, pit door, roof door, fire emergency service, hoistway access, mechanical hoistway access devices and miscellaneous switch keys. 
Add Section 511 Emergency Radio Communications to read as follows: 
SECTION 511 
EMERGENCY RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 
511.1 Signal strength in buildings. In all new and existing buildings in which the type of construction or distance from an operational emergency services antenna or dispatch site does not provide adequate frequency or signal strength as determined by the code official, the building owner shall be responsible for providing the equipment, installation and maintenance of said equipment in a manner to strengthen the radio signal. The radio signal shall meet the minimum input / output strengths according to the emergency radio system's provider and system manager. 
Add Section 512 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher to read as follows: 
SECTION 512 
ELEVATOR CAR TO ACCOMMODATE AMBULANCE STRETCHER. 
512 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher. In buildings three stories or more above grade plane or three or more stories below grade plane, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24-inch by 84-inch (610 mm by 2134 mm) with not less than 5-inch (127mm) radius corners, in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoistway door frame. 
Amend Section 907.2.3 to add exception 1.1 to read as follows: 
1.1. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-12D, §§ 2, 3, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-11C, § 2, 12-11-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-12B, § II.B, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-07B , § II.11, 7-16-2019)  
Sec. 10-38. - Enforcement. 
The code adopted in this article shall be enforced by the fire marshal or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § II, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 10-39. - Permits. 
The fire marshal, the fire chief and the code enforcement officer shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code adopted in this article. The code enforcement officer and the fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in their offices, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § IV, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 10-40. - Exclusion of persons from scene of fire. 
The city manager, any officer of the fire rescue department, and any other officer of the city is hereby authorized and empowered to keep away from the vicinity of any fire all disorderly, idle or suspicious persons, and to arrest, restrain and imprison any such persons who shall fail or refuse to obey orders, or in any way interfere or put themselves in the way of the firefighters, or in any way interfere with or handle any goods. All such persons so arrested, restrained or imprisoned shall be deemed and held guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § V, 2-26-85; Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 )  
Sec. 10-41. - City officers, citizens, to aid in extinguishing fires, preserving property. 
It shall be the duty of the city officers and all other persons within the city to aid in extinguishing fires and preserving property and goods in danger of being stolen at fires. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § VI, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 10-42. - Combustibles—Open flames prohibited near. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry in or through any public or private place containing hay, straw, cotton, shavings or other combustible material, any lighted match, candle, lamp, torch, brand, or other fire, unless the same is securely enclosed and protected in a covered vessel. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § VII, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 10-43. - Same—Storage near structures using fire. 
No person shall deposit or keep on hand in any alley, street, lot or other place in this city, within fifty (50) feet of any dwelling or other structure where fire is kept or used, any hay, straw, shucks, fodder, shavings or other combustible material, unless the same is securely enclosed and covered so as to protect it from flying sparks or fire. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § VIII, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 10-44. - Cotton yards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a cotton yard or other accumulation of cotton within the fire limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, strike or ignite any match, or carry or use any fire in any house, or in or upon any lot or enclosure where any cotton is stored or placed in the city. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, §§ IX, X, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 10-45. - Fire apparatus; unlawful use of or injuring generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, under any pretext whatever, other than for the purposes for which they were intended in the Fire Rescue Department, to take or use any engine, truck, ladder, bucket, ax or other apparatus belonging to or in the possession of the department, or any member or company thereof, or to break, deface or injure the same. 
(Ord. No. 85-O-2, § XI, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 10-45.1. - Life safety code adopted. 
NFPA 101, Life Safety Code Handbook, 2015 edition, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein and made a part of hereof for all intents and purposes, and shall apply to repairs, alterations, renovations, and maintenance of all commercial buildings and appurtenances thereto. A copy of said code shall be maintained in the office of the city secretary. 
( Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, 10-6-2015 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-09E, § II, adopted October 6, 2015 , set out provisions for use herein as art. III, div. 1, § 10-46. Inasmuch as a § 10-46 already exists in art. III, div. 2, and at the editor's discretion, those provisions have been included as § 10-45.1.  
DIVISION 2. - CONTROLLED BURNING 
 
Sec. 10-46. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases which are not defined in this section but are defined in Title 30, Section 111.219 of the Texas Administrative Code shall be given the meanings set forth within Title 30, Section 111.203 of the Texas Administrative Code. Other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Controlled burn or burn means the controlled application of fire to naturally-occurring vegetative fuels under specified environmental conditions and confined to a predetermined area, following appropriate planning and precautionary measures and after having provided notice of the planned burn to the city's Fire Rescue Department in the manner provided for by this article. 
Extinguished means the absence of any visible flames, glowing coals, or smoke. 
Structures containing sensitive receptors means a manmade structure used for human residence or business, the containment of livestock, or the housing of sensitive live vegetation. The term "manmade structure" does not include such things as range fences, roads, bridges, hunting blinds or facilities used solely for the storage of hay or other livestock feeds. The term "sensitive live vegetation" means vegetation that has the potential to be damaged by smoke and heat, including, but not limited to: nursery production, mushroom cultivation, pharmaceutical plant production, or laboratory experiments involving plants. 
Sunrise/sunset means the official sunrise/sunset as set forth in the United States Naval Observatory tables available from National Weather Service offices. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2B, § 3, 3-14-2005)  
Sec. 10-47. - Outdoor burning prohibited. 
No person within the corporate limits of the city may cause, suffer, allow or permit any outdoor burning, except as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2B, § 3, 3-14-2005)  
Sec. 10-48. - Exceptions. 
The following activities shall be exempt from the requirements and prohibitions of this article: 
(1)  Outdoor burning related to the training of fire-fighting personnel as authorized by state law. 
(2)  Outdoor burning related to recreational or ceremonial purposes or in the noncommercial preparation of food, or used exclusively for the purpose of supplying warmth during cold weather. Provided however, that such outdoor burning shall only be exempt as long as the outdoor burning does not involve the burning of any of the prohibited materials listed in section 10-49(a). 
(3)  Outdoor burning related to a permit or authorization obtained from the TCEQ. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2B, § 3, 3-14-2005)  
Sec. 10-49. - Requirements for allowing outdoor burning. 
Outdoor burning is authorized by this article upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Outdoor burning shall be limited to the burning of brush, grass, leaves, trees and vegetation generated only from the property where the burn is to take place. Electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics, non-wood construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, tires, natural or synthetic rubber and household garbage shall not be burned. 
(2)  Burning shall be commenced and conducted only when wind direction and other meteorological conditions are such that smoke and other pollutants will not cause adverse effects to any public road, landing strip, navigable water, or off-site structure containing sensitive receptor(s). 
(3)  If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow onto or across a road or highway so as to obscure the vision of motorist, the responsible party shall extinguish the burn. 
(4)  Burning must be conducted downwind of or at least three hundred (300) feet (ninety (90) meters) from any structure containing sensitive receptors located on adjacent properties unless prior written approval is obtained from the adjacent occupant with possessory control. Evidence of such written permission shall be located on the site of the burn and be available for inspection at the request of the city fire marshal or his/her designee. 
(5)  Burning shall be conducted in compliance with the following meteorological and timing considerations: 
a.  The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one (1) hour after sunrise and be completed on the same day not later than one (1) hour before sunset. A responsible party shall be present at all times during the active burn phase and when the fire is progressing. In cases where residual fires and/or smoldering objects continue to emit smoke after this time, such areas shall be extinguished if the smoke from these areas has the potential to create a nuisance or traffic hazard condition. In no case shall the extent of the burn area be allowed to increase after this time. 
b.  Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind speed is predicted to be less than six (6) miles per hour (mph) (five (5) knots) or greater than twenty-three (23) mph (twenty (20) knots) during the burn period. 
c.  Burning shall not be conducted during periods of actual or predicted persistent low-level atmospheric temperature inversions. 
(6)  Attendance. Any open burning shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be available for immediate use such as, but not limited to, a water hose connected to a water supply, portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-A rating, water barrel, dirt, sand, front end loader or water truck. The fire-extinguishing equipment that is available on site shall be comparable to the size of the fire. 
(7)  Due to radiant heat the burn area must be no closer than fifty (50) feet from any structure. 
a.  Residential lots. Burn piles on residential lots, and open lots of less than one acre, are limited in size to no greater than five (5) feet by five (5) feet in width and four (4) feet in height. No more than one (1) pile is to be burned at one (1) time. 
b.  Open lots. Burn piles on open land of at least one (1) acre are limited to ten (10) feet by ten (10) feet in width and ten (10) feet in height. No more than one (1) pile is to be burned at one (1) time. 
c.  Size of burn piles can be changed by special permit. 
(8)  When outdoor burning bans are instituted by the county judge or the emergency management director the ban will supersede this article and outdoor burning authorized by this article will be prohibited, except by special permit, until the ban is lifted. 
(9)  Prior to the initiation of any outdoor burn, any person proposing to conduct an outdoor burn shall obtain a burn permit from the city's fire rescue department. Prior to initiation of any outdoor burning the burn permit must be approved. The permit application shall include the following: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the landowner where the burn will be conducted, 
b.  Address of the site of the burn, 
c.  Approximate start date and end date, and 
d.  Identify a responsible party who can be contacted during the burn period, 
e.  Any other information required by the fire chief. 
(10)  If at any time the city's fire rescue department determines that a proposed outdoor burn cannot be conducted without a risk to health, safety or property, the fire rescue department shall notify the responsible person and the burn shall not be authorized. If the burn is already underway at the time of the fire rescue department's determination, then the responsible party shall immediately extinguish the fire. If the responsible party cannot be located or refuses to extinguish the fire, the fire rescue department is authorized to enter the property and extinguish the fire. 
(11)  The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person or property owner liable for the expense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2B, § 3, 3-14-2005; Ord. No. 2010-O-12A, § II, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 2017-O-08E, § II, 8-15-2017 )  
Sec. 10-50. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Civil and criminal penalties. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Criminal prosecution. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a provision of this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this article is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(c)  Civil remedies. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this article and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the article or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the article; and 
(2)  A civil penalty up to one hundred dollars ($500.00) a day when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the article and after receiving notice committed acts in violation of the article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the article; and 
(3)  Any other available relief. 
(d)  Any property owner or occupant who violates any section of this division shall be civilly liable to pay the fees contemplated in sections 10-51 and 10-52. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2B, § 3, 3-14-2005; Ord. No. 2010-O-12A, § II, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 2017-O-08E, § II, 8-15-2017 )  
Sec. 10-51. - Fire operations service fees. 
(a)  The fire department, or its authorized agent, shall send an invoice to the owner or occupant of the property at which the following fire operations services were required due to a violation of this division: 
(1)  The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of cost for services provided inside the city limits as well as those provided outside the city limits. The cost may include but shall not be limited to, the following: 
Communications for dispatching. 
(2)  Additional personnel and fire fighter manpower. 
(3)  Apparatus for operations response. 
(4)  Protective equipment that has been damaged or contaminated. 
(5)  Specialized fire protection supplies. 
(6)  Firefighting equipment that has been damaged or contaminated. 
(7)  Fire equipment used. 
(8)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Fees and charges described above may be combined or separated and shall be billed as described in the master fee schedule, appendix C, which may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 2017-O-08E, § II, 8-15-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-O-08E, § II, adopted August 15, 2017 , repealed and replaced § 10-51, in its entirety. Former § 10-51 pertained to "Fee collection," and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-O-12A, § II, adopted December 21, 2010.  
Sec. 10-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-O-08E, § II, adopted August 15, 2017 , repealed § 10-52, in its entirety. Former § 10-52 pertained to "Fire operations service fees," and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-O-12A, § II, adopted December 21, 2010.  
Secs. 10-53—10-61. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit use of any pyrotechnic, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015(22); regulation and offenses as to fireworks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9205. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks means and includes any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by and designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display. Such term shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, whether specially designated and defined in this section or not. 
Person means and includes any natural person, association of persons, partnership, corporation, agent or officer of a corporation. Such term shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and administrators. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 1, 1-17-84) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-63. - Prohibitions generally. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer or have in his possession with intent to sell, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 2, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-64. - Permitted transportation. 
It shall be lawful to transport I.C.C. Class C Common Fireworks, as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9205, by motor vehicles which meet the Interstate Commerce Commission requirement for transporting I.C.C. Class C Common Fireworks and equipped with at least one (1) ten-pound fire extinguisher for extinguishing Type B fire, along and upon state and federally numbered highways within the city. It shall further be lawful for bona fide fireworks dealers to transport I.C.C. Class C Common Fireworks, as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 9205 along and upon state and federally numbered highways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 3, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-65. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroads, which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any railroad for use in railroad operation, nor shall this article apply to any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried by a vessel at sea for its own use and which signal flare or rocket is transported or received or stored for use only as ship's stores. This article shall apply to signal flares or rockets used for military or police purposes, nor shall this article apply to starter's blanks and pistols used at athletic events. 
(b)  Toy paper pistol caps which contain less than twenty-five one-hundredths grains of explosive compounds shall not be affected by this article and the sale and use is permitted at all times. 
(c)  Land that is annexed by the City of Marble Falls wherein an existing fireworks sales operation or lease has been in operation during the preceding year prior to annexation shall be allowed to continue to operate for five (5) years following the annexation of said land by the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, §§ 4, 5, 1-17-1984; Ord. No. 2012-O-11A, § II, 11-6-2012)  
Sec. 10-66. - Illegal fireworks a nuisance; seizure; destruction, injunctive relief. 
The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The fire marshal is directed and required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found in violation of this article and any member of the fire prevention division of the building department, any police officer of the city or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the fire marshal can be notified in order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section. Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the fire marshal, or both, for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to aid the fire marshal in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks. It shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 6, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-67. - Right of entry to enforce article; limitation. 
The fire marshal is hereby authorized to enter any building where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to inspect the same for the presence of such fireworks; but such authority does not include the right to enter a private dwelling or apartment. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 8, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-68. - Violations. 
Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell any fireworks in violation of this article shall be fined as provided in section 1-9 for each offense. If the fireworks are separately wrapped or packaged, the doing or omitting to do any act prohibited by this article shall be a separate offense as to each such separately wrapped or separately packaged fireworks. Each day that a violation of this article shall continue with respect to any package of fireworks shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 18, 1-17-84)  
Secs. 10-69—10-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DISPLAYS 
 
Sec. 10-81. - When permitted. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a public display of fireworks made under the terms and conditions of this division and such a display shall be permitted, upon compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 9, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-82. - Permit—Application. 
Any adult person or any firm, co-partnership, corporation or association planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make written application for a permit to the building department at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the date of the proposed display. No city permit shall be issued until a permit issued for such purposes has been issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 10, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-83. - Same—Issuance or denial; term; transfer. 
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to make an investigation as to whether the display as proposed by the applicant for a permit under this article shall be of such a character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person, and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to the conditions prescribed in this article. If the application is approved, a permit shall be issued for the public display by the building department. Such permit shall be for a period of time designated on the permit, but shall not exceed fourteen (14) days, and the permit shall not be transferable. In the event that the application is denied by the building department, he shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 11, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-84. - Insurance; bond. 
The applicant for a display permit under this article shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that he carries compensation insurance for his employees as provided by the laws of the state, and he shall file with the code enforcement officer, a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the state, for the benefit of the person named therein as assured, as evidence of ability to respond in damages in at least the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), such policy to be approved by the city. In lieu of insurance, the applicant may file with the city a bond in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) issued by an authorized surety company approved by the city conditioned upon the applicant's payment of all damages to persons or property which shall or may result from or be caused by such public display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the applicant or his agents, servants, employees or subcontractors in the presentation of the public display. The city shall also be designated as an insured by the insurance policy and bonded by the bond. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 12, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-85. - Only aerial displays permitted. 
Any fireworks display authorized under this article shall be limited to an aerial display. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 13, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-86. - Material not to be stored in city. 
The material to be used for a public display authorized by this article shall not be stored within the city limits, but shall be brought in on the day of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place of display for further handling and storage. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 14, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-87. - Hazardous conditions prohibited. 
No public display of fireworks shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or property, and this determination shall be within the sound discretion of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 15, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-88. - Qualifications of persons handling fireworks. 
The persons handling the display of fireworks under this article shall be competent, adult persons and experienced pyrotechnic operators approved by the fire marshal. No person not approved by the fire marshal shall handle fireworks at the public display. The names of the experienced pyrotechnic operators shall be designated on the permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 16, 1-17-84)  
Sec. 10-89. - Firefighters to be present. 
For each public display of fireworks under this article, not less than two (2) firemen of the city shall be in attendance during the display. The expense of such firemen at the display shall be borne by the applicant for the permit and shall be paid in advance at the time of the application for the permit. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-1, § 17, 1-17-84)  
ARTICLE V. - CREATION OF CITY FIRE RESCUE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 10-90. - Establishment. 
(a)  There shall be maintained a Fire Rescue Department to provide a means for protection against conflagrations and other emergencies and the city shall provide for the maintenance, support, and regulation of the Fire Rescue Department. 
(b)  The Marble Falls Fire Rescue Department is established. It shall be composed of various member groups, including, but not limited to, paid, part-time, auxiliary firefighters, and/or support staff, as well as civilian personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-10D, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 10-91. - Functions. 
The Fire Rescue Department shall: 
(a)  Protect life and property from fire and explosion hazards by prevention and suppression. 
(b)  Inspect commercial property for fire and safety hazards. 
(c)  Enforce the law and ordinances related to fire, explosion and life safety. 
(d)  Respond to and take charge of hazardous material releases. 
(e)  Perform confined space rescues, trench rescues, swift water rescues, high angle rescues, and any other rescue situation in order to protect life and property. 
(f)  Conduct public fire education to all aspects of the community. 
(g)  Perform construction plan reviews to ensure public safety. 
(h)  Aggressively pursue criminal investigations in all cases of arson. 
(i)  Maintain all records in an efficient and orderly manner. 
(j)  Provide administrative support and records management relating to the foregoing functions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-10D, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 10-92. - Fire chief. 
(a)  The office of the fire chief is created. The fire chief is to have control of the Fire Rescue Department. The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  All members of the Marble Falls Fire Rescue Department, whether paid, part-time, auxiliary, support staff or civilian, shall be under the command of the fire chief and subject to all the provisions of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, the City Charter and the ordinances of the city, and the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The fire chief, or his/her designee, is given the authority to commission all officers and firefighters and to activate their services when necessary. 
(d)  The fire chief, or his/her designee, shall develop, maintain and implement standard operating guidelines, rules, regulations and/or written department operating policies for the department, a copy of which shall be located at each fire station in the city. 
(e)  The fire chief, or his/her designee, shall determine the chain of command, and cause such to be recorded in the written department operating policies. 
(f)  In case of fire or other emergencies, the fire chief, or his/her designee, shall perform such duties as prescribed by law and by ordinance, and shall be the authority having jurisdiction in, arson, fire prevention and/or fire code matters. The fire marshal shall report directly to the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-10D, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 10-93. - Notification required. 
(a)  Any person with knowledge shall immediately notify the Fire Rescue Department of any fire, any explosion, any hazardous material release that is a threat to persons or property, of any persons trapped or endangered that will require rescue measures, and any situation that could result in a fire or explosion that could endanger persons or property. 
(b)  Any person with knowledge shall immediately notify the Fire Rescue Department of any fire alarm activation in the corporate limits. Alarms may be silenced after it is determined by the Fire Rescue Department that there is no immediate threat to persons or property. No person other than Fire Rescue Department personnel may reset a fire alarm system after a response to the alarm has been made. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-10D, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 10-94. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
(a)  The fire chief or officer in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or property or any part thereof, shall have the authority to direct such operation as necessary to extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. 
(b)  In the exercise of such power, the fire chief, or his/her designee, is authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel or thing from approaching the scene and is authorized to remove or cause to be removed or kept away from the scene any vehicle, vessel, or thing which could impede or interfere with the operations of the Fire Rescue Department and, in judgment of the fire chief or his/her designee, any person not actually and usefully employed in the emergency operation in the preservation of property in the vicinity thereof. 
(c)  The fire chief, or his/her designee, at the scene of an emergency, is authorized to place ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across any street, alley, place or private property in the vicinity of such operations so as to prevent accidents or interference with the lawful efforts of the Fire Rescue Department to manage and control the situation and handle fire apparatus. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-10D, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 10-95. - Fire and rescue calls outside the city. 
The Fire Rescue Department is authorized to respond to fire, medical, rescue, and hazardous materials calls outside the city within the boundaries of the Marble Falls Area Volunteer Fire Rescue Department upon their request for mutual aid. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-10D, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 10-96. - Investigations of hazardous materials releases. 
The fire marshal, or his designee is authorized to investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of unauthorized releases of hazardous materials. The police department is authorized to assist the Fire Rescue Department in its investigation when requested to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2002-O-10D, 10-28-2002; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Secs. 10-97—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Hazardous material clean up liability. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, any party who accidentally, negligently or intentionally causes, or is responsible for an unauthorized release of hazardous material(s) as defined in the International Fire Code or The U.S. Department of Transportation Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration Emergency Response Guide which affects public or private property within the city, shall be liable for the payments of all cost incurred by the city in an effort to mitigate and abate said hazard. The remedy provided by section 10-102 shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(b)  If the cause of the discharge of hazardous materials is a motor vehicle accident, the driver of the motor vehicle determined to be liable for the motor vehicle accident shall be presumed to be responsible for payment of the hazardous material cleanup fee assessed under this article. If more than one (1) driver is determined to be liable for the motor vehicle accident, then the fee will be apportioned among the drivers based on each driver's percentage of liability. Provided however, there shall be no fees assessed against a driver of a motor vehicle if the combined volume of the spill resulting from all vehicles in the accident is less than ten (10) gallons of a petroleum product such as oil or gasoline. If a driver is a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be responsible for payment of any fee or portion of a fee assessed to the minor driver under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-12A, § II, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2017-O-08D, § II, 8-15-2017 )  
Sec. 10-102. - Hazardous material clean up fee. 
(a)  Whenever the fire department provides services to clean up contaminants, debris, and other hazardous materials discharged onto a public right-of-way or public property, a hazardous material clean up fee will be charged by the city in accordance with this article. The purpose of the fee is to recover the costs incurred by the fire department in preventing the contaminants, debris, and other materials from entering the city's storm water system and in returning the public right-of-way or property to its condition immediately prior to the accident. 
(b)  Fees and charges described herein may be combined or separated and shall be billed as described in the master fee schedule, appendix C, which may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  In addition, all other cost incurred by the city shall be payable in addition to the fees described in the master fee schedule under the hazardous material clean up fee. For the purpose of this article, cost incurred by the city shall include, but shall not be limited to all out-of-pocket expenses attributable to the abatement or clean-up of the hazardous material(s), including cost of equipment operations, cost of materials utilized, cost of third party specialist, replacement or cleaning of contaminated firefighter personal protective equipment, experts or contract labor not in the full time employment of the city, overhead cost, overtime cost and any other cost incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-12A, § II, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 2017-O-08D, § II, 8-15-2017 )  
Chapter 13 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animal nuisances, § 6-4; offenses Ch. 14; unnecessary noise declared nuisance, § 14-3; solid waste, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Authority to abate nuisances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015(11); abatement of nuisances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1, § 3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13-1—13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED PROPERTY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. II, "Abandoned property generally," was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 90-O-7, adopted July 10, 1990, codified herein as a new Art. II, at the discretion of the editor. The deleted provisions, §§ 13-16—13-25, derived from Ord. No. 67-O-5C, §§ 1—5, 7—10, adopted May 11, 1967. 
Cross reference— Secondhand goods, Ch. 19. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 13-16—13-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25. 
 
Sec. 13-21. - Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act adopted; Definition. 
(a)  Generally. The provisions of article 6687-9 of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, the Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, as now enacted or as hereafter amended, and the provisions of this section, are hereby adopted to establish a comprehensive and uniform procedure for the impounding, storage and sale of abandoned motor vehicles within the city limits. 
(b)  City manager to establish administrative procedures. The city manager is authorized to provide for the impounding, storage and disposition of abandoned motor vehicles, and shall establish such administrative procedures as he deems necessary for the securing of proof of abandonment, collection of fees, distribution of proceeds of sale or redemption, giving of notices, and impounding and sale of abandoned and junked motor vehicles, consistent with this division and the Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act. 
(c)  Abandoned motor vehicle defined. As used in this division, the term "abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle that is: 
(1)  Inoperable and over eight (8) years old and is left unattended on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(2)  A motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours; or 
(3)  A motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § A(1), 7-10-90) 
Cross reference— Junked motor vehicles, § 13-41 et seq.  
Sec. 13-22. - Fees for impounding, storage, etc. 
(a)  The following fees shall be charged by and shall be paid to the city police department or the person, if any, engaged by the city to impound and store abandoned motor vehicles upon redemption of an abandoned motor vehicle or out of the proceeds of sale of such motor vehicle if not redeemed: 
(1)  For the taking and impounding of any motor vehicle where a wrecker is necessary, thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(2)  For the taking and impounding of any motor vehicle where both a wrecker and a dolly are necessary, forty-five dollars ($45.00). 
(3)  Storage fee, seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per twenty-four-hour period. (No charge if vehicle stored less than twenty-four (24) hours.) 
(4)  For preparing advertisement of sale for each motor vehicle, including newspaper advertisement, one dollar ($1.00). 
(5)  For selling each motor vehicle, one dollar ($1.00). 
(6)  For posting notices of sale of each motor vehicle, one dollar ($1.00). 
(7)  For newspaper advertisement, the actual pro rata publication costs incurred. 
(8)  For preparing and mailing notice to the owner and lienholder of record that the vehicle has been taken into custody, one dollar ($1.00) for each notice. 
(b)  In addition to the above charges, when the abandoned motor vehicle is one impounded at a storage facility operated by a garagekeeper for commercial purposes, as defined in the Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, and under the provisions of such act, the garagekeeper has a valid claim for servicing, storage or repair of such vehicle; his charges shall also be paid to the garagekeeper by the person redeeming the motor vehicle before the motor vehicle is released by the police department. In the event such motor vehicle is not redeemed, the proceeds of the sale shall be first applied to the garagekeeper's charges. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § A(2), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-23. - Notice of sale of abandoned vehicles at public auction. 
Any motor vehicle not redeemed as provided by law shall be sold at public auction in the manner provided by the city manager. Before selling such motor vehicles, the impounder shall post two (2) notices of sale, one (1) at the county courthouse and one (1) at the Third Street entrance of city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in the official newspaper of the city once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of sale. The notice shall describe the impounded motor vehicles to be sold by year, make and model, state that same is unredeemed and is being sold at public auction with reserve pursuant to the Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, and state the time, date, place and manner of sale. The notice shall further state that the Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act provides that the purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership, and is entitled to register the purchased vehicle and receive a certificate of title. Such notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles. Failure to give the notice required by this section, in whole or part, shall not affect the sale of such motor vehicle, it being the intention of the city council that following the above procedures for giving notice of the sale shall not be a condition of the sale, but merely a means of advertising the sale to potential bidders. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § A(3), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-24. - Record book of impounded motor vehicles. 
The police department, or its delegate, shall keep a record book which shall contain a description by year, make, model, and vehicle identification number (V.I.N.) of all motor vehicles impounded; the date and time of such impounding; the date notices of impounding were advertised or mailed to lienholders and owners of record and the return receipts therefrom; the date the motor vehicle was redeemed or sold; the amount realized for each motor vehicle at such sale; the amount of fees to which the impounder is entitled pursuant to this section, the name and address of the owners and lienholders, if known; the name and address of the buyer; the name and address of the garagekeeper, if any, entitled to recover his charges for servicing, storage or repair of the motor vehicle upon redemption or sale and the amount of his charges and any other information the city manager may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § A(4), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-25. - Visible notice of abandonment; prima facie evidence. 
At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to impounding any motor vehicle, as abandoned, whether on public or private property, a police officer of the city shall securely affix a visible, dated, brightly colored notice of abandonment to such vehicle and a record of the date and time such notice was affixed shall be maintained by the chief of police or his delegate. In the event the motor vehicle is subsequently impounded as abandoned, proof that the motor vehicle was not removed from the public or private property after the visible notice of abandonment was attached thereto shall be prima facie proof in any court that: 
(1)  Such vehicle was left unattended and abandoned for the period of time between the affixing of the notice and the impounding of the motor vehicle, and 
(2)  The owner of such vehicle caused, allowed, suffered and permitted the motor vehicle to remain at the place where such motor vehicle was impounded for the period of time between the affixing of the notice and the impounding of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § A(5), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-26. - Inoperable motor vehicles on public property or streets; nuisance; definition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place an inoperable motor vehicle, or to allow an inoperable motor vehicle to remain on any public street, alley, sidewalk, highway or public property within the city for a period of more than twenty-four (24) continuous hours, and the presence of such inoperable motor vehicle upon any such public street, alley, sidewalk, highway or property after the expiration of such twenty-four-hour period is hereby declared illegal and to be a public nuisance. The term "inoperable motor vehicle," as used in this section, means a motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act that does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates; or a motor vehicle that cannot be started, driven, operated, steered and stopped, under its own power and without causing damage to the vehicle, because of mechanical failure, flat tire, burned, dismantled or partially dismantled. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § A(6), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-27. - Unlawful to interfere with impounding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any abandoned motor vehicle by the police department or its delegate pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act and this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § A(7), 7-10-90)  
Secs. 13-28—13-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 13-31. - Declared nuisance; duty of police to impound; notification of impoundment. 
(a)  Any personal property, other than a motor vehicle, which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any ordinance, the Charter of the city or any state law; or left unattended for more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or public property or public place in the city; or which is placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in or on any public street, alley or sidewalk in such a manner as to substantially interfere with, obstruct or constitute a barrier to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, is declared a public nuisance, and any such property when so found by the police officers of the city shall be removed or caused to be removed summarily to the police pound or any other place of impoundment designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Trash receptacles placed in compliance with city ordinance and newspaper and magazine vending machines on public sidewalks shall not be deemed obstructions under this division. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days after any personal property is impounded under this section, the impounder shall notify the owner of such property and all lienholders, if their names and addresses be known, that such property has been impounded. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § B(1), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-32. - Impounded property—Lien. 
A lien for all costs incurred in the impounding, storing and advertising for sale of personal property pursuant to this division shall exist and inure to the benefit of the person actually impounding such property. Such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the impounder may retain possession of such property until all costs are paid and may sell the same as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § B(2), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-33. - Same—Redemption. 
The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of any impounded personal property as provided for in this division may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)  Before sale. By paying to the impounder, before sale, the applicable fees set out in section 13-35. 
(2)  After sale. By paying to the buyer at the sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property, and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping the same; provided, that the property shall be redeemed from the buyer within thirty (30) days after the date of the sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise title to the property shall become absolute in the buyer. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § B(3), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-34. - Sale of impounded property. 
(a)  When impounded property to be sold. When any personal property, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within thirty (30) days after being impounded, the same may be sold in the manner designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Notice of sale. Before selling any personal property as provided for in this section, the impounder shall post two (2) notices thereof, one (1) at the county courthouse door and one (1) at the Third Street entrance of the city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in the official newspaper published in the city once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the day of the sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold, designate the place of sale, the manner of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than fourteen (14) days from the date of the first posting of such notices. 
(c)  Procedure for selling. When any impounded property is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the impounder shall sell such property in the manner designated by the city manager, and execute a bill of sale of such property to the purchaser thereof; provided, that he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of sale until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of thirty (30) days in time, exclusive of the day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. 
(d)  Disposition of proceeds of sale. After deducting the fees to which the impounder is entitled pursuant to section 13-35, the impounder shall hold the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to pay the same to the owner of the property. If the owner fails to call for such proceeds within thirty (30) days, they shall belong to the impounder. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § B(4—7), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-35. - Fees for impounding, storage, etc. 
The following fees shall be charged and shall be paid to the impounder: 
(1)  For the taking and impounding of any personal property, the actual expenses incurred by the impounder in impounding the property, plus two dollars ($2.00), but in no event less than four dollars ($4.00) total. 
(2)  Storage fee, including storage for all or part of the first twenty-four (24) hours, one dollar ($1.00) per twenty-four-hour period or portion thereof. 
(3)  For preparing notices of sale of each article, including newspaper advertisement, one dollar ($1.00). 
(4)  For selling each article, one dollar ($1.00). 
(5)  For posting notices of sale for each article, one dollar ($1.00). 
(6)  For newspaper advertisement, the actual publication costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § B(8), 7-10-90)  
Secs. 13-36—13-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - JUNKED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25. 
 
Sec. 13-41. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed below, except where the context in which the word or phrase is used clearly indicates a different meaning is intended: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or anyone designated to represent the chief of police. 
Junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and inoperable and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; or 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; 
(2)  Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(3)  Has remained inoperable for more than forty-five (45) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § C(1), 7-10-90; Ord. No. 96-O-12, § 1, 12-10-96)  
Sec. 13-42. - Junked vehicles declared public nuisance; maintenance of nuisance declared unlawful; fine imposed for violation; unlawful to interfere with impounding. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and 
(7)  Is a public nuisance. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described in this section. An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any junked vehicle by the chief of police or his delegate pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § C(2), 7-10-90; Ord. No. 96-O-12, § 2, 12-10-96)  
Sec. 13-43. - Notice. 
(a)  Written notice specifying the nature of a nuisance prohibited by this division shall be sent by certified mail with a five-day return to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of: 
a.  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
b.  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice must state that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. This request must be made, in writing, to the clerk of the municipal court. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last-known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered. 
(d)  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § C(3), 7-10-90)  
Secs. 13-44, 13-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-O-12, §§ 4, 5, adopted Dec. 12, 1996, repealed §§ 13-44 and 13-45, which pertained to notice to owners to abate nuisances on unoccupied premises or on public property or public right-of-way and requiring the notice to abate nuisance to be visible, and which derived from Ord. No. 90-O-7, §§ C(4), (5), adopted July 10, 1990.  
Sec. 13-46. - Public hearing; findings and order of court. 
(a)  Any person entitled to notice under section 13-43 may, within ten (10) days after service of such notice, request of the clerk of the municipal court of the city, in writing, that a date and time be set when such person may appear before the court for hearing to determine whether or not the vehicle is a public nuisance. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall hear all matters pursuant to this division. The court shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not the vehicle constitutes a public nuisance prohibited by this division. The Texas Rules of Civil Evidence shall be followed. If the court finds that the vehicle is a nuisance, then the court shall order the nuisance abated within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing. If the nuisance shall not be abated within such ten-day period, the court may issue an order directing the chief of police to abate the nuisance. Any order pursuant to this section shall include the following information if same is available at the location of the nuisance: a description of the vehicle; the vehicle identification number; and the license plate number. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § C(6), 7-10-90; Ord. No. 96-O-12, § 6, 12-10-96)  
Sec. 13-47. - Abatement under court order. 
If the notices required by section 13-43 are returned undelivered, or if no hearing is requested within the time allowed in this division, the municipal court may issue an order directing the chief of police to abate the nuisance. The order authorized by this section shall issue on or after the eleventh day after giving the notice required by section 13-43. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § C(7), 7-10-90; Ord. No. 96-O-12, § 7, 12-10-96)  
Sec. 13-48. - Notice to state highway department. 
Notice shall be given to the state highway department that a junked vehicle has been impounded within five (5) days after the removal of the junked motor vehicle as provided in this division, identifying the vehicle or part thereof impounded. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § C(8), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-49. - Disposition of impounded junked vehicles. 
The chief of police or his delegate shall dispose of all impounded junked vehicles in such manner as the city manager may designate, consistent with state law, provided such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. Disposal may be by removal or sale, with or without competitive bidding, to a scrap yard or demolisher. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-7, § C(9), 7-10-90)  
Sec. 13-50. - Inapplicability of this division. 
(a)  The procedures in this division shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle, or part, and the outdoor storage area, if any are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(b)  In this section: 
(1)  Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least thirty-five (35) years old. 
(2)  Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
a.  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles. 
b.  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
(3)  Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 96-O-12, § 8, 12-10-96)  
Secs. 13-51—13-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of former Art. III, "Junked vehicles," were deleted as being superseded by § C of Ord. No. 90-O-7, adopted July 10, 1990, which are codified as Art. II, Div. 4, §§ 13-41—13-49, of this chapter. Former Art. III contained §§ 13-41—13-48 which derived from Ord. No. 86-O-1, §§ 2—9, adopted Jan. 14, 1986. 
 
Secs. 13-61—13-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WEEDS, GRASS AND OTHER RANK, POISONOUS OR HARMFUL VEGETATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 13, Art. IV, §§ 13-101—13-104 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 90-O-12, adopted Dec. 6, 1990 included herein as a new Ch. 13, Art. IV. Former Ch. 13, Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 71-O-2C, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 11, 1971; Ord. No. 83-O-5B, §§ I—III, adopted May 17, 1983. 
State Law reference— Noxious weed control districts. V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, § 78.001 et seq.; authority to require owners of lots to keep them free of weeds or other unsanitary matter, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Cutting and mowing—Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative of any employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land or any part thereof in the city or to permit or allow on any such lot or parcel of land, or on or along any sidewalk or right of way areas described in section 13-102 adjacent to the same any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a maximum height of twelve (12) inches or to allow or permit any accumulation of litter, debris, dead weeds, grass or brush. It shall also be unlawful for any such person or persons to cause or allow to grow on any such lot or parcel of land or right of way area adjoining such lot or parcel in such manner that any part of such poison ivy, ragweed, or other poisonous or harmful weeds shall extend upon, overhang or border any public place or allow seed, pollen or other poisonous particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative of any employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land or any part to fail to maintain such lot or parcel and adjoining right of way area in accordance with the maintenance requirements set out in section 13-102. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally sweep, rake, mow or blow litter, debris, leaves or grass clippings onto public property or into a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-12, § 1, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 2012-O-08B, § 15, 11-20-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-O-08B, § 15, adopted Nov. 20, 2012, amended § 13-101 title to read as herein set out. Former § 13-101 title pertained to cutting and removing—Required.  
Sec. 13-102. - Responsibility of owner, lessee or occupant to maintain property and adjoining right-of-way areas. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of any person described in section 13-101 to maintain their lot or parcel of land together with the right-of-way area adjoining such lot or parcel as described in subsection (b), in accordance with the requirements set out herein. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of any person described in section 13-101 to maintain the right of way area from the property line of the lot or parcel to the curb line. If there is not a curb line, then from the property line to the edge of the pavement. If the lot or parcel adjoins an unpaved street or alley, then maintenance shall be from the property line to the centerline of the adjacent unpaved street or alley. 
(c)  Maintenance by the person named in section 13-101 of the lot, parcel and adjoining right of way areas shall include mowing, removal of litter or debris, and removal of noxious weeds or vegetation. In addition, the lot or parcel and adjoining right-of-way area shall be maintained to the same or higher level of adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-12, § 2, 12-6-1990; Ord. No. 2012-O-08B, § 15, 11-20-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-O-08B, § 15, adopted Nov. 20, 2012, amended § 13-102 title to read as herein set out. Former § 13-102 title pertained to same—Duty of owner, lessee or occupant.  
Sec. 13-103. - Same—When city to do work. 
If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the city manager or his authorized agent is authorized to file a complaint in the office of the municipal court judge to alleviate such violations through judicial means. Additionally, the city manager may serve written notice by certified mail upon the owner, occupant or lessee, or any person having the care and control of properties in violation with an administrative order to bring said property into compliance with the provisions of this article. Upon being served with such an order, the owner, occupant, lessee or any person having the care and control of the subject property shall have five (5) days from the date of notification, as evidenced by the date signified by the U.S. Postal Service that said notice was received, to bring said property into compliance with the provisions of this article. If the subject property is not brought into compliance within this time period, the city manager is authorized to cause such weeds, grass and other vegetation on such property to be cut and removed. Furthermore, the city manager is authorized to ascertain the actual costs of undertaking such actions and to pursue the collection of these costs with the property owner, occupant, lessee, or any person having the care and control of properties in violation. In the event that the city is not reimbursed for cutting and removing weeds, grass and other growth from the subject property within thirty (30) days of the serving of an invoice for such services, then the city manager is authorized to cause a lien to be attached to the subject property. Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year shall be added to the debt, or such other rate as may be established by state law, until the debt is satisfied. Said lien being superior to all others except ad valorem tax liens and liens for street improvement. In the event no address is available for the owner, occupant, lessee or any person having the care and control of a property in violation of the provisions of this article, then the city manager is authorized to attempt to notify such person by citation in the official newspaper of the city. If the subject property is not brought into compliance within five (5) days of the publication of said citation, then the city manager is authorized to undertake the appropriate action as set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-12, § 3, 12-6-90; Ord. No. 94-O-8B, § 1, 8-9-94)  
Sec. 13-104. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall be fined a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. Furthermore, any person who obstructs or attempts to obstruct the city, any of its employees or authorized agents from enforcing the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall be fined a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 90-O-12, § 4, 12-6-90)  
Sec. 13-105. - Definition. 
The word "person" as used in this article shall mean and include one (1) or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporation, partnerships, associations, joint stock associations, societies and other entities of any kind capable of being sued. 
(Ord. No. 90-O-12, § 5, 12-6-90)  
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 18; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Police power of city, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1011. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Interfering with city officers or employees in performance of their duties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any city officer or employee in the performance of his duties as such.  
Sec. 14-2. - Trespassing on city property. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he enters or remains on city property without effective consent and he: 
(1)  Had notice that the entry was forbidden; or 
(2)  Received notice to depart but failed to do so. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Entry means the intrusion of the entire body; and 
(2)  Notice means: 
a.  Oral or written communication by the city or someone with apparent authority to act for the city; 
b.  Fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to exclude intruders or to contain livestock; or 
c.  Sign posted on the property or at the entrance to the building, reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders, indicating that entry is forbidden. 
State Law reference— Trespass, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.05.  
Sec. 14-3. - Generally. 
(a)  General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, continue or allow or cause to be made or continued within the limits of the city, and five thousand (5,000) feet beyond the limits any noise nuisance. 
(b)  Noise nuisance defined. For purposes of this chapter, the phrase "noise nuisance" is any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary sound or noise that causes material distress, discomfort or injury to a reasonable person of ordinary sensitivity in the immediate vicinity thereof, and/or any sound or noise of such character, intensity and continued duration that substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity; and/or any sound that exceeds eighty (80) decibels, except during the hours of quiet time, which shall be Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; and Friday and Saturday midnight to 6:00 a.m. the following morning, any sound that exceeds seventy (70) decibels, and measured as provided in section 14.3.1.1 below. 
(Ord. No. 72-O-7, 7-11-72; Ord. No. 2004-O-1B, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-2D, § II, 3-14-2005; Ord. No. 2010-O-1C, § II.1, 2-8-2010) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate noise, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015(21, 22); disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal code, § 42.01.  
Sec. 14-3.1. - Prohibited noise nuisances. 
The following activities are declared to be a prima facie noise nuisance in violation of section 14-3 of this chapter and are unlawful: 
(1)  Animals, birds. The keeping or maintenance or the permitting to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by any person of any animal or bird that by frequent, habitual or continued noise unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivity within the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  Construction. The construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work of any building or other structure, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public safety and convenience, and then only with written permission from the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(3)  Firearms and fireworks. The explosion of firecrackers, skyrockets, roman candles, pinwheels or any other form of fireworks or the shooting of any firearms, except as specifically authorized by law or the proper official. 
(4)  Horns and signaling devices. The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when necessary to ensure safe operation, or the creation by means of any horn or signaling device of an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. 
(5)  Engine brakes and altered muffler system. The use or operation of an unmuffled auxiliary or compression engine brake in a posted area on a street or highway on which such use is prohibited that produces any noise in addition to the normal operating engine noise within the city. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of braking mechanisms by emergency vehicles while in the performance of their official or normal duties. This provision is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with engine or "Jake brakes" in posted areas but rather to prohibit the use of unmuffled engine or "Jake brakes" in posted areas. 
(6)  Peddlers. The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. 
(7)  Radios, loudspeakers, musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television, phonograph, computer, loudspeaker, megaphone, amplifier, or musical instrument in such manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons of ordinary sensitivity in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, libraries, hospitals, rest homes, long-term medical or mental care facilities. The creation of any excessive noise on any street or sidewalk adjacent to any school, institution of learning, court, church or library while the same are in use or adjacent to any hospital, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys the occupants of such institutions. 
(9)  Vehicles. The operation or testing of any automobile, commercial vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, or the operation of any motor engine or brakes of any automobile, commercial vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle as to create loud, grating, jarring or rattling noise vibrations, or the operation of any automobile, commercial vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle so loaded or in any such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring or rattling noise or vibrations. 
(10)  Yelling, shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of a reasonable person of ordinary sensitivity in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-4G, § II, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 2004-O-1B, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2005-O-2D, § II, 3-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-3B, § II, 4-10-2006)  
Sec. 14-3.1.1. - Measurement of sound levels. 
Whenever this article prohibits sound above a certain decibel limit, measurement of the sound shall be made with a Type 1 or Type 2 calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-weighting scale and the slow meter response as specified by the American Standards Association. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the sound being measured. The microphone of the meter shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used. Traffic, aircraft, and other transportation noise shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the noise being measured and cannot reasonably be distinguished from the primary noise. 
Measurements of sound generated shall be conducted consistent with the directionality of the complaint or disturbance and the location of measurement shall be one of the following methods: Measurement conducted at the curb line or edge of pavement on the street side(s) of the building or venue at which the sound is emanating, but if there is not a minimum of fifty (50) feet between the building and the curb line or edge of pavement closest to the building, then the measurement shall be taken from the opposing side of the street directly in line with the structure, with clear line of sight; for all non-street side measurements the measurement shall be conducted a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the building or venue at which the sound is emanating. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-01C, § II.2, 2-8-2010)  
Sec. 14-3.2. - Defenses and exemptions. 
(a)  Defenses. The following defenses shall apply to violations of section 14-3 of this chapter: 
(1)  Emergency, danger. The emission of any sound was for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or attempted crime. 
(2)  Emergency personnel and vehicles. The sound was produced by police or fire personnel or an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(3)  Utilities and protection. The sound was produced by emergency work necessary to restore public utilities, or to restore property to a safe condition, or to protect persons or property from imminent danger following a fire, accident or natural disaster. 
(4)  Events and First Amendment. The sound was generated: 
a.  At a lawfully scheduled stadium event; 
b.  By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a permitted parade; 
c.  By spectators and participants at lawfully scheduled outdoor events; 
d.  By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival or concert that was sponsored, co-sponsored or permitted by the city; or 
e.  Any lawful activity that constitutes protected expression pursuant to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(5)  Bells and chimes. 
a.  Church, school and clocks. The sound was produced by bells or chimes or any device used for the production or reproduction of the sounds of bells or chimes from any church when used as part of a religious observance or service, or from any clock or school, which is used during daytime hours, and which does not exceed five (5) continuous minutes in duration in any one-hour period. 
b.  Ice cream vending machines. The sound was produced by bells or chimes or any device used for the production or reproduction of the sound of bells or chimes from any ice cream vending machine during daytime hours. 
(6)  Permit. The sound was produced in accordance with a permit issued under section 14-3.3 of this chapter. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the prohibitions under section 14-3 of this chapter on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and on Sunday through Thursday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.: 
(1)  Special events that have been approved by permit issued by the city manager or the city manager's designee. The noise levels for such events shall not exceed one hundred ten (110) decibels when measured from a distance of approximately one hundred (100) feet from the location where the noise is generated. The city manager or the city manager's designee may, in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or convenience, set different hours, days and/or decibel levels in the special events permit authorizing the event. 
(2)  Certain events at the Lakeside Park Pavilion. Events, public or private, held in the Lakeside Park Pavilion for which the organizers have entered into a contract with the city to reserve said facility and for which all fees and deposits have been paid. The noise levels for such events shall not exceed one hundred ten (110) decibels when measured at a distance of approximately one hundred (100) feet from the location where the noise is generated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2D, § II, 3-14-2005)  
Sec. 14-3.3. - Permits. 
(a)  The city manager or the city manager's designee may grant permits for relief from any provision in the city's noise ordinance on the basis of undue hardship in cases where: 
(1)  The sound source will be of short duration and the activity cannot be conducted in a manner that complies with sections 14-3 through 14-3.4; 
(2)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the applicant's activity or operation to comply with sections 14-3 through 14-3.4; or 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(b)  An automatic variance will be granted without the payment of a permit fee for the purpose of conducting parades or other public events, provided that any noise disturbance created by such activity will be abated when such request is made by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(c)  The city manager or the city manager's designee may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects and may suspend any permit issued under this section for violating any provisions prescribed in the permit. 
(d)  A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged to each applicant for processing permit applications. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2D, § II, 3-14-2005)  
Sec. 14-3.4. - Civil and criminal penalties. 
The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(1)  Criminal prosecution. Any person violating any provision of sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a provision of this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 is a Class C misdemeanor. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this section 14-3 of this chapter. 
(2)  Civil remedies. Nothing in sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with sections 14-3 through 14-3.4; and 
b.  A civil penalty up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) a day when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 and after receiving notice committed acts in violation of sections 14-3 through 14-3.4 or failed to take action necessary for compliance with sections 14-3 through 14-3.4; and 
c.  Other available relief. 
(Ord. No. 2005-O-2D, § II, 3-14-2005)  
Sec. 14-4. - Discharge of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the city except in defense of life or property. 
Cross reference— Display of firearms in city parks, § 15-19.  
Sec. 14-5. - Smoking in grocery stores. 
(a)  Purpose. Because the smoking of tobacco or of any other weed or plant is a positive danger to health and a cause of material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort and a health hazard to those who are present in confined places, and in order to serve public health, safety and welfare, the purpose of this section is to prohibit the smoking of tobacco or any other weed or plant in certain areas which are used by or open to the public. 
(b)  Definitions: 
Grocery store means any retail establishment that sells food for consumption off premises. This definition shall not include restaurants or convenience stores. 
Person means any individual, partnership, joint venture, association, official group, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Smoke or smoking means and includes the holding or carrying of a lighted pipe, lighted cigar or lighted cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. Smoking shall include tobacco products, as well as any other plant or weed used as a substitute or alternative to tobacco products. 
(c)  Smoking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any grocery store located within the city limits except as specifically authorized pursuant to this section. A grocery store may establish certain designated areas where smoking shall be permitted. However, these designated smoking areas shall not include any of the following: 
(1)  Lobbies and public hallways. 
(2)  Checkout stands. 
(3)  Eating areas or any place of public assembly. 
(4)  All other areas within the grocery store where food is stored or shelved for purchase. 
(d)  Sign requirements. Signs which designate smoking or no-smoking areas established by this section shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every room, building or other place so covered by this section. The manner of such posting, including the wording, size, color, design and place of posting, whether on the walls, doors, tables, counters, stands or elsewhere, shall be at the discretion of the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such room, building or other place so long as the sign clearly notifies the public of the prohibitions of this section. However, notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the sign shall contain the phrase "smoking is prohibited by city ordinance," and the ordinance number shall also appear on the sign. The sign shall also contain the international "NO" symbol to indicate no smoking areas. 
(e)  Responsibility of owners and operators. The owner, operator or manager of any facility, business or agency shall post or cause to be posted all no-smoking signs required by this section. 
(f)  Violation, penalty. Upon conviction thereof, any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 94-O-5, §§ 1—6, 5-10-94)  
Sec. 14-6. - Overdue library material. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Delinquent date shall mean fourteen (14) days after the due date. 
Due date shall mean the date established for the return of a library material to the library. This date shall be established at the time the library material is checked out of the library. 
Library material means any printed or recorded information including but not limited to one (1) or more books, audiotapes, and videotapes. 
Notice of overdue materials shall mean written notice sent by regular first class mail to the current address of the person who checked out the library material as shown on the records of the library, as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  The library shall notify each person who checks out library material of the due date for such material. This notice shall be in writing. The method presently used by the library for giving such notice is hereby approved. Any subsequently adopted method of giving the notice required by this section shall give fair notice of the due date to any person who checks out library material. 
(c)  On or after the delinquent date, the library shall give written notice of overdue materials to each person who has failed to return library material on or before the due date. This notice of overdue materials shall be sent by first class mail to the person's address of record as maintained by the library. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to return library material within fourteen (14) days after the delinquent date. It shall be a separate violation for each item of library material not returned. 
(e)  Upon conviction of violating this section, a person shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(f)  Prosecution under this section shall in no way interfere with the library's right to collect fines or fees from the person prosecuted. 
(Ord. No. 2000-O-8A, § II, 8-22-2000)  
Sec. 14-7. - Regulation of sex offender residency. 
(a)  Finding and intent. The city council finds that sex offenders who are required to register as a sexual predator under V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, ch. 62, present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of children. Sex offenders are likely to repeat an offense, have many more victims than are ever reported, are prosecuted for only a fraction of their actual sexual offenses, and children not only lack the ability to protect themselves but additional measures should be taken to keep known sex offenders from having access to children in areas where children generally feel safe. 
It is the intent of this section to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases; when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; 
Minor: A minor is a person younger than sixteen (16) years of age. 
Permanent residence: A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence: A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence 
(c)  Sex offender residency prohibition; penalty; and exceptions. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person who is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, ch. 62 because of a violation involving a victim who was less than sixteen (16) years of age to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premise where children commonly gather, including a public playground, playscape, skate park, youth soccer or baseball field, public or private school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, crisis center or shelter, or public swimming pool, as those terms are commonly understood and/or defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 481.134. It shall be prima facie evidence that this chapter applies to such a person if the person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than sixteen (16) years of age. 
(2)  For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in the case of multiple residences on one (1) property, measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking lot/driveway, whichever is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. A map generally depicting the prohibited areas is attached to this ordinance for representation purposes. The city shall review the map at least annually for changes, and it will be available at the Marble Falls Police Department. 
(3)  Civil and criminal penalties. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this section is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
a.  Criminal prosecution. Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each day that any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
b.  Civil remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the section or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the section; and 
2.  A civil penalty up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) a day when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the section and after receiving notice committed acts in violation of the section or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the section; and 
3.  Other available relief. 
(4)  Culpable mental state not required: Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. 
(5)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following situations: 
a.  The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this section. 
b.  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
c.  The person is a minor. 
d.  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the person's permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
e.  The person proves that the information on the database is incorrect and that, if corrected, this chapter would not apply to the person erroneously listed on the database. 
(d)  Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sexual offenders; penalty. 
(1)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this Code, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located within one thousand (1,000) feet, as determined pursuant to subsection (c)(2), of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, playscape, school, day care facility, crisis center or shelter, skate park, youth soccer or baseball field, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as those terms are commonly understood and/or defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 481.134. 
(2)  Penalty—Civil and criminal penalties. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section as may be required by governing law. Any person violating any provision of this section is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
a.  Criminal prosecution. Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each day that any violation of this ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
b.  Civil remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this section and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the section or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the section; and 
2.  A civil penalty up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) a day when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the section and after receiving notice committed acts in violation of the section or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the section; and 
3.  Other available relief. 
(3)  Affirmative defense. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for an offense under this section that on or prior to the date of the alleged offense, the property owner conducted a criminal history check with the Texas Department of Public Safety and reviewed the department of public safety's sexual predator registration database, and that at the time the property owner conducted the criminal history check and reviewed the sexual predator database the sexual offender's criminal history did not include a record of a sexual offense and the offender's name did not appear in the database. 
(Ord. No. 2006-O-8C, § II, 9-11-2006)  
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; development code, App. B. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to operate and maintain parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 331.001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONDUCT IN CITY PARKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 1, adopted April 12, 1994, repealed Ord. No. 81-O-6, adopted June 9, 1981, from which was derived provisions formerly codified as Ch. 15, Art. II, §§ 15-16—15-23. Sections 2—16 of Ord. No. 94-O-4 enacted new provisions which the editor has included herein as Ch. 15, Art. II, §§ 15-16—15-29. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for and regulate parks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015(32). 
 
Sec. 15-16. - Time restriction; overnight camping; penalty. 
(a)  There shall be no overnight camping within any publicly owned park or playground within the city limits; except in designated camping areas. 
(b)  There shall be no erection of tents by campers or for campers upon any public property within the city limits; except in designated camping areas. 
(c)  There shall be no overnight parking of any portable building, any camping unit of any type, or any motor vehicle within any publicly owned park, playground or cemetery within the city limits, except in designated overnight parking areas. 
(d)  There shall be no person, vehicle, equipment or activity within any publicly owned park or playground within the city limits between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. each day, except in designated overnight areas. 
(e)  The only exception to the provisions of this section shall be with the approval of an exemption granted by the city council. 
(f)  Persons found in violation of this section shall receive notice to depart from the park, playground or cemetery. Such notice to depart means an oral or written communication from the city manager, the director of parks and recreation, the police chief, or city police officer. Any person failing to comply with such notice to depart within a reasonable length of time, which shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and a conviction of this violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 2, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 2001-O-11D, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009)  
Sec. 15-17. - Camping or parking on grassy areas restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or to place any vehicle on the grassy areas of any city park, except as allowed under section 15-26. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, §§ 3, 4, 4-12-94) 
Cross reference— Parking, stopping or standing of vehicles generally, § 25-181 et seq.  
Sec. 15-18. - Damaging public facilities prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally damage any of the public facilities in any city park. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 5, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-19. - Display of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display a gun in any city park. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 6, 4-12-94) 
Cross reference— Discharge of firearms generally, § 14-4.  
Sec. 15-20. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter the parks. Garbage and waste may be disposed of only in available trash receptacles. In areas where there are no trash receptacles, all users of the park, campers and picnickers shall collect and remove their garbage and waste from the park land for lawful disposal. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 7, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009) 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Litter abatement, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477—9a.  
Sec. 15-21. - Animals running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person exercising ownership, care, custody, or control of any animal to allow such animal to run at large upon any city park except in the designated leash-free zone. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 8, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 2001-O-11D, 1-8-2002) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 15-22. - Horses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse on any city park, except on designated roads or streets. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 9, 4-12-94) 
Cross reference— Animals, generally, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 15-23. - Fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, or attempt to build, a fire in any city park except in barbecue pits, fire rings, contained camp stoves or similar containers specifically designed for this purpose. The director of parks and recreation may declare an area in a public park as "extreme fire hazard" and all fires will be prohibited without exception until such designation is removed. It is understood that this declaration may precede such designation by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 10, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 15-24. - Glass containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess glass beverage containers in any city park. To the extent possible, aluminum containers shall be used and such containers shall be recycled. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 11, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-25. - Picnics, barbecues, family reunions. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit the holding of picnics, barbecues, family reunions, or using the city parks in any lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 12, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-26. - Special public functions; permit. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit use of the parks for special public functions or entertainment. Participants in these special functions shall be permitted to have overnight camping and shall be permitted to park vehicles on the grassy areas on the following conditions: the organizer(s) of the special function shall first obtain the consent of the city council and shall obtain a permit from the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 13, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-27. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to consume alcoholic beverages of any kind in any city park. Nothing herein shall prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages for special functions when first obtaining a permit from the city manager or designee. A permit fee in the amount set out in the fee schedule [see section 15-28] attached hereto as Exhibit "A," and incorporated by reference herein, shall accompany the request for a permit. Organizations, such as horseshoe pitching and softball, will be allowed to purchase one (1) permit for the year on or before the opening day of their season. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 14, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 2001-O-11D, 1-8-2002) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Code, V.T.C.A., § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 15-28. - Reservation, use and fee schedule for park facilities. 
A person may reserve a park facility for holding picnics, barbecues, family reunions, or any other lawful function. The ball field may be reserved for baseball, softball, kickball, or soccer games; or for any other purpose authorized by the city manager or designee. A reservation fee in the amount set out in the Master Fee Ordinance, Appendix C of this Code, shall accompany the request for the reservation. Other persons may use a park facility when it is not reserved. However, such use is subject to use by persons who have a prior reservation. Any group or organization with an attendance of one hundred (100) or more shall keep the city parks free of litter for the duration and at the conclusion of the event; and may be required to provide additional waste facilities. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 15, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 2001-O-11D, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2003-O-4C, § II, 4-28-2003; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2015-O-10C, §§ 2, 3, 11-3-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-O-02F, § II, 2-7-2017 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-O-10C, § 2, adopted November 3, 2015 , amended the title of § 15-28 to read as set out herein. Previously § 15-28 was titled "Reservation, use and fee schedule of Johnson Park pavilions, amphitheater and ball field."  
Sec. 15-29. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or the maximum amount authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 94-O-4, § 16, 4-12-94) 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-9.  
Sec. 15-30. - Facility use agreements. 
The city manager, or their designee, may enter into park facility use agreements for the use of park and/or athletic facilities to ensure that such facilities owned or leased by the City of Marble Falls are utilized efficiently and safely. Such agreements may provide for exclusive or non-exclusive use of park and/or athletic facilities. The city manager, or their designee, is fully authorized to impose fees for the use of such park and/or athletic facilities. City staff shall prepare a facility use agreement which shall be utilized whenever an individual or entity wishes to enter into an agreement regarding the exclusive or non-exclusive use of such park and/or athletic facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-11A, § II, 11-23-2009)  
Secs. 15-31—15-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LAKE MARBLE FALLS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority concerning public waters within corporate limits, V.T.C.A., Parks and wildlife Code, § 31.092. 
 
Sec. 15-41. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them: 
Boats means any boat, barge, or other vessel capable of being used as transportation on water. 
Tributaries means all tributaries or portions of tributaries to Lake Marble Falls which are within the corporate limits of the city. When "Lake Marble Falls" is defined within this chapter as being only a portion of the waters or area of Lake Marble Falls, the word "tributaries" shall also mean any portion of the main body of water at Lake Marble Falls not included in such limited definition of "Lake Marble Falls." 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 1, 7-11-78) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 15-42. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or any city police officer to patrol Lake Marble Falls and the adjoining lands for the purpose of enforcing strict compliance on the part of all persons with the terms, provisions and conditions of this article and to make arrests upon the violations of any provision or regulation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 2, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-43. - Exclusion of offenders. 
The chief of police, or any city police officer, shall have the right and authority to exclude from the premises of Lake Marble Falls any person found violating the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 3, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-44. - Nonliability of city. 
The city shall in no event be liable to any person due to the loss of or damage to any property that may be placed in or upon Lake Marble Falls nor shall the city be liable in any event to any person due to personal injuries or loss of life that may be sustained by any person in or upon Lake Marble Falls. Any person entering in or upon Lake Marble Falls shall do so at his sole risk and shall not be privileged to enter or remain in or upon Lake Marble Falls save and except under the terms and provisions of this section and such other applicable sections of this Code, ordinances, resolutions and regulations that have been or may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 4, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-45. - Obedience to police, signs. 
No person shall fail or refuse to obey any lawful instruction or warning issued by the chief of police or any city police officer, nor shall any person fail or refuse to obey any instruction or warning displayed upon any sign erected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 5, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-46. - Restricted areas established. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, wade, dive, or immerse himself, or to ride any type of surfboard or skiing apparatus, or to drive or operate a boat or to fish in any manner within three hundred (300) feet in any direction of the city's water intake facility. This section shall in no way prohibit fishing or boating downstream from a point three hundred (300) feet or more from the outlet facility. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 6, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-47. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or discharge any cans, bottles, containers, trash or human refuse into the waters of Lake Marble Falls or its tributaries and adjacent park areas. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 8, 7-11-78) 
Cross reference— Solid waste generally, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Litter abatement, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477—9a.  
Sec. 15-48. - Extension of poles, other obstructions above water level. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, place, or erect any post, stake, pipe, pier, float, or other obstruction on the waters of Lake Marble Falls or its tributaries unless the top of the obstruction shall extend at least one (1) foot above the high water mark of such lake. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 9, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-49. - Swimming—Restricted areas for. 
Any area within the waters of Lake Marble Falls which shall be roped off or marked by barrels, or other indicia, setting aside such area for swimming purposes, shall be used for swimming and wading purposes only. No person shall operate any boat or water ski or manipulate any aquaplane, or similar device, within one hundred (100) feet of such area. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 10, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-50. - Same—Near launching area. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or wade in the waters of Lake Marble Falls within one hundred (100) feet of any public boat launching area unless such person is engaged in the actual loading or unloading of a boat. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 11, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-51. - Diving from bridges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dive from or off of any structure or part of any public bridge or its appurtenance thereto. This prohibition shall also be deemed to include the use of any rope, cable or other apparatus, so as to permit an individual to swing out over the waters of Lake Marble Falls. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. I, § 12, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-52. - Fishing prohibited in swimming areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fish, set out trotlines, gang hooks or fish nets in any area, portion or area of the waters of Lake Marble Falls which have been restricted for swimming. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. III, § 1, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-53. - Closure of Lake Marble Falls for public health and safety reasons. 
(a)  The city council may order by resolution the closure of Lake Marble Falls and its public boat ramps and docks to marine traffic and recreation if the council determines that the interest of public health and safety requires such closure. The closure may continue until such time as the public health and safety threat has ended. 
(b)  The mayor may order the closure of Lake Marble Falls and its public boat ramps and docks to marine traffic and recreation if the mayor determines that an emergency condition exists and that the interest of public health and safety requires immediate closure of the lake. An order of the mayor shall continue for seventy-two (72) hours or until such time as a meeting of the city council can be convened to extend or terminate the mayor's order, which ever event occurs first. 
(c)  The chief of police and/or the chief's designee shall post appropriate signage and/or other markings informing the public of the dates of closure, identifying any area(s) from which the public is restricted from entering, and warning the public to keep out of the restricted area(s). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter the restricted area during the time in which Lake Marble Falls is closed as provided by this section. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (a), the council finds that is in the best interest of public health and safety that Lake Marble Falls and all public boat ramps and docks shall be closed to marine traffic and recreation during the Lakefest Drag Boat Races. Such closure shall commence on the Monday preceding the start of Lakefest and shall extend through the Wednesday following the end of Lakefest regardless of whether the council adopts a separate resolution as described by subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6a, § 2, 7-23-2007)  
Sec. 15-54. - Lakeside Park Restricted Swimming Area. 
(a)  The Lakeside Park Restricted Swimming Area, plus an additional one hundred (100) feet extending therefrom as described herein and as depicted in Exhibit "A", attached [to the ordinance from which this section derives and can be found on file with the city], is hereby designated as a "Boats Keep Out Area". For purposes of this section only, the term boats or water craft refers to any boat or watercraft that is mechanically powered and sailboats. Kayaks, canoes, paddle boats and similar watercraft are not prohibited from entering the 100-foot portion of the boats keep out area that is outside of the restricted swimming area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any boat or water craft, as that term is described above, including sailboats, or to water ski, or to ride any type surfboard pulled by a powered boat, skiing apparatus or jet ski, or manipulate any aquaplane, or similar device, or to fish or set trot lines or hooks (collectively "boaters") within the boats keep out area. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat or watercraft, and including any watercraft that are not powered, within the portion of the boats keep out area that is restricted as a swimming area. 
(c)  The center of the Lakeside Park Restricted Swimming Area is located at coordinates 30°33'59.94"N latitude 98°16'45.28"W longitude, on Lake Marble Falls. The total length of the area is four hundred twenty (420) feet (two hundred ten (210) feet to the northeast and southwest of the coordinates above) and fifty (50) feet vertically out from the shoreline. The Lakeside Park Restricted Swimming Area is to be used for swimming and wading purposes only. The Lakeside Park Restricted Swimming Area may be identified with float barriers or other appropriate markings. 
(d)  The city manager, or designee and shall post appropriate signage, floating barriers, buoys and/or other markings identifying the boats keep out area from which boaters are restricted from entering or operating. Buoys shall be placed to designate the boats keep out area and shall be compliant with section 15-55 and any LCRA permit. 
(e)  All other prohibitions and requirements of this article shall apply, except as same may be in conflict with the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-05A , § 2, 5-5-2020)  
Sec. 15-55. - Navigation buoys. 
(a)  All buoys placed to designate a "Boat Keep Out Area" must be United States Coast Guard approved and comply with the U.S. Aids to Navigation System. All buoys shall be marked with a three-inch white or silver reflective band positioned as close to the top of the buoy as practicable. 
(b)  The "Boats Keep Out" buoys must be placed no further than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart and must display a fixed white light at nighttime. 
(c)  The placement of orange barrier floats in between the buoys is authorized to more clearly depict a boundary for the "Boats Keep Out" area. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, relocate, deface or tamper with a navigation buoy or to moor a boat to a navigation buoy. It shall be unlawful for a person to remove, relocate, deface or tamper with any buoy, float, sign or other barrier or marker which delineates a restricted area located on Lake Marble Falls. This prohibition does not apply to a city, state, or federal official performing an official duty. 
( Ord. No. 2020-O-05A , § 2, 5-5-2020)  
Secs. 15-56—15-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOATS AND BOATING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Water safety, V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-66. - Reckless or negligent operation. 
No person may operate any motorboat or vessel or manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of Lake Marble Falls or its tributaries in a wilfully or wantonly reckless or negligent manner that endangers the life, limb, or property of any person. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, § 1, 7-11-78) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.094.  
Sec. 15-67. - Excessive speed. 
No person may operate any boat on the waters of Lake Marble Falls or its tributaries at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the conditions and hazards, actual and potential, then existing, including weather and density of traffic, or greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the boat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, § 2, 7-11-78) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.095.  
Sec. 15-68. - Reckless operation and excessive speed. 
No person may operate a vessel or manipulate water skis, an aquaplane, or a similar device on the waters of Lake Marble Falls or its tributaries in wilful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others or without due caution or circumspection, and at a speed or in a manner that endangers, or is likely to endanger, a person or property. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-78) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.096.  
Sec. 15-69. - Exhaust water manifold; muffler. 
A motorboat operating on the waters of Lake Marble Falls shall have an exhaust water manifold or a factory-type muffler installed on the engine. Noise levels shall not exceed eighty-six (86) decibels. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, § 3, 7-11-78) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.070.  
Sec. 15-69.1. - Exhaust water manifold; muffler—Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the prohibitions of section 15-69 on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and on Sunday through Thursday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.: 
(1)  Special events that have been approved by resolution adopted by the city council of the city. City council may, at its discretion, set out different hours, days, and decibel levels in the resolution authorizing the event. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-4G, § III, 5-18-99)  
Sec. 15-70. - Obstruction of ramps. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to block any public boat loading ramp leading to the waters of Lake Marble Falls or its tributaries except while loading or unloading a boat. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, § 1, 7-11-78) 
State Law reference— Obstructing passage, V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.101.  
Sec. 15-71. - Removal from lake. 
The chief of police or other city police officer may require the removal of any boat or other craft from Lake Marble Falls in the following instances: 
(1)  Such boat or other craft is in an unsafe operating condition; 
(2)  Such boat or other craft is in violation of any of the applicable provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, § 5, 7-11-78)  
Sec. 15-72. - Operation by minors. 
No person under the age of thirteen (13) years shall operate a boat or other craft on Lake Marble Falls unless accompanied on board by a person at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, § 6, 7-11-78; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009)  
Sec. 15-73. - Sailboats. 
Sailboats shall have the right-of-way over all power boats. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-7D, Art. II, § 7, 7-11-78) 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, V.T.C.A., Parks & Wildlife Code § 31.093.  
Sec. 15-74. - Backbone Creek. 
(a)  No skiing shall be allowed in Backbone Creek from entrance of creek from Lake Marble Falls up Backbone Creek. Signs are to be placed at the entrance from Lake Marble Falls into creek area. 
(b)  All motorboats must be operated at an idle while operating in Backbone Creek area. 
(c)  No one shall operate a motorboat in Backbone Creek area in such a manner as to cause a hazardous wake which endangers life or property. 
(Ord. No. 69-O-7, §§ 1—3, 7-10-69; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009)  
Sec. 15-75. - Applicability of state law. 
(a)  All provision of the laws of the state relating to the regulations of boats shall, insofar as applicable, be the law of the city, upon the same subjects, except as otherwise provided. 
(b)  All provisions of the laws of the state relating to the rules, regulations, practices and procedures of corporation courts, except as otherwise provided, are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 69-O-7, § 5, 7-10-69; Ord. No. 2004-O-1C, 1-26-2004) 
State Law reference— Corporation court means municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code, § 29.003.  
Secs. 15-76—15-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LAKESIDE PAVILION 
 
Sec. 15-86. - Definitions. 
The Lakeside Pavilion of the City of Marble Falls, hereinafter called Pavilion, means the building including grounds located at 307 Buena Vista at Lakeside Park under the jurisdiction of the city. 
Administration: The city manager or the authorized representative shall have full responsibility for the operation of the Pavilion and shall act on behalf of the city. The city manager may enter into license agreements subject to the fee schedule contained in these regulations. 
License as used herein means the written agreement issued to an applicant by the city manager or his authorized representative for use of the Pavilion. 
Licensee as used herein includes any person, association, public organization, partnership, company or corporation that is granted a license agreement to use the Pavilion. 
Rate classification groups for determination of license fees: 
Group I. Public agencies and non-profits: Federal, state, county and city agencies; 501(c)(3) and 501(c)(6) non-profit organizations; and co-sponsored city athletic leagues. Co-sponsored city athletic leagues will not be charged for board meetings as provided for in the city facility use agreement. 
Group II. Individuals, civic organizations, and social groups: Any person or group who wishes to use the property for other than commercial purposes. These include but are not limited to: Fraternities, sororities, lodges, social clubs, family reunions, wedding receptions and banquets. 
Group III. Commercial groups: Individuals, organizations or companies who sponsor events which charge admission fees, registration fees, solicit contributions, buy, sell, trade, or display or promote products or services. 
Should those in Group I and II participate in any of the activities outlined in Group III, they will be charged Group III rates. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-1, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-01C, § II, 2-1-2011; Ord. No. 2016-O-01A, § II, 1-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 2018-O-07A, § II, 7-17-18 ) 
Editor's note— Definitions for lease and lessee were deleted at the instruction of the city, as said were superseded by definitions of license and licensee.  
Sec. 15-87. - Reservations. 
(a)  Reservations will be taken at the parks and recreation department office between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, (except for official holidays). Reservation requests may also be submitted via the city website at any time. 
(b)  The pavilion will be rented on a first-come, first-served basis. Reservation request conflicts will be resolved by the city manager or his authorized representative. 
(c)  A reservation for the pavilion will be considered confirmed only upon the receipt of a signed license agreement accompanied by the appropriate fee as described herein. 
(d)  Reservation of the pavilion may be made up to twelve (12) months from the date of the request in advance. 
(e)  Reservation cancellation by licensee must be made in writing on or before thirty (30) days prior to any scheduled event for a full refund. If a reservation is cancelled after such time or if the person does not use the pavilion on the scheduled date, the license fee shall be forfeited. Bad weather is not grounds for refund or cancellation. 
(f)  Official use of the pavilion will take precedence over any and all reservations that may be in effect in the event of an emergency (as identified by the Marble Falls emergency operations management team) or when the city manager determines there is a public necessity warranting the need for use of the pavilion. Such preemption shall be without liability to the city for any and all damages that may result from the prior reservation. The city shall refund any deposits paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-2, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-6B, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009)  
Sec. 15-88. - License. 
All rental of the pavilion will require a signed license agreement between the licensee and the city through its duly authorized representative and accompanied by the appropriate fees. no oral agreements for use of the pavilion will be valid; and, sublicensing and assignment is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-3, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009)  
Sec. 15-89. - Rental hours. 
(a)  The pavilion will be available for events between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, which will constitute a rental day. 
(b)  Licensee, band, caterers and all occupants (except cleaning service) must vacate the pavilion no later than 1:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-4, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-6B, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2018-O-07A, § II, 7-17-18 )  
Sec. 15-90. - License fees. 
(a)  License fees per day for use shall be charged as set in the Master Fee Ordinance, Appendix C of this Code. 
(1)  Residents (persons residing within the corporate limits of the city and named on a reservation as a licensee) shall receive a five hundred dollar ($500.00) discount on the license fee. Resident discount is not applicable to rate classification Groups I and III. 
(b)  License fee and facility deposit are required at the time of reservation confirmation. 
(c)  Keys will be issued one (1) day prior to scheduled event. Keys must be returned no later than the next working day after scheduled event. Anyone not returning the key after one (1) working day has passed shall forfeit the facility deposit. 
(d)  Facility deposit will be refunded after return of keys and facility deposit refund checklist, and, inspection of the Lakeside Pavilion; provided, however, that the use or consumption of alcohol without having obtained a permit from the parks and recreation department and without having paid all required alcohol sales permit fees, and alcohol and consumption fees shall result in a forfeiture of the facility deposit. 
(e)  Any damage to the pavilion in excess of the security deposit shall be billed to licensee. 
(f)  Early access will be permitted to the pavilion and grounds prior to rental time only if such access will not conflict with any other event or licensee. 
(g)  A reservation for the use of the pavilion for three (3) consecutive weekend days (i.e. Friday, Saturday, and Sunday) that is paid in full shall entitle the licensee to the use of the pavilion for two (2) weekdays at no additional license fee. The weekdays must be consecutive with the weekend use. 
(h)  All personal property must be removed at the end of the event. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-5, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2001-O-11D, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2006-O-6B, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-12A, § 2, 12-11-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-01C, § II, 2-1-2011; Ord. No. 2013-O-08H, § II, 8-20-2013; Ord. No. 2016-O-01A, § II, 1-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 2017-O-02F, § II, 2-7-2017 )  
Sec. 15-91. - City's right to refuse rent. 
To the extent permitted by law, the city may deny an application for license if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for license was made has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity previously licensed or has violated the terms of prior licenses issued to or on behalf of the applicant. The city may also deny an application for license on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The application for license (including any required attachments and submissions) is not fully completed and executed; 
(2)  The applicant has not tendered the required license fee with the application or has not rendered the required user fee, indemnification agreement, insurance certificate or facility deposit within the times prescribed. 
(3)  The application for license contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(4)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued; 
(5)  The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for license was made has on prior occasions damaged city property and has not paid in full for such damage, or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the city; 
(6)  A fully executed prior application for license for the same time and place has been received, and a license has been or will be granted to a prior applicant; 
(7)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by the city and previously scheduled for the same time and place; 
(8)  The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent with the classifications and uses of the park or part thereof designated pursuant to this chapter; 
(9)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, or other users of the park, or city employees or of the public; 
(10)  The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations of the city concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services; 
(11)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law, by this Code or by the regulations or ordinances of the City of Marble Falls. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-6, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2004-O-1C, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2016-O-01A, § II, 1-19-2016 )  
Sec. 15-92. - Use of alcoholic beverages. 
Alcohol that is available or is consumed at the Pavilion shall be in compliance with the laws of the state and with the regulations of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. Any such violation shall cause an immediate termination of the use of the Pavilion, and the police department is thereupon authorized to remove all persons from the premises and to close the Pavilion. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-7, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006)  
Sec. 15-93. - Fire security. 
(a)  The licensee is responsible for providing fire security if the event is proposed to have any open flame, or any combustible materials. The city fire prevention code will be enforced at all events. The licensee shall contact the fire marshal for a determination of necessary security should the event be of the above described nature. 
(b)  Licensee shall not store any motor fuel in the Pavilion. Fuel tanks, boats, vehicles or equipment on display will be secured in accordance with instructions by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-8, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 10-36 et seq.  
Sec. 15-93.5. - No smoking. 
The Lakeside Pavilion is a non-smoking facility. Smoking is permitted in areas outside of the building only. 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-01A, § II, 1-19-2016 )  
Sec. 15-94. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-O-08H, § II, adopted Aug. 8, 2013, repealed § 15-94, which pertained to police security. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 15-95. - Setups and decorations. 
(a)  Tables and chairs are for the exclusive use of the licensee. Outside use of these tables and chairs is not allowed. 
(b)  Licensee shall be responsible for setting up and arranging such tables and chairs. 
(c)  Decorating is the responsibility of the licensee. Decorations may be of any type or design as long as installation and placement does not damage the pavilion, or violate the fire code. Decorations shall be removed by licensee upon vacating the pavilion. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-10, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-6B, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-01C, § II, 2-1-2011)  
Sec. 15-96. - Licensees to indemnify city. 
All licensees of the Pavilion shall hold the city harmless from any and all liabilities for any claim or claims resulting from their use of the Pavilion and shall indemnify the city in case of any claims resulting from their operation or occurring during their occupation of the Pavilion. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-11, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009)  
Sec. 15-97. - Pavilion basic services. 
(a)  The pavilion's basic license includes the following services: 
(1)  All Utilities. 
(2)  Heat and/or air conditioning. 
(3)  Tables and chairs. 
(4)  PA system with wired and wireless microphones, audio/video system, and podium. The audio/video equipment has limited capacity and capability; and may not be suitable for all uses. 
(5)  Restrooms. 
(6)  Commercial kitchen. 
(7)  Facility cleaning service. 
(8)  Wireless Internet. 
(b)  Failure to furnish any of the services as noted in subsection (a) resulting from circumstances beyond the control of the city; or limitations of certain services, will not be considered a breach of contract by the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-12, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 2001-O-11D, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 2006-O-7B, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-02A, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-01C, § II, 2-1-2011; Ord. No. 2016-O-01A, § II, 1-19-2016 )  
Sec. 15-98. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective and of full force upon the passage, approval and publication hereof as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-6C, § 15-13, 6-27-95)  
Secs. 15-99—15-124. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PARK CONCESSIONS 
 
Sec. 15-125. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
City means the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
City-operated concessions means visitor goods and services and accommodations operated by park personnel. 
Commission means the parks and recreation commission, which serves in an advisory capacity and makes recommendations to the city council concerning the acquisition, maintenance, operation and use of parks and open spaces within the city. 
Concessioner means any person, partnership, or corporation granted concession rights or privileges. 
Concessions means a non-profit organization or privately operated business, on park land serving park users, authorized by a grant of a concession by the city in accordance with applicable code and contractual agreement, for which charges, fees, admissions, or similar assessments are collected by the city, excluding park entrance fees. Types of businesses operated as concessions may include without limitation food and beverage stands, boat or other recreational equipment rentals, and sport or recreational lessons. Such concession grants are considered as a license which may be revoked and shall convey no property rights to the concessioner. 
Concession fee means the fee a concessioner pays to the city for park concession rights or privileges. 
Director means the director of the city parks and recreation department, or his designee. 
Department means the parks and recreation department of the City of Marble Falls. 
Non-profit concessions means visitor goods and services and accommodations operated by a non-profit park volunteer support group or athletic organization for fund raising purposes. 
Park or parkland means land dedicated for park purposes by deed or by other conveyance and under the control and management of the city for such park purposes, and specifically including land dedicated for park purposes. 
Request for proposals means a public statement issued by the city giving information on the availability of a concession as to location, visitor goods and services and accommodations to be provided, capital and operating investment needed, business experience or other knowledge required, and the procedure to follow in submitting a concession proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-126. - General requirements for park concessions. 
(a)  Concessions authorized. If authorized by the city council, a person may operate a food or beverage, rental, or service concession in city parks, subject to the requirements of this article and any contractual agreement executed between the city and concessioner. 
(b)  Park concessions shall be limited to visitor goods and services, recreational services and accommodations that are necessary and appropriate for public use and enjoyment of the city park area in which they are to be located, and that are consistent to the highest practical degree with the preservation, use or conservation of the area. When adequate services and accommodations exist outside a park within a reasonable distance, every attempt will be made to avoid the duplication of same products and services. 
(c)  Except as noted in this subsection, all building and land improvements for overnight or day-use accommodations in city parks for which user fees are charged shall be developed at city expense. The department shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of overnight and day-use facilities developed with city funds and shall also be responsible for the collection of user fees unless this responsibility has been specifically delegated to a concessioner. In the event cabins, lodges, or other buildings and structures are deemed essential for the public's full enjoyment of an area, and city funds are not available in priority for their development, the city may authorize facilities to be constructed, operated, and maintained with private capital. 
(d)  Park visitor services and accommodations in the following categories may be operated by a concessioner under contractual arrangements: 
(1)  Food and merchandise sales; 
(2)  Equipment rentals for recreational use; 
(3)  Merchandise vending machines; 
(4)  Marine or other recreational supplies and services; 
(5)  Sport or recreational lessons; 
(6)  Fishing piers and fishing marinas; 
(7)  Facilities for accommodating overnight visitors; and 
(8)  Visitor services to interpret parks and natural and cultural resources; 
or, as may otherwise be determined by council. 
(e)  In parks where certain facilities for visitor services and accommodations, or recreational facilities or equipment have been provided at city expense, a concessioner may be permitted to use said buildings, structures, and installations provided he assumes full responsibility for their maintenance and repair due to normal wear and tear. 
(f)  The director, subject to the approval of the city council, shall take such action as may be appropriate to encourage or enable the use of private capital to provide visitor services and accommodations necessary for the full enjoyment of park areas administered by the department. 
(g)  In parks where there are concession areas that have been constructed with funds from a non-profit organization prior to the date of this article, the organization or group responsible for this concession area will have the right of first refusal to operate a concession. If the responsible organization or group elects not to operate a concession, the city may offer a concession to third parties or operate the concession itself. 
(h)  The decision to allow a concession on city owned or controlled park property is at the sole discretion of the city council. 
(i)  This article does not apply to special events that may occur from time to time and are authorized by the city for a particular day or time. 
(j)  Anyone who desires to utilize city-owned or controlled park land and intends to produce income from use of the land or facilities shall be required to obtain a concession agreement from the city in accordance with this article. Persons who wish to utilize city-owned or controlled park land and desire to enter into a facility use agreement as described in section 15-30, in addition to the authority to obtain a concession, may elect to obtain authority for the use of the facility as part of the grant of authority for the concession. Two (2) separate agreements are not required. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-127. - Selection of a concessioner. 
(a)  When it is determined by the city that the granting of a park concession is necessary, desirable, and financially feasible for furnishing visitor services and accommodations in a park area, or when it is necessary to secure a new concessioner for a concession, a request for proposals announcing the availability of such concession may be issued to all interested persons, detailing essential information about the concession, and the procedure to follow in submitting a proposal. 
(b)  A concessioner will be selected with great care to insure that he or she has the ability to operate the concession in an entirely satisfactory manner. In addition to ample financing and the ability to conduct the concession in an economical manner, the concessioner should conduct his or her operation in accordance with the ideals and objectives of the city by adhering to business practices that emphasize public service in addition to a profit motive, and are consistent to the highest practical degree with the preservation, use, or conservation of the area. 
(c)  The granting, termination, amendment, transfer, assignment, and enforcement of all concession contract requirements and provisions of such contracts shall be approved by city council. City staff may conduct a comprehensive review of all information contained within the submitted proposal and conduct personal interviews of each submitter for the purpose of recommending a candidate as the prospective concessioner. The city council may empanel a review board consisting of city staff, the commission, and the local community, industry experts, or other individuals relevant or pertinent to the selection or establish other requirements for selection. 
(d)  The city may grant a concession to persons requesting a concession contract without the city submitting a request for proposals depending upon the nature of the request and the facilities or park land to be utilized as part of the requested concession. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-128. - Concession contracts. 
(a)  Except as may be provided in a request for proposals, all concession contracts shall be considered as a revocable license issued by the city and shall be non-exclusive. Concession contract terms may vary depending upon the nature of the concession, the land or facilities being covered by the concession, the duration or impact of the concession on the ability of the public to be able to continue to enjoy the park land or facilities with the concession in place and whether the concessioner is required to make sizable investments in merchandise inventories, furnishings or equipment, and/or is required to maintain or repair city park land or facilities. 
(b)  Concession contracts shall be subordinate to the present and future right of the city to use the park land or facilities in any manner authorized by law. The concession contract is also subordinate to any easements, utility easements, rights of way, or other property interests recorded and associated with the park land or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-129. - Contract terms. 
The following terms shall be applicable to the concession contract: 
(a)  The concession contract shall allow the concessioner to use the park land or facilities solely for the purposes contained in the concession contract. 
(b)  Concession contracts issued to concessioners, other than non-profit organizations, shall be required to pay a fee to the city for the right to use the park land or facilities as described in section 15-130. If the city causes damage to or destruction of concessioner's improvements, equipment or inventory, concessioner covenants not to sue the city, or pursue other remedies against the city to recover costs of repairing or replacing the improvements, equipment or inventory as additional consideration for being granted the concession contract. 
(c)  Concession contracts will normally be limited to a one (1) year term but may be renewed by the city council for subsequent terms. 
(d)  The city may enter the park land or a facility subject to a concession contract without giving notice and without incurring any obligation to concessioner and remove the improvements, equipment or inventory of concessioner. Such removal will occur only if the city manager deems it necessary: (i) in order to exercise the city's rights or duties with respect to the park land or facilities; (ii) to protect persons or property; or (iii) for the public health or safety with respect to the park land or facilities. 
(e)  Concessioner shall not construct or locate any structures or improvements on park land or within any facility without the prior written permission of the city manager. Concessioner shall not remove or alter any improvement, soil or other material on the park land or facility without the prior written consent of the city manager. Concessioner shall be responsible for repairs to the park land or facilities or its improvements if damage is caused to such property or improvements. 
(f)  If concessioner is granted written authority to construct or locate a structure or improvement on park land or on or within a facility, concessioner may be required at its own cost to remove the structure or improvement, at the option of the city upon termination of the concession contract, or prior to termination upon a determination by the city manager that the structure or improvement needs to be removed or modified because the structure or improvement is a hazard to persons or property, that the structure or improvement prevents the city from using the property for a lawful purpose or because the structure or improvement does not comply with federal, state or local ordinances or this license. All improvements must meet the city's ordinances and be compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(g)  Concessioner shall maintain the park land or facilities by keeping the area free of debris and litter on an ongoing basis. Further, concessioner must timely and properly maintain any improvements of concessioner or the facilities being used by the concessioner, if any. 
(h)  Concessioner will not conduct any activities, events, or operate the concession in a manner that would cause the city to be in violation of any state, federal or local law, deed restrictions, covenants or easements in effect for the park land or facilities covered by the concession. 
(i)  Concessioner may be required to post signage relating to the concession and if required shall construct and maintain the signage required by the city. 
(j)  Concessioner shall be required to maintain a commercial general liability insurance policy with limits as required in the concession contract with the City of Marble Falls named as an additional insured. A forty-five-day notice of cancellation endorsement in favor of the City of Marble Falls must also be provided. Required coverage may be provided in the form of a rider and/or endorsement to a previously existing insurance policy. The insurance must cover all perils arising from the activities of concessioner, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, and invitees, related to concessioner's use of the park land or facilities covered in the concession. Concessioner shall be responsible for the payment of any deductibles stated in the policy. 
(k)  Concessioner shall agree to indemnify, save, and hold harmless the City of Marble Falls, its officers, employees, agents, and licensees (collectively called "indemnitees") against any and all liability, damage, loss, claims, causes of action, expenses or demands (collectively "costs") of any nature whatsoever, on account of personal injury (including without limitation, Workers' Compensation and death claims), or property loss or damage of any kind whatsoever, which arises, or is claimed to arise, out of or is, or is claimed to be, in any manner connected with operation of the concession. 
(l)  Either party may terminate the concession contract by delivering written notice of termination to the other party not later than thirty (30) days before the effective date of termination. In the event that the licensee is the terminating party, licensee shall deliver the required thirty-day notice of termination to the city manager. 
(m)  If concessioner abandons or fails to comply with the terms of the concession contract, and the city manager receives no substantive response within thirty (30) days following written notification to concessioner, then the city (through action by the city manager) may terminate the concession contract and remove and/or replace any improvements, equipment or inventory at its option and located on city park land or within city facilities. All of concessioner's improvements, equipment or inventory located on city park land or within city facilities after the date that a concession contract expires or is terminated shall be deemed property of the city. 
(n)  These concession contract terms may be amended and other terms may be required depending upon the nature of the Concession and the park land or facilities subject to the concession. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-130. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  Rates and concession fees shall be established on an equitable and fair manner, giving consideration to the various types of concessions, gross receipts, net profit, capital investment of the concessioner and the nature of the concession being granted. 
(b)  The concession contract shall provide for interest and penalties if the concessioner does not pay concession fees in a timely basis and shall be grounds for termination of the concession contract. 
(c)  Additional charges may be required to be paid by the concessioner as established by the concession contract. 
(d)  When a concession contract renews the city may consider and renegotiate concession fees as well as other contract terms when conditions warrant an adjustment. 
(e)  The rates and charges prescribed by the concessioner shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The reasonableness of the concessioner's rates and charges to the public shall be judged primarily by comparing with current charges for facilities and services of comparable character under similar conditions. Consideration shall be given to: 
(1)  Length of season; 
(2)  Provisions for peak loads; 
(3)  Average percentage of occupancy; 
(4)  Accessibility; 
(5)  Availability and costs of labor and materials; 
(6)  Type of patronage; and 
(7)  Other factors deemed significant as related to the type of concession. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-131. - Accounting. 
(a)  The concessioner shall submit reports and keep such records in such a manner as the director may prescribe to enable the city to determine that all terms and conditions of the concession contract have been and are being faithfully performed. An annual report shall be required which details the income and expenditure statement for each concession for the preceding year of operation, unless the concession fee is based on a percentage of gross receipts, then accounting reports may be required more frequently and as specified in the concession contract. 
(b)  The city auditor, or duly authorized representative of the city, shall, for the purpose of audit and examination, have access to records and other books, documents, and papers of the concessioner pertinent to the contract. The city may, upon reasonable notice to concessioner, conduct an audit of concessioner's records to verify that concession fees have been properly paid and that charges to the public by the concessioner have been properly charged and received. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-132. - Bond and insurance. 
(a)  The city may require the concessioner to furnish a bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of the concession contract. When the concession involves construction of public improvements, the concessioner may be required to obtain a performance and payment bond applicable to the construction and may be required to bid the construction project in accordance with state law. Alternatively, the city may enter into a separate contract with the concessioner and the city may construct the improvements with the concessioner being responsible for depositing with the city in advance of the construction an amount sufficient to cover the construction costs. 
(b)  The concessioner shall carry such insurance against losses by fire, public liability, employee liability, and other hazards as is customary among prudent operators of similar businesses under comparable circumstances, and in amounts satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-133. - Furnishing utilities. 
(a)  The city may furnish utilities to the concessioner. 
(b)  When it is not feasible for the city to meter utilities supplied to the concessioner, a reasonable rate fixed by the city for the concessioner's monthly consumption may be assessed and shall be payable in accordance with the concession contract. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Sec. 15-134. - Department report and commission recommendations. 
(a)  In October of each year, the director shall deliver a report to the commission on the concessions granted under this chapter. 
(b)  A report prepared under this section shall include: 
(1)  The name of each concession and the person or entity operating in parks; 
(2)  An income and expenditure statement for each concession; 
(3)  A statement describing any environmental or other problem that is caused or created by a concession; 
(4)  Any recommended changes to the parks concession ordinance. 
(c)  Not later than the thirtieth day after receipt of a report under this section, the commission and director shall make a recommendation to city council regarding: 
(1)  The report presented to the commission; 
(2)  The creation, continuation, or termination of a concession; 
(3)  The status of each existing concession; 
(4)  The issuance of a request for proposal for a concession under this chapter; 
(5)  Any recommended changes to the parks concession ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-O-03A, § II, 4-12-2010)  
Chapter 16 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND VENDORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, adopted May 3, 2011, repealed former Ch. 16, §§ 16-1—16-14, and enacted a new Ch. 16 as set out herein. Former Ch. 16 pertained to peddlers and vendors and derived from Ord. No. 83-O-5C, adopted May 17, 1983; Ord. No. 87-O-7E, adopted July 23, 1987; Ord. No. 95-O-8, adopted Aug. 8, 1995 and Ord. No. 98-O-7A, § 3, adopted July 28, 1998. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
Interstate commerce: Soliciting, selling or taking orders for, or offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, photographs, magazines, or subscriptions to magazines, or things which, at the time the order is taken, are in any federal district or territory, any commonwealth, or in any state other than Texas and shipped or introduced into the city in fulfillment of such orders. 
Merchandise: Merchandise is used in its broadest sense and shall include property of every kind. 
Motor vehicle: Any vehicle used for displaying, storing, or transporting of articles for sale by a vendor which is required to be licensed and registered by the state department of motor vehicles. The term is to include trailers, trucks and automobiles. 
Peddler: Any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck of any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of, as well as the selling, offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future or immediate delivery, or for services to be performed immediately or in the future, whether or not such individual had, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or not or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. The word "peddler" shall include the terms, "canvasser" and "solicitor". The word "peddler" shall not include individuals traveling to businesses, houses or places at the invitation of the resident or owner. 
Public way: All areas legally open to public use, such as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, parks, as well as the interior and areas surrounding public buildings. 
Services: Services is used in its broadest sense and shall include any work done for the benefit of another person. 
Special event: Any occasion including, but not limited to, fairs, shows, exhibitions, city wide celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically defined area of the city for a period of time established by the city council. 
Stand: Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart, vehicle or any other fixture or device used for the display or storage of articles offered for sale by a vendor or peddler. Such stands must be located at least ten (10) feet away from all other property lines adjacent to a street. All stands must be removed from the property on which business is conducted each day. 
Vendor: Any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, who offers for sale food, beverages, goods, merchandise, delivery, or for services to be performed immediately or in the future, from a certain location, for a period of more than fifteen (15) minutes, that is not within a building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy is required by the city. This term shall not apply to businesses that operate from within a building or structure within the city for which a certificate of occupancy is required and also display or sell food, beverages, goods, merchandise, etc., outside. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-2. - Peddler/vendor permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or vendor to engage in the business of selling, displaying, offering for sale of any food, beverages, goods, services, or merchandise within the City of Marble Falls without first obtaining a permit from the city secretary as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-3. - Peddler/vendor permit—Exemptions. 
The following are excluded from permitting provisions: 
(1)  Newspaper distribution. 
(2)  Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them, when located within a public way and at a time designated by the city council in advance. 
(3)  Peddlers and vendors operating within a designated public way in connection with a special event approved by the city council and appropriate body organizing and implementing the special permit. Provided that, the appropriate organizing body first apply and receive a special permit anticipating and approving such vendor sales for the special event. 
(4)  Any individual soliciting or peddling for a philanthropic, charitable, political or religious organization provided such activity is for the sole exclusive benefit of that organization and so long as the person engaging in such activity does not receive compensation in the form of a commission, salary, or other monies paid to him for such activity. 
(5)  Anonymous political speech and political campaigns. 
(6)  Any operation which is exempted by state or federal statute from this chapter, only to the extent of such applicable exemption. 
(7)  Sales made to established businesses by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, or to sales made under authority and by order of law. 
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the provisions of this chapter, including the payment of the permit fee shall make such a claim in writing to the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-4. - Use of public ways—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or vendor to engage in business within any public ways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-5. - Use of public ways—Exemptions. 
Vendors may locate within a designated public way in connection with a special event approved by the city council and the appropriate body organizing and implementing the special event. 
(1)  Farmers may sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them within a public way and time designated by the city council. 
(2)  Ice cream vendors may use the public ways, provided they do not remain in one (1) location for longer than fifteen (15) minutes. 
(3)  Peddlers may utilize streets and roads to travel from house to house or place to place in pursuit of their business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-6. - Sales and use tax permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in business within the city without having obtained and presented a sales and use tax permit issued by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-7. - Sales and use tax permits—Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from having to present a sales and use tax permit: 
(1)  Any peddler or vendor engaged in interstate commerce. 
(2)  Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them. 
(3)  Nonprofit organizations. 
(4)  Any other business or activity exempt by the Texas State Comptroller from collecting state sales tax. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-8. - Health license—Required. 
The application of any vendor engaged in the sale or distribution of food or beverages shall be required to submit a copy of the vendor's current mobile food vendor license or roadside vendor license issued by the State of Texas Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-9. - Health license—Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from having to submit a copy of their State of Texas Mobile Food Vendor License or roadside food vendor license: 
(1)  Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them. 
(2)  Nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-10. - Application. 
Every person desiring to engage in the business of a peddler or vendor within the city must file a written application for a permit with the city secretary. The application must include the following information: 
(1)  Applicants name, telephone number, address, date of birth and either: 
a.  Driver's license number and state; or 
b.  Social Security number and an official, government issued picture identification card number. 
(2)  If the applicant is peddling or making solicitations for any commercial, charitable or political organization, the name, telephone number and address of such organization; 
(3)  Full and complete list of goods to be sold and/or services delivered; 
(4)  For each individual involved as a peddler or vendor: name, telephone number, address, date of birth, and either: 
a.  Driver's license number and state; or 
b.  Social Security number and an official, government issued picture identification card number. 
(5)  Description (year, make and model) and license plate number and state of all motor vehicles to be used in soliciting and peddling and a copy of the vehicle's current proof of liability insurance. 
(6)  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of any felonies of any nature of any other crimes of moral turpitude in this state or any other state; and if having been so convicted, a full statement as to the place of conviction and crime for which applicant was convicted. 
(7)  Specific location where applicant will peddle or solicit and a written statement from the property owner consenting to the applicant's use of his/her property for the sales activities indicated in the permit application. 
(8)  A site plan of the subject property indicating where the vendor will be located in relation to the adjacent right-of-way, adjacent buildings, and the location of two (2) nine (9) by eighteen (18) foot on-site parking spaces with a twenty-foot backup lane. (Vendors should note that the location of their business will not be allowed if it results in a reduction in the number of parking spaces serving an existing business below that required by city ordinances). 
(9)  A copy of the vendor's current State of Texas Sales and Use Tax Permit together with written documentation from the state comptroller that all sales tax that may be due and owing by the vendor has been paid in full. 
(10)  Vendors engaged in the sale or distribution of food or beverages must submit a copy of the vendor's current mobile food vendor license or roadside food vendor license issued by the State of Texas Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-11. - Restrictions applicable to all vendors, peddlers and solicitors. 
(1)  Stands. Vendor stands and/or motor vehicles shall not: 
a.  Exceed twenty-five (25) feet in total length, ten (10) feet in width or thirteen (13) feet in height; 
b.  Impede access to the entrance or driveway of an adjacent building. 
(2)  Hours of operation. Vendors shall be allowed to engage in the business of vending only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or as approved by the city manager or his/her designee. All stands and other vending operations must be removed during nonoperating hours. 
(3)  Handicapped areas. No vendor shall conduct business within twenty (20) feet of any handicapped parking space or access ramp. 
(4)  Prohibited areas. A vending permit issued pursuant to this chapter is not valid in public ways or in public places of the City of Marble Falls. Vendor stands and motor vehicles are prohibited within twenty (20) feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, loading zone or driveway of a fire station, police station or hospital. 
(5)  Removal of trash. All trash or debris accumulating within fifty (50) feet of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and deposited in an authorized trash container. All vendors selling food or beverages must provide at least one (1) trash receptacle adjacent to or as a part of their stand. 
(6)  Noise. No vendor may sound any device, which produces a loud and raucous noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio sound amplifier, or similar device to attract public attention. 
(7)  Quarterly sales and use tax reports. All vendors shall provide a copy of their quarterly report of sales and use tax receipts to the city secretary within thirty (30) days of completing such reports. 
(8)  Motor vehicles. No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall: 
a.  Stop, stand or park within twenty (20) feet of any intersection; 
b.  Conduct business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting property owner or obstruct access to emergency vehicles. 
(9)  Signage. All signage utilized by a permitted peddler/vendor shall be subject to the following standards: 
Peddler/vendors shall be allowed a single temporary detached sign to advertise the business, subject to the following standards: 
a)  A peddler/vendor may have a maximum of two (2) signs upon the vehicle or peddler/vendor structure. A third sign is allowed upon the vehicle/structure; however the third sign shall constitute the allowed single detached sign. If two (2) signs or less are utilized on the vehicle structure, then the peddler/vendor shall be allowed the single temporary detached sign subject to standards, b)—h) below. 
b)  The sign must remain temporary and no permanent installation shall be allowed unless permitted under the City of Marble Falls Sign Ordinance. The sign should be anchored or stabilized to prevent wind damage. 
c)  Height of the sign shall not exceed six (6) feet from the surface of the ground. 
d)  Overall sign dimensions shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. Sign may be dual sided. 
e)  Sign must be a minimum of five (5) feet from the property line or curb, whichever is greater. 
f)  Signs may not: 
•  Block a sidewalk or other pedestrian path. 
•  Impede access to/from a mail box. 
•  Block a driveway or be located in the turning radius of a driveway. 
•  Be set up in an area where the visual triangle of a driveway would affected. 
•  Be within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant. 
g)  All peddler/vendor signs may not be electronic or have any flashing component(s) upon the sign surface. Battery operated internally lighted signs are allowed. 
h)  All signs must be constructed of weatherproof materials and shall not be constructed of any of the following: Paper, canvas, cloth, cardboard, Styrofoam, or sheet metal. 
(10)  Vending, peddling or soliciting at any residence or building which has posted a "No Peddlers" or "No Solicitors" sign is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-12. - Permit fees. 
All peddlers and vendors, not exempted by section 16-13, shall pay the following permit fees, which shall be valid for the calendar year in which the permit is issued: 
One person .....$50.00 
Two (2) or more persons .....100.00 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-13. - Permit fees—Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the permit fee: 
(1)  Any individual soliciting or peddling for a philanthropic, charitable, political or religious organization provided such activity is for the sole exclusive benefit of that organization and so long as the person engaging in such activity does not receive compensation in the form of a commission, salary, or other monies paid to him for such activity. 
(2)  Sales made under authority of state statue and by order of any court. 
(3)  Sheriff constables, bona fide assignees, receivers or trustees in bankruptcy or other public officers selling wares and merchandise according to law. 
(4)  The sale of personal property goods which occurs on a person's own private property by the owner thereof at his/her private residence or business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-14. - Permit issuance; investigation. 
A copy of the application for permit will be referred to the chief of police who will undertake an investigation of the applicant's record and background such as shall be reasonably necessary to protect the public. An applicant for permit under this chapter may be reasonably denied if he or she is currently wanted on warrant for arrest, of if the applicant had been convicted of a felony involving theft, fraud, bribery, or perjury. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-15. - Procedures for permit issuance. 
The city secretary shall review all information relevant to the issuance of a peddler/vendor permit and make the determination whether said permit is granted or denied. Before any permit is denied the city secretary shall consult the city manager. Said determination shall be made within five (5) working days of the filing of an application. Application is not complete until all items outlined in section 16-6 are submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-16. - Permit ID card. 
All peddlers, solicitors and vendors and their associates will be issued a permit ID card by the city secretary showing the individual's name, the address wherein the vending business is to be conducted, the individual's driver's license number and the effective period of the permit and shall display the permit ID card on their person at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-17. - Authority to enforce. 
The chief of police or designated representative shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to enlist the assistance of all appropriate agencies in the enforcement effort. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-18. - Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under this ordinance may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application; 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business of vending; 
(3)  Conducting the business of vending in any way contrary to the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; 
(5)  Conviction of any felony offense or any misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude while holding a vendor/peddler permit from the City of Marble Falls; 
(6)  Suspension or cancellation of any license issued by the Texas Department of Health Services; 
(7)  Arrears (ninety (90) days or more) of sales and use tax due the state comptroller; 
(8)  Failure to submit quarterly sales tax report to the city secretary pursuant to subsection 16-11(7) above. 
(9)  Violation of any city ordinance or law of the state in connection with any soliciting or selling by the vendor/peddler. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Sec. 16-19. - Appeals. 
Any person who is denied a permit or whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal same by filing a written notice of appeal to the Marble Falls City Council. All appeals must be filed with the city secretary within ten (10) days after notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. The appeal shall be heard by the Marble Falls City Council within thirty (30) days after receipt. At least five (5) days' notice of the date of the hearing shall be given to the applicant, permit holder. Based on the hearing of the appeal and facts relative thereto, the city council will either sustain or reverse the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the permit. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-04C, § I, 5-3-2011)  
Chapter 17 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; signs, Ch. 20; development code, App. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 17-1—17-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 95-O-3, adopted March 14, 1995, repealed Ord. No. 82-O-3B, adopted March 23, 1982, from which was derived provisions formerly codified as Ch. 17, Art. II, §§ 17-16—17-23. Section 1 of Ord. No. 95-O-3 enacted provisions which have been included as a new Art. II, §§ 17-16—17-22. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-126 et seq. 
State Law reference— Zoning commission, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1011f. 
 
Sec. 17-16. - Established. 
The council of the City of Marble Falls hereby establishes a planning board which shall also serve as a zoning board and which shall be known as the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-3, § 1(A), 3-14-95)  
Sec. 17-17. - Number. 
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) residents of the city who own real property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-3, § 1(B), 3-14-95; Ord. No. 98-O-2D, 2-24-98)  
Sec. 17-18. - Appointment; terms; vacancies. 
The members of the commission shall be appointed by the council for a term of two (2) years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the council. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-3, § 1(C), 3-14-95)  
Sec. 17-19. - Chairperson; quorum. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its appointed members. A majority of the appointed members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-3, § 1(D), 3-14-95)  
Sec. 17-20. - Duties and responsibility. 
The planning and zoning commission shall serve as an advisory board to the city council. They shall make recommendations relating to the development and redevelopment of the city and its environs. The planning and zoning commission shall have all duties imposed upon such body by ordinance, City Charter, state statute or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-3, § 1(E), 3-14-95)  
Sec. 17-21. - Removal. 
Commission members may be removed from office for nonparticipation, official misconduct, gross and obvious conflict of interest, violation of a city ordinance or council policy and being convicted of a crime of moral turpitude. The council may remove a commissioner by a majority vote after a hearing has been held. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-3, § 1(F), 3-14-95)  
Sec. 17-22. - Compensation. 
Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-3, § 1(G), 3-14-95)  
Sec. 17-23. - Attendance regulations. 
Failure of any member to attend a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of all meetings and workshops of the planning and zoning commission during any calendar year shall result in automatic removal from membership of the planning and zoning commission. Excused absences which have been approved by the chairman of the planning commission shall not be counted as absences in calculating the percentage of attendance. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-8G, 8-25-2003)  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, adopted Jan. 15, 2019, renumbered the former Ch. 17, Art. III, as Ch. 17, Art. IV, and added a new Ch. 17, Art. III as set out herein. The historical notations have been kept with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
 
Sec. 17-24. - Creation. 
The council of the City of Marble Falls hereby establishes a zoning board of adjustment (the "board" or "ZBA") in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 211.008. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-25. - Composition. 
The zoning board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) residents of the city. In addition, city council may appoint two (2) additional residents to serve as alternate members of the board in the event that a regular member of the board is unable to attend a meeting of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-26. - Appointment; terms; and vacancies. 
The members of the zoning board of adjustment shall be appointed by the city council for a term of four (4) years, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. However, for the first appointment of the board of adjustment, city council may choose to appoint two (2) or three (3) of the members to two-year terms in order to stagger reappointments in the future. When a vacancy on the board occurs, a replacement member shall be appointed by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Alternate members shall serve four-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-27. - Compensation. 
Members of the zoning board of adjustment shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-28. - Members not to hold other public offices. 
No member of the board shall hold any other public office of honor, trust or profit in the government of the city or county during their term of office. No member of a board or commission shall continue in such position after filing for an elective office. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-29. - Chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
The zoning board of adjustment shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its appointed members. The term of office for the chair and vice-chair shall be two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-30. - Recording secretary. 
The planning technician of the development services department shall act as the recording secretary of the board. The secretary shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the board's recording secretary as public record. Such findings of the board, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the zoning board of adjustment meeting at which such zoning variance is considered. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-31. - Duties; authority; and by-laws. 
The zoning board of adjustment shall have the authority and duty to consider requests for variances in accordance with App. B, Section 11.3.6, of the Code of Ordinances and any duties imposed upon such body by ordinance, city charter, state statute or other applicable law. Pursuant to V.T.C.A, Local Government Code, § 211.009, the zoning board of adjustment may authorize in specific cases a variance from the zoning requirements of this Code. The zoning board of adjustment shall have the power to make the rules, regulations and bylaws for its own governance so long as such rules, regulations and bylaws are not contrary to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-32. - Limitations on authority of zoning board of adjustment. 
The zoning board of adjustment may not grant a zoning variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the district for which the zoning variance is sought. The zoning board of adjustment shall have no power to grant or modify a conditional use permit authorized under App. B, Section 11.3.4, of these regulations. The zoning board of adjustment shall have no power to grant a zoning map amendment. In the event that a written request for a zoning map amendment is pending before the planning and zoning commission or the city council, the zoning board of adjustment shall neither hear nor grant any zoning variances with respect to the subject property until final disposition of the zoning map amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-33. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the zoning board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-34. - Quorum and vote. 
A quorum of the board shall consist of four (4) members. Each case before the board must be heard by at least seventy-five (75) percent of the members. A concurring vote of at least seventy-five (75) percent or a minimum of four (4) of the members of the board is necessary to decide in favor of an applicant. Any request not approved by the affirmative vote of four (4) or more members shall be considered denied. Alternate members shall serve whenever one (1) or more regular members are absent or are unable to serve and when requested by the mayor or city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-35. - Attendance. 
Failure of any member to attend a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of all meetings and workshops of the zoning board of adjustment during any calendar year may result in removal of the board member by the city council. Excused absences which have been approved by the chairperson of the zoning board of adjustment shall not be counted as absences in calculating the percentage of attendance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 17-36. - Removal. 
Board members may be removed from office for nonparticipation, official misconduct, gross and obvious conflict of interest, violation of a city ordinance or council policy and being convicted of a crime of moral turpitude. The city council may remove a board member by a majority vote after a hearing has been held. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.C, 1-15-2019)  
Secs. 17-37—17-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL HISTORIC DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Ch. 17, Art. III. 
Ordinance No. 92-O-70, adopted Oct. 27, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—9 as Ch. 17, Art. III, §§ 17-41—17-49 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 17-41. - Districts created. 
The city council hereby authorizes the creation of municipal historic districts within the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 1, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-42. - Application for proposed district. 
To qualify as an historic district the owners of the property within the proposed district must file an application in the city secretary's office. The application must include the following information: 
(1)  The geographic area to be included in the proposed historic district. The application shall include a map with the proposed historic district clearly identified. 
(2)  The locations of the historic structures with the proposed historic district. The application should also provide the following information on each structure: 
a.  A brief narrative of the history of each historic structure. 
b.  The name of the owner of the property on which the structure is located. 
c.  The present use of the structure. 
d.  Legal description. 
(3)  The name of the organization or entity applying for recognition of the proposed historic district. 
(4)  A detailed plan for preservation and development of the structures within the proposed historic district. This plan shall include proposals to maintain or restore the exterior of each building in the district to its original appearance. Plan may include beautification plans and/or educational plans. 
(5)  The sponsor's financial ability to implement the plan. 
(6)  Any other information specifically requested by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 2, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-43. - Sponsor required. 
No historic district shall be recognized by the city unless some person or organization agrees to act as a sponsor of the proposed historic district. The sponsor shall be responsible for the implementation of the plan for the historic district, which is required by this article to be submitted and approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 3, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-44. - Financial stability. 
No historic district shall be recognized unless the sponsor demonstrates its financial stability. This may be done by showing that members of the organization will pay dues, that donations actually received will create sufficient income to implement the sponsor's plan, or in some other similar manner. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 4, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-45. - Membership participation. 
No historic district shall be recognized unless the sponsor shall obtain membership participation of seventy-five (75) percent of all property owners within the proposed historic district. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 5, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-46. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of a proposed historic district shall be drawn so as to include all historical structures within a reasonable proximity to other historic structures located within the city. However, no property owner shall be included in the district against his or her wishes. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 6, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-47. - Review by council. 
Six (6) months prior to the renewal every five (5) years, each historic district recognized and approved by the council pursuant to this article shall be reviewed by the council for compliance with the plan for maintenance and development of the historic district. Upon completion of this review, the council may renew approval of the historic district for an additional five-year term, or it may terminate the historic district. The decision regarding renewal or termination of the historic district is a political decision, and is not subject to the jurisdiction of any court. Neither the sponsor nor any individual members of the sponsor's organization shall have a property right of any nature whatsoever in the status of the area as an historic district. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 7, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-48. - Signs. 
Notwithstanding the terms of Ordinance No. 90-O-5 (the Sign Ordinance), the sponsor may erect not more than two (2) signs indicating the location of the historic district. The sponsor shall be responsible for all costs associated with creating, erecting and maintaining the signs. The actual design and location of the sign shall be subject to approval of the city. In the event that an historic district is terminated by the council pursuant to this article, the sponsor shall remove the signs authorized in this section within thirty (30) days of such termination. If the sponsor fails to remove the signs, the city may cause such signs to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 8, 10-27-92)  
Sec. 17-49. - Definitions. 
An historic district shall be defined as a contiguous geographical area which contains five (5) or more structures that have historical significance for the City of Marble Falls, Burnet County, the State of Texas or the United States of America. 
Sponsor shall mean an organization who applies for recognition of a historic district, and who is responsible for the implementation of the plan for maintenance and development of the district. 
(Ord. No. 92-O-10, § 9, 10-27-92)  
Chapter 18 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; emergency management, Ch. 8; offenses, Ch. 14; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Police reserve unit. 
The Chief of the Marble Falls Police Department shall be the director and sponsor of the Marble Falls Police Reserve Unit. He shall aid in developing and establishing policies, directives, standard operating procedures, and programs of the unit. He shall be the commanding officer of the reserve unit. Rules shall be adopted from time to time by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 78-O-2E, 2-14-78) 
State Law reference— Police reserve force, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 998a.  
Secs. 18-2—18-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 18-21. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
For the purposes of this article, an alarm system shall not include: 
(1)  An alarm system installed upon premises occupied by the United States Government, the State of Texas, the City of Marble Falls, or any county government or school districts situated within the city; 
(2)  An alarm system installed on a motor vehicle; or 
(3)  An alarm system which provides notice of activation only to persons on the premises served by the alarm system. 
Alarm protective service: Any service involving the installation, servicing, repair, maintenance, sale, replacement, or response to an alarm system. For the purposes of this article, alarm protective service shall not include any persons engaged solely in the sale of alarm systems designed to cause an audible and/or visual signal to be emitted only in the premises in which the system is installed. 
Alarm site: A single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner. 
Alarm system: A device or system that transmits or relays a signal intended to summon emergency services of the city in response to an emergency. The categories of alarm systems are robbery, burglary, fire emergency, medical assistance, and emergency assistance. Alarm system does not mean an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless used for a habitation at a permanent site, or an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within a premise, but does include an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. 
Alarm system user: The owner, agent or person in control of the property on which an alarm system is maintained within the city. 
Burglar alarm notification: Notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered by an alarm system designed to respond to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
Director: The chief of police or his authorized representative. 
Emergency assistance alarm: Any automatic notification other than those previously defined which summons emergency assistance from the City of Marble Falls. 
Emergency medical assistance alarm notification: An alarm system intended to summon emergency medical assistance. 
False burglar alarm notification: A burglar alarm notification to the police, when the responding police officer reasonably finds there is no evidence of unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion. 
False emergency medical assistance alarm notification: An emergency medical assistance alarm notification to the police department, when the responding Emergency Medical Service personnel reasonably find there is no evidence of need for emergency medical assistance. 
False fire alarm notification: A fire alarm notification to the police department when the responding Fire Rescue Department personnel reasonably find there is no evidence of a fire having occurred. 
False robbery alarm notification: A robbery alarm notification to the police, when the responding officer reasonably finds there is no evidence of a robbery. 
Financial institution: An institution required to have an alarm system by the provisions of the Bank Protection act of 1968 (12 USC section 1882, as amended). 
Fire alarm notification: A notification to the police department intended to summon fire-fighting forces, which is initiated or triggered by an alarm system designed to react to any of the visual or physical characteristics of fire. 
Local alarm: An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible from the exterior of a structure. 
Person: An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or two (2) or more persons having a joint or common economic interest. 
Robbery alarm notification: A notification intended to summon the police when a robbery occurs by means of an alarm system designed to be purposely activated by an individual. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-2, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 18-22. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he installs, operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first obtaining a license from the director. A separate license is required for each alarm site and each type of alarm system as hereinabove defined at each site. 
(b)  Any person operating or causing to be operated an alarm system on the effective date of this article must apply for a license within thirty (30) days after said effective date. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the required fee and completed application form, the director shall issue a license unless there is reasonable cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained or operated in accordance with this article or the application will not comply with each provision of this article. 
(d)  Each license application must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person who is responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees or charges levied under this article. Each license application must also contain the name, address, and telephone number of at least two (2) persons who are able to have agreed to receive notification from a member of the Marble Falls Police Department or Marble Falls Fire Rescue Department at any time and to come to the alarm site within forty (40) minutes after receiving such notification. 
(e)  An alarm license cannot be transferred to another person. However, the individual designed to respond to an alarm or relay an alarm may be changed. A license holder must inform the director of any change that alters information listed on the license application. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(f)  Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm license or renewal, or the purpose of making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause for refusal to grant, or suspension of, a license. 
(g)  If a person applies for a license before a new alarm system is put in operation, no service fee will be assessed during the first thirty (30) days after issuance of a license and any activation of alarm system which causes a response by the police or Fire Rescue Departments during that period will not be counted in assessing a service fee. 
(h)  A license holder may present evidence to the police or fire chief that the activation of an alarm system was not a false alarm. If the police or fire chief determines that the activation was not a false alarm, any response by the police or Fire Rescue Department to such activation will not be included in determining the service fee set out below. The burden shall be on the license holder to prove that the activation of the alarm system was not a false alarm. 
(i)  The license required by this section shall not obviate the requirement to obtain all applicable permits from the City of Marble Falls, including, but not limited to, building and electrical permits. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-3, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 18-23. - License fee. 
A nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for a residential site and twenty dollars ($20.00) for a commercial or industrial site per year is required for each license. A license is issued for one (1) year and must be renewed each year thereafter by payment of an annual renewal fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for a residential site and twenty dollars ($20.00) for a commercial site or industrial site. It is the responsibility of the license holder to pay the renewal fee prior to the expiration date of the license. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-4, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 2001-O-4B, § II, 4-10-2001)  
Sec. 18-24. - Service fee for false alarms. 
(a)  If the license holder has had six (6) false burglar alarms in the twelve-month period immediately preceding any false alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for such false alarm. 
(b)  If the license holder has had two (2) false fire alarms in the twelve-month period immediately preceding any false alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for such false alarm. 
(c)  If the license holder has had two (2) false robbery alarms in the twelve-month period immediately preceding any false alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for such false alarm. 
(d)  If the license holder has had two (2) false medical assistance alarms in the twelve-month period immediately preceding any false alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for such false alarm. 
(e)  If the license holder has had two (2) false emergency assistance alarms in the twelve-month period immediately preceding any false alarm, he shall be assessed a service fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for such false alarm. 
(f)  A license holder must pay any service fee assessed under the provisions of this section within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice that it has been assessed by the director. 
(g)  The city shall maintain a written record of all alarm notifications, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name of license holder; 
(2)  Location of alarm site; 
(3)  Date and time of alarm notification; 
(4)  Name and badge number of the responding police officer, fire fighter, or emergency medical service personnel; 
(5)  Weather conditions; and 
(6)  Whether the notification was a false alarm notification. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-5, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-25. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The director shall not consider an alarm notification to be false if he determines that the alarm was caused by: 
(1)  A natural or man-made catastrophe; 
(2)  Severe weather; 
(3)  Vandalism; 
(4)  Telephone line outage; or 
(5)  Attempted entry or attempted robbery. 
(6)  In high-risk loss of life occupancies such as hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, residential care facilities, educational uses, including day care centers and theaters where a fire alarm was: 
a.  Caused by undetermined means; or 
b.  Caused by conditions not under control of the building management such as manual false alarms, or smoking. 
(b)  The determination of the director in classifying an alarm notification as false or actual is final. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-6, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-26. - Relaying intermediary. 
A license holder shall not report his alarm signals through a relaying intermediary person that does not meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-7, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-27. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A license holder must: 
(1)  Adjust or modify the sensory mechanism of this alarm system to suppress false indications of force so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses due to: 
a.  Transient pressure changes in water pipes; 
b.  Flashes of light; 
c.  Wind noise caused by the rattling of vibrating of doors or windows; 
d.  Vehicular noise adjacent to the installation; and 
e.  Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies; and 
(2)  Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system. 
(b)  A person in control of a local alarm must: 
(1)  Adjust the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than thirty (30) minutes after activated; 
(2)  Display in a prominent exterior location an identification notice provided by the director; and 
(3)  Come to the alarm site within forty (40) minutes after receiving a request from a member of the Marble Falls Police Department or the Marble Falls Fire Rescue Department to do so and grant access to the site and deactivate the alarm if necessary. 
(4)  In the event that a mechanism sounds an alarm system signal for longer than thirty (30) minutes after being activated, the chief of the Marble Falls Police Department, the chief of the Marble Falls Fire Rescue Department or their designated representative are authorized to disable the alarm. All costs of the city in disabling such an alarm shall be assessed to the operator of the alarm system and shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days after the operator has received notice that the costs have been assessed. City shall not be liable for any damage incurred to the property or alarm system in disabling the alarm system. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article constitutes a grant of approval by the operator of the alarm system for the city to deactivate the local alarm system under the provisions of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-8, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 18-28. - Manual reset required. 
A person in control of a local alarm or alarm system that causes an alarm notification to be sent directly to the city shall adjust or modify the mechanism so that upon activation the system will transmit only one (1) alarm signal and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being manually reset at the alarm site. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-9, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-29. - Inspection. 
Upon reasonable notification, the police chief or fire chief of their designee may inspect an alarm site and alarm system of a license holder during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-10, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-30. - Revocation of permit or failure to pay assessment fee. 
(a)  The chief of police may revoke an alarm system license if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a license; 
(2)  The license holder has violated any provision of this article; 
(3)  The license holder causes or permits any intentional activation of an alarm system for the purpose of testing the response by the police or Fire Rescue Department. 
(b)  If the chief of police refuses to issue or revokes a license, he shall send to the applicant or license holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system during the period in which the license for the system is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-11, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-31. - Appeal. 
(a)  A license holder aggrieved by the decision to assess a service fee may appeal the decision to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after the assessment of the service fee. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays the assessment of the service fee until the city manager or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the assessment is final. 
(b)  A license holder make appeal the decision of the chief of police to revoke a license to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the chief of police. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays the revocation until the city manager or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police is final. 
(c)  The city manager or his representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing. The formal rules or evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing; the hearing officer shall make a decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action forming the basis for the appeal. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies with the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-12, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-32. - Standards for alarm protective services and alarm system operation. 
The police and fire chiefs may set reasonable standards and procedures to be followed by any alarm protective service when giving notice to the police or Fire Rescue Departments or activation of an alarm system. Such standards and procedures shall be set out in writing and made available to any alarm protective service requesting them. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-13, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 18-33. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall: 
(1)  Send notification of an alarm to the city by an individual; 
(2)  Keep his business premises locked and secured at all times; 
(3)  Allow an inspection of his business premises by authorized agents of police chief or fire chief or fire chief at any time; 
(4)  Report alarms only to a telephone number or numbers designated by the city; 
(5)  Send alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the city; and 
(6)  Maintain sufficient staff to ensure that valid alarms are relayed immediately to the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-14, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-34. - Direct alarm reporting. 
A license holder whose alarm system transmits automatic alarm notifications, other than alarm notifications from financial institutions, directly to the city over the normal telephone system shall: 
(1)  Transmit the alarm in the form and content specified by the city; 
(2)  Transmit over telephone lines designated for such use; 
(3)  Design his system so that it will notify the license holder, or his designated agent identified on the license application, when an alarm is transmitted to the city; 
(4)  Furnish the city upon request or director with copies of the alarm operation procedures and senior locations; and 
(5)  Furnish the name, address, and telephone number of a licensed alarm company responsible for correcting any malfunction that any occur. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-15, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-35. - Protection of financial institutions. 
(a)  Financial institution may install, with the permission of the chief of police, a signal line directly to the police department for the purpose of reporting burglaries and robberies. If such installation is made, all other requirements of this article must be met. The financial institution shall execute a letter of agreement with the city permitting the installation of all necessary equipment on an indicator panel located in the communications division of the police department. The installation must be accomplished at the institution's expense. 
(b)  The letter of agreement shall contain provisions granting a right of inspection to the chief of police, requiring payment of an annual, nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each indicator installed. The rights of a financial institution under such letter of agreement with the city are not transferable. In addition to the matters set forth herein above, the letter of agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The police chief annually may inspect the alarm system at the alarm site and shall require necessary repairs or improvements. If the police chief finds that the signaling device fails to comply with the requirements of this article, he may terminate the letter of agreement and require the removal of equipment and indicators from the communications center of the police department. Such removal shall be at the expense of the financial institution. 
(2)  The financial institution shall, at its expense, provide service for the alarm system at the request of the financial institution or the chief of police. In no event shall the city become liable for service charges for repairs and maintenance of any such alarm system. 
(3)  The financial institution may cancel its letter or agreement with the city at any time by giving written notice thereto the chief of police. Upon giving such notice, the institution shall promptly remove its equipment and indicators from the monitor panel in the communications center. Such removal shall be at the expense of the financial institution. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-16, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-36. - Service fee. 
(a)  If a license holder (or its agent or representative) fails to comply with section 18-27(b)(3), then a service fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each half hour or portion thereof that the license holder fails to appear shall be charged to that license holder. 
(b)  All service fees charged by this section shall be paid within ten (10) days of the date notice is given to the license holder by city. If such service fees are not paid within such time, the license granted hereunder shall be revoked at the option of the city. Under no circumstances shall a license be renewed if a license holder owes service fees pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-17, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-37. - Repealing clause. 
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-18, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-38. - Severability clause. 
If any article, paragraph or subdivision, clause or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part or provision thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-19, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-39. - Penalty clause. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every day such offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-20, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 18-40. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect immediately from and after the publication of its caption, as the law in such cases provides. 
(Ord. No. 95-O-8A, § 19-21, 8-8-95)  
Chapter 18.5 - PUBLIC FUNDS INVESTMENT POLICY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, §§ I—7, adopted November 15, 2016 , amended ch. 18.5, §§ 18.5-1—18.5-7, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 18.5 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2007-O-9C, §§ 1—7, adopted September 10, 2007. 
Cross reference— Employee benefits, § 2-176 et. seq.; municipal retirement system, § 2-186 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18.5-1. - Scope and objectives. 
(a)  Scope. This investment policy applies to all financial assets and funds of the city, held in all funds. 
(b)  Statement of cash management philosophy. The city will maintain a comprehensive cash management program to include the effective collection of all accounts receivable, the prompt deposit of receipts to the city's bank accounts, the payment of obligations to comply with state law and in accord with vendor invoices, and the prudent investment of idle funds in accord with this policy. 
(c)  Objectives. The city's investment program will be conducted to accomplish the following objectives, listed in priority order: 
(1)  Safety. The city will give priority to the preservation and safety of the principal invested. Investments will be made in a manner that will mitigate credit risk and interest rate risk. 
(2)  Liquidity. The city will maintain the availability of sufficient cash to pay obligations of the city when they are due. 
(3)  Diversification. Diversification of the portfolio will include diversification by maturity and market sector and will include the use of a number of broker/dealers for diversification and market coverage. 
(4)  Yield. The city will invest idle cash at the highest possible rate of return, consistent with state and local laws and the objectives of safety and liquidity listed above. 
Effective cash management is recognized as essential to good fiscal management. Cash management is defined as the process of managing monies in order to ensure maximum cash availability. The city shall maintain a comprehensive cash management program which includes collection of accounts receivable, prudent investment of its available cash, disbursement of payments in accordance with invoice terms and the management of banking services. 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, § I, 11-15-2016 )  
Sec. 18.5-2. - Standard of care. 
(a)  Prudence. Investments will be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, that persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital and the probable income to be derived. The city council recognizes that in maintaining a diversified portfolio occasional measured losses due to market volatility are inevitable and must be considered within the contest of the overall portfolio's investment return, provided that adequate diversification has been implemented. 
(b)  Ethics and conflict of interest. Officers and employees involved in the investment process will refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with the property execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. The officer and his/her employees will comply with all disclosure and reporting requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code, § 2256.005(1). 
(c)  Delegation of authority. The city's director of finance is responsible for overall management of the city's investment program and is designated as the city's investment officer. In the event the director of finance is unavailable, the city manager may conduct day-to-day emergency investment operations, provided he has been designated an investment officer and has met the requirements as such under V.T.C.A., Government Code, Ch. 2256.008. Accordingly, the director of finance and city manager are responsible for day-to-day administration of the investment program and for the duties listed below: 
(1)  Maintain current information as to available cash balances in city accounts, and as to the amount of idle cash available for investment; 
(2)  Make investments and maintain written procedures for the operation and internal control of the investment program consistent with this policy; 
(3)  Ensure that all investments are adequately secured; and 
(4)  Attend training as required by V.T.C.A., Government Code, § 2256.08(a) and ensure that any staff executing transactions covered by this policy attends the required training. The investment training shall be attended not less than once in a two-year period and receive not less than eight (8) hours of instruction relating to investment responsibilities under this policy. The training must be sponsored by a recognized professional trade association or accredited college or university or its affiliate including, but not limited to: 
Texas Municipal League 
Government Finance Officers Association of Texas (GFOAT) 
Government Finance Officers Association of US and Canada 
Government Treasurers Organization of Texas 
University of North Texas 
Texas Tech University for Professional Development 
Texas State University 
(5)  Establish an investment committee and conduct quarterly meetings to deliberate and prepare for the governing body items such as: performance reports, economic outlook, portfolio diversification, maturity structure, potential risk, compile list of authorized brokers/dealers, and the target rate of return on the investment portfolio. The investment committee shall consist of, but is not limited to, the director of finance, the city manager, and selected staff. 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, § 2, 11-15-2016 )  
Sec. 18.5-3. - Investment strategies. 
(a)  Operating funds. Operating funds are defined as cash and investments used for day-to-day operations that do not fall into one (1) of the other categories. Operating funds will be invested in a manner suitable for funds requiring a high degree of liquidity. Investments of operating funds shall be limited to a weighted average maturity no greater than one (1) year, and all investment instruments must meet credit and safety criteria as required by the Public Funds Investment Act and this policy. Involuntary liquidation of operating fund investments is unlikely due to their short term nature. However, should a liquidation of investments prior to maturity be necessary, their short term nature will make material losses unlikely. Operating fund investments will be diverse and include certificates of deposit, U.S. treasuries and agencies, investment pools and money market mutual funds. Investment of operating funds will be structured to attain the highest possible yield given the liquidity and safety requirements. 
(b)  Contingency reserves (or operating reserves). Contingency reserves are the minimum fund balance/working capital requirements as defined by council in the annual budget document. Contingency reserve balances may be used to cover any cash operating shortfalls due the timing of bond issues, revenue receipts, etc. Investment of these funds may exceed twenty-four (24) months with prior approval of the city manager if short term cash flow needs are not evident. Any one (1) security may not exceed twenty-four (24) months in maturity length. The weighted average maturity for these funds may not exceed twelve (12) months. Involuntary liquidation of contingency reserve investments is unlikely due to their nature. However, should a liquidation of investments prior to maturity be necessary, the comparatively longer term nature of some of the investments could result in material losses depending on financial and economic conditions. Contingency reserve investments will be diverse and include C.D.'s, U.S. treasuries and agencies, investment pools and money market mutual funds. Investment of contingency reserves will be structured to attain the highest possible yield given the liquidity and safety requirements. 
(c)  Debt. 
(1)  Reserves. Debt reserves are defined as bond reserve funds required to be set aside in accordance with bond covenants. The city's revenue bond covenants permit the city to accumulate a reserve fund or to fund the required amount with a surety or other insurance policy; therefore, the city's investments are not adversely affected by any reserve requirement conditions. Currently the city funds its required bond reserves with a surety policy. In the event the city has bonds that require bond reserves, the reserves will be issued according to this policy. 
(2)  Interest and sinking (or debt service funds). Interest and sinking funds are defined as those funds accumulated to meet periodic payments required by bond and note maturity schedules. The investment maturities are limited by pertinent debt service requirements and tax laws limiting accumulation and earnings for such funds. Involuntary liquidation of investments is highly unlikely due to the nature of these funds. Interest and sinking fund investments will be diverse and include C.D.'s, U.S. treasuries and agencies, investment pools or money market mutual funds. 
(d)  Bond proceeds (capital improvement funds). Bond proceed funds are defined as those funds received from the sales of city bonds or notes and not otherwise set aside for debt service or reserve purposes. These funds typically include money to fund infrastructure construction or other large projects. The investment maturities are limited by pertinent project draw requirements and tax laws governing earnings for such funds, but may not have a weighted average maturity in excess of one (1) year, with no single security greater than twenty-four (24) months. Involuntary liquidation of investment is highly unlikely. Bond proceed investments will be diverse and include C.D.'s, U.S. treasuries and agencies, investment pools or money market mutual funds. 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, § 3, 11-15-2016 )  
Sec. 18.5-4. - Authorized investments. 
(a)  Allowable investments. The city funds may be invested in the following instruments: 
(1)  Certificates of deposit. Certificates of deposit that are issued by a state or national bank that has its main office or a branch office in the state and are guaranteed or insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance. All certificates of deposit in excess of the FDIC insured amount must be collateralized as described by Section 2257.023 of the Public Funds Collateral Act. Collateral must be held by a third party and in accordance with section 18.5-4 and 18.5-5. 
In addition certificates of deposits may be invested by an investing entity through a broker that has its main office or a branch office in the state and is selected by the investing entity. The broker arranges for the deposit of the funds in certificates of deposit in one (1) or more federally insured depository institutions, wherever located, for the amount of the investing entity. The full amount of the principal and accrued interest of each of the certificates of deposit is insured by the FDIC. The investing entity appoints a clearing broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission and operating pursuant to SEC Rule 15c3-3 as custodian for the investing entity with respect to the certificates of deposit issued for the account of the investing entity. 
(2)  U.S. Treasuries and agencies. Obligations of the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities. 
(3)  Investment pools. Investment pools that meet the following criteria: 
a.  An investment pool must provide and comply with the following: 
1.  The investment officer of the city with a detailed prospectus from the pool; 
2.  Detailed periodic reports to the city; 
3.  Be continuously rated "AAA" or "AAA-m"; 
4.  Offer circular or other similar disclosure instruments; and 
5.  Provide monthly transaction reporting as required by V.T.C.A., Government Code, § 2256.016. 
b.  Investment pools authorized by city council are TexPool, Logic and Texas CLASS. 
c.  Investment in a new pool will require the approval of the city council. 
d.  A public funds investment pool created to function as a money market mutual fund must: 
1.  Mark its portfolio to market daily; 
2.  Include in its investment objectives the maintenance of a stable net asset value of one dollar ($1.00) for each share; and 
3.  Be continuously rated no lower than AAA or at an equivalent rating by at least one (1) nationally recognized rating service. 
(4)  Money market mutual funds. No-load money market mutual funds if the fund: 
a.  Is regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission; 
b.  Marks its portfolio to market daily; 
c.  Includes in its investment objectives the maintenance of a stable net asset value of one dollar ($1.00) for each share; 
d.  Has a dollar-weighted average stated maturity of ninety (90) days or fewer; 
e.  Is continuously rated no lower than AAA or at an equivalent rating by at least one (1) nationally recognized rating service. 
(5)  Other investments. If additional types of securities are approved for investment by public funds by state statute, they will not be eligible for investment by the city until this policy has been amended and the amended version approved by the city council. 
(b)  Compliance with state law. All authorized investments outlined above must meet the requirements of the Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, § 2256. No investment may be made in any instrument except as provided above. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code, § 2256.025, the city may only engage in investment transactions with qualified brokers/dealers that are hereby authorized by the governing body, as listed in exhibit "A", attached. 
(c)  Cash on hand. Cash resources required for the immediate needs of the city and not otherwise available for longer term investment will be placed in checking account(s) at the city's depository/depositories. Such checking account(s) will earn interest at the highest rate(s) provided in the respective depository contract(s). 
(d)  Length of investments. The following general constraints will apply. Maturities exceeding twelve (12) months will require authorization by the city manager, with no single maturity greater than twenty-four (24) months. Maturities will be staggered to avoid undue concentration of assets in a specific maturity sector and maturities selected will provide for stability of income and reasonable liquidity. In no instance shall the maximum stated maturity be greater than its longest stated debt service requirement unless further restricted in section 18.5-3, Investment strategies, of this policy; bond covenants or state law. 
EXHIBIT A
SELECTION OF AUTHORIZED BROKERS/DEALERS 
BANKS 
American Bank of Texas 
BBVA Compass Bank 
First State Bank of Central Texas 
Grand Bank of Texas 
IBC Bank 
Northstar Bank of Texas 
Security State Bank and Trust 
BROKERED DEALER 
Financial Northeast Companies 
INVESTMENT POOLS 
Logic 
Tex-Pool 
Texas CLASS 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, § 4, 11-15-2016 )  
Sec. 18.5-5. - Safekeeping and custody. 
(a)  Authorized dealers. Authorized investments in U.S. treasuries and agencies may be purchased only through brokers/dealers who are licensed and in good standing with the Texas Department of Securities, the Securities Exchange Commission, the National Association of Securities Dealers or other applicable self-regulatory organization. 
The investment officer will maintain a list of approved security brokers/dealers principally on the basis of evidenced credit worthiness that are authorized to provide investment services. Before engaging in investment transactions with a broker/dealer, investment pool or money market mutual funds, the investment officer will have received from said firm a signed certification form. This form will attest that the individual responsible for the city's account with that firm has received and reviewed the city's investment policy and that the brokerage firm has implemented reasonable procedures and controls in an effort to preclude imprudent activities arising out of investment transactions conducted between city and the brokerage firm. The letter must be signed by a qualified representative as defined by V.T.C.A., Government Code, § 2256.002. 
"Qualified representative" means a person who holds a position with a business organization who is authorized to act on behalf of the business organization and who is one (1) of the following: 
(1)  A business organization doing business that is regulated by or registered with a securities commission, a person who is registered under the rules of the National Association of Securities Dealers; 
(2)  For a state or federal bank, a savings bank or state or federal credit union, a member of the loan committee for the bank or branch of the bank or a person authorized by corporate resolution to act on behalf of and bind the banking institution. 
(3)  For an investment pool, the person authorized by the elected official or board with authority to administer the activities of the investment pool to sign the written instrument on behalf of the investment pool, or 
(4)  For an investment management firm registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 or, if not subject of registration under the Act, registered with the state securities board, a person who is an officer or principal of the investment management firm. 
(b)  Authorized financial institutions. Certificates of deposit may be purchased at a qualified bank. The city must have a written agreement with the qualified bank and that bank must meet all state law for deposit of public funds. 
(c)  Acknowledgement of investment policy. Every dealer and financial institution with whom the city transacts business will be provided a copy of this investment policy to assure that they are familiar with the goals and objectives of the investment program. A representative of the firm will be required to return a signed certification stating that the policy has been received and reviewed and that controls are in place to assure that only authorized securities are sold to the city. 
(d)  Prudence. The standard of prudence to be used in the investment function shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall be applied in the context of managing the overall portfolio. This standard states: 
"Investments shall be made with judgement and care under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the expected income to be derived." 
Limitation of personal liability. The investment officer and those delegated investment authority under this policy, when acting in accordance with the written procedures and this policy and in accord with the prudent person rule, shall be relieved of personal liability in the management of the portfolio provided that deviations from expectations for a specific security's credit risk or market price change or portfolio shifts are reported in a timely manner and that appropriate action is taken to control adverse market effects. 
(e)  Internal controls. All investment transactions will be documented by the investment officer. The investment officer may make investments orally, but will follow promptly with a written confirmation to the financial institution or broker/dealer, with a copy of such confirmation retained in the city's files. 
On investments in U.S. treasuries and agencies, the investment officer will take competitive bids. At least two (2) quotations will be taken for each such investment made. 
Market value of the portfolio and each security will be monitored at least quarterly through industry standard publications/sources for market data such as, but not limited to, The Wall Street Journal. 
Cash flow forecasting. Cash flow forecasting is designed to protect and sustain cash flow requirements of the city. Supplemental to the financial and budgetary systems, the investment officer will maintain a cash flow forecasting process designed to monitor and forecast cash positions for investment purposes. 
(f)  Safekeeping. All securities purchased by the city under this policy must be designated as assets of the city, must be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment (DVP) basis, and must be protected through the use of a third-party custody/safekeeping agent. The city will enter into a formal agreement with an institution of such size and expertise as is necessary to provide the services needed to protect and secure the investment assets of the city. 
(g)  Collateralization. To the extent not insured by federal agencies that secure deposits, city funds (including cash on hand and C.D.'s) must be collateralized by collateral securities in compliance with the Texas Public Funds Collateral Act and pertinent federal banking regulations. Only securities prescribed as eligible investments under the Public Funds Investment Act qualify as pledged securities. 
Securities pledged as collateral must be retained in a third party bank in the state or with a Federal Reserve Bank in the city's name. The city will provide the original safekeeping receipt on each pledged security. The city, financial institution, and the safekeeping bank(s) will operate in accordance with a master safekeeping agreement signed by each of the parties. Collateral pledged to the city must be approved by the financial institution's board or directors or loan committee, and documented as pledged to the city in the minutes of the meeting. The city's investment officer must approve in writing the release of collateral prior to its removal from the safekeeping account in accordance with the terms of depository agreement. 
The financial institution(s) with which the city invests and/or maintains deposits will provide monthly a listing of the collateral pledged to the city marked to current market prices. The listing will include total pledged securities itemized by name, type and description of the security; safekeeping receipt number; par value; current market value; maturity date, if available; and Moody's or Standard & Poor's rating, if available. 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, § 5, 11-15-2016 )  
Sec. 18.5-6. - Reporting. 
(a)  Quarterly reporting. The investment officer shall prepare and submit to the council a quarterly report on investment transactions for all funds covered by this policy. The report will be prepared in compliance with the Public Funds Investment Act, and generally accepted accounting practices. The report will cover the investment position of the city at the end of each fiscal quarter. The contents will include at a minimum: 
(1)  Beginning, ending and significant changes in market value of the portfolio; 
(2)  Beginning and ending market value and book value, maturity date, type of funds, interest coupon, accrued interest and yield for each separate security; and 
(3)  A statement as to the compliance with this policy and state law. 
(b)  Annual reporting. Within ninety (90) days following the end of the fiscal year, the investment officer will present to the city council a comprehensive annual report on the investment program and investment activity. In addition to the information required for quarterly reporting, the annual report will include a review of the activities and return for the twelve (12) months, suggest policy revisions and improvements that might enhance the investment program, and include an investment plan for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(c)  Performance standards. In order to evaluate portfolio performance of funds subject to this policy, the city portfolio will be compared against appropriately competitive and reasonable benchmarks, including money market mutual funds or investment pools of similar make-up and maturities. 
(d)  Compliance. A compliance audit of management controls and adherence to this policy as it relates to the citys' investments and investing activity will be performed on an annual basis in conjunction with the city's annual financial audit if the criteria of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 2256.023(d) are met. 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, § 6, 11-15-2016 )  
Sec. 18.5-7. - Policy review and amendments. 
This investment policy will be reviewed by the city council on at least an annual basis as required by the Public Funds Investment Act and make amendments as necessary. The council will review the policy as part of the annual investment report presented by staff. 
( Ord. No. 2016-O-11D, § 7, 11-15-2016 )  
Chapter 19 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Abandoned property generally, § 13-16 et seq.; junked vehicles, § 13-41 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 19-1—19-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-16. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sales means and includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. 
Goods are meant to include any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-6A, § 1, 6-9-81) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-17. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any person selling or advertising for sale an item of personal property which is specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in number. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-6A, § 5, 6-9-81)  
Secs. 19-18—19-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 19-31. - Required; fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the city without first filing with the clerk the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such clerk a permit to do so, to be known as a garage sale permit. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-6A, § 2, 6-9-81)  
Sec. 19-32. - Issuance; display. 
A garage sale permit shall be issued to any one person only twice within a twelve-month period and no such permit shall be issued for more than four (4) consecutive calendar days. Each permit issued must be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the permitted sale. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-6A, § 3, 6-9-81)  
Sec. 19-33. - Required information. 
The information to be filed with the clerk, pursuant to this division, shall be follows: 
(1)  Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association, or organization conducting the sale; 
(2)  Name of owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted and consent of owner if applicant is other than the owner; 
(3)  Location at which sale is to be conducted; 
(4)  Number of days of sale; 
(5)  Date of sale and dates of past sales; 
(6)  Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the information given is full and true and known to him to be so. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-6A, § 4, 6-9-81)  
Chapter 19.5 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19.5-1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, (1986); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Iacobucci v. City of Newport, Ky, 479 U.S. 92 (1986); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir.1997); Kev. Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir.1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir.1995); and South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F.2d 608 (11th Cir.1984), as well as studies conducted in other cities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and findings reported in the Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics obtained from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the city council finds that: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where sexually oriented businesses are located. See e.g., Studies of the cities of Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; and Austin, Texas. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. See, e.g., California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 111 (1972); See also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377. 
(4)  Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. See, e.g., Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 698 (1986); see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77. 
(6)  At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. See, e.g., Study of Fort Meyers, Florida. 
(7)  For the period 1985 through 1995, the total number of reported cases of AIDS in the United States caused by the immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was five hundred twenty-three thousand fifty-six (523,056). See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(8)  AIDS cases and the infectious nature of that disease represent a substantial risk to the citizens of the state and to the citizens of the city. 
(9)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for HIV antibody test in state. 
(10)  The total number of cases of early (less than one (1) year) syphilis in the United States reported during the ten-year period 1985 through 1995 was 367,796. See, e.g., Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(11)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with a total of one million two hundred fifty thousand five hundred eight-one (1,250,581) cases reported during the period 1993 through 1995. See, e.g. Statistics of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(12)  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(13)  According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. See, e.g. Findings of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(14)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. See. e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377. 
(15)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids, including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377. 
(16)  Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity. See, e.g., Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560, 583 (1991). 
(17)  Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug use. See, e.g., Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1986). 
(18)  The findings noted in paragraphs numbered (1) through (17) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(19)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which would be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(20)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(21)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult establishments. 
(22)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity. 
(23)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(24)  The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention to this chapter. 
(25)  The barring of such individuals from operation or employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of ten (10) years for a previous felony conviction serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(26)  The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of this city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § I, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-2. - Definitions. 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment that, as one (1) of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial activity of the establishment. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or 
(2)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(4)  Persons who engage in erotic dancing or performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear, in person, in a state of nudity and/or semi-nudity, and/or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
Director means the chief of police and such employee(s) of the police department as he may designate to perform the duties of the director under this chapter. 
Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, contract basis, or independent basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises, nor does "employee" include a person exclusively on the premises as a patron or customer. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform an act involving "specified sexual activities" or involving the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" in the presence of another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or 
(5)  A sexually oriented business or premises on which the sexually oriented business is located. 
Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the state whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve (12) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva, with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a business license pursuant to section 19.5-24 of this chapter; 
Semi-nude or semi-nudity means the appearance of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if fully and opaquely covered; 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, but not including any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or any similar sex-related offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of this state, other states, or other countries. 
(2)  For which: 
a.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; 
c.  Less than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period; 
(3)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether covered or uncovered; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor areas exist on June 1, 2000. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § II, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-3. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § III, 5-22-2001)  
Secs. 19.5-4—19.5-23. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 
 
Sec. 19.5-24. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the director pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work and/or perform services on the premises of the sexually oriented business, if such employee is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such employee by the director pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business if such person is not in possession of a valid sexually oriented business employee license issued to such person by the director pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  It shall be a defense to subsections (2) and (3) of this section if the employment is of limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair and/or maintenance of machinery, equipment, or the premises. 
Violation of any provision within this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  An application for a sexually oriented business license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Prior to issuance of a license, the premises must be inspected by the health department, fire department, development services department, and zoning department. 
(c)  An application for a sexually oriented business employee license must be made on a form provided by the city. 
(d)  All applicants for a license must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established under this chapter. The applicant has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the application was deemed completed. 
(e)  If a person who wishes to own operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a business license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a business license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a business license as applicant. 
(f)  Applications for a business license, whether original or renewal, must be made to the director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be submitted to the office of the director or the director's designee during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by the director. The following information shall be provided on the application form: 
(1)  The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the applicant(s); 
(2)  A recent photograph of the applicant(s); 
(3)  The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number; 
(4)  The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided; 
a.  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state 1) the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and 2) submit the required registration documents; 
(5)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 19.5-2 and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each; 
(6)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose business license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation; 
(7)  Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses; 
(8)  The single classification of license, as found in section 19.5-3, for which the applicant is filing; 
(9)  The telephone number of the establishment; 
(10)  The address, and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located; 
(11)  If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the business license is sought, and the date on which the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the business license is sought; 
(12)  If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the business license). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten (10) days following the date of issuance of the business license, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same; 
(13)  If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in section 19.5-79 hereunder. 
(g)  Each application for a business license shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment of the application fee in full; 
(2)  If the establishment is a Texas corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; 
(3)  If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto; 
(4)  If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto; 
(5)  If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto; 
(6)  Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed; 
(7)  If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land in item (6) are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment; 
(8)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, public park or recreation area, or family-oriented entertainment business within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted; 
(9)  Any of items (2) through (8), above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the director with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(h)  Applications for an employee license to work and/or perform services in a sexually oriented business, whether original or renewal, must be made to the director by the person to whom the employee license shall issue. Each application for an employee license shall be accompanied by payment of the application fee in full. Application forms shall be supplied by the director. Applications must be submitted to the office of the director or the director's designee during regular working hours. Each applicant shall be required to give the following information on the application form: 
(1)  The applicant's given name, and any other names by which the applicant is or has been known, including "stage" names and/or aliases; 
(2)  Age, and date and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair color, and eye color; 
(4)  Present residence address and telephone number; 
(5)  Present business address and telephone number; 
(6)  Date, issuing state, and number of photo driver's license, or other state issued identification card information; 
(7)  Social Security number; and 
(8)  Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years old. 
(i)  Attached to the application form for a license shall be the following: 
(1)  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in this or any other city, county, state, or country, has ever had any license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought and/or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
(3)  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 19.5-2 and, if so, the "specified criminal activity" involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(j)  Every application for a license shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(1)  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and, 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions of this article. 
(k)  A separate application and business license shall be required for each sexually oriented business classification as set forth in section 19.5-3. 
(l)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § IV, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-25. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the director shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for investigation to be made on the information contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of the completed application. After the investigation, the director shall issue an employee license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one (1) or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 19.5-2 of this chapter; 
(4)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current application. 
If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as forth in subsection (i) of this section. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The employee shall keep the license on his or her person at all times while engaged in employment or performing services on the sexually oriented business premises so that said license may be available for inspection upon lawful request. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the director that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within thirty (30) days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 19.5-26. 
Nonrenewal of a license shall be subject to appeal as set forth in subsection (i) of this section. 
(d)  If application is made for a sexually oriented business license, the director shall approve or deny issuance of the license within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the completed application. The director shall issue a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one (1) or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  An applicant has failed to provide the information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  An applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(3)  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
(4)  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the city in taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business; 
(5)  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in section 19.5-2; 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the development services department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
(7)  The license fee required under this chapter has not been paid; 
(8)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with one (1) or more of the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the section 19.5-3 classification for which the license is issued. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(f)  The health department, fire department, development services department and zoning department shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the completed application by the director. The certification shall be promptly presented to the director. 
(g)  A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one (1) classification, as set forth in section 19.5-3. 
(h)  In the event that the director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a sexually oriented business license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the completed application by the director, provided that the applicant may request, in writing at any time before the notice is issued, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this chapter. 
(i)  An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding a denial to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city secretary within fifteen (15) days after service of notice upon the applicant of the director's decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The director may, within fifteen (15) days of service upon him of the applicant's memorandum, submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal to the city council. After reviewing such memoranda, as well as the director's written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the director, the city council shall vote either to uphold or overrule the director's decision. Such vote shall be taken within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the date on which the city secretary receives the notice of appeal. However, all parties shall be required to comply with the director's decision during the pendency of the appeal. Judicial review of a denial by the director and city council may be made pursuant to section 19.5-31 of this chapter. 
(j)  A license issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the director that the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The decision whether to renew a license shall be made within thirty (30) days of the completed application. The renewal of a license shall be subject to the fee as set forth in section 19.5-26. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § V, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-26. - Fees. 
The initial application fee for a sexually oriented business license is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license, whether new or renewal, is five hundred dollars ($500.00). The annual fee for a sexually oriented business employee license, whether new or renewal, is fifty dollars ($50.00). These fees are to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § VI, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-27. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, development services department, or other city or state departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to promptly permit such lawful inspection of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § VII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-28. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 19.5-24. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date; when made less than forty-five (45) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the director denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § VIII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-29. - Suspension. 
The director shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that licensee or an employee of licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; 
(2)  Operated or performed services in a sexually oriented business while intoxicated by the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances; 
(3)  Refused to allow prompt inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; 
(4)  With knowledge, permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § IX, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-30. - Revocation. 
(a)  The director shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 19.5-29 occurs and the license has been suspended within the proceeding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The director shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee, or a person with whom the licensee is residing, was convicted of a "specified criminal activity" on a charge that was pending prior to the issuance of the license; 
(3)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted the sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises; 
(5)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted prostitution on the premises; 
(6)  A licensee has, with knowledge, operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(7)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises; 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes or fees; 
(9)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter the establishment; or 
(10)  A licensee has attempted to sell his business license, or has sold, assigned, or transferred ownership or control of the sexually oriented business to a nonlicensee; 
(11)  A licensee has, with knowledge, permitted a person or persons to engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  When the director revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § X, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-31. - Judicial review. 
After denial of an initial or renewal application by the director and city council, or suspension or revocation of a license by the director, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XI, 5-22-2001  
Sec. 19.5-32. - No transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XII, 5-22-2001)  
Secs. 19.5-33—19.5-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LOCATION 
 
Sec. 19.5-53. - Location restrictions. 
Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted in C-3 General Commercial Base District, but not retail districts, provided that: 
(1)  The sexually oriented business may not be operated within: 
a.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship; 
b.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a public or private elementary or secondary school; 
c.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a boundary of any residential district; 
d.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a public park; 
e.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a licensed day-care center; 
f.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or 
g.  One thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(b)  A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business classified pursuant to section 19.5-3. 
(c)  For the purpose of this chapter, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot, or licensed day care center, or child or family entertainment business. 
(d)  For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XIII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-5-54. - Nonconforming uses; amortization. 
(a)  Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of this chapter that is in violation of the locational or structural configuration requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two (2) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one (1) another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operated at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming. 
(b)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, synagogue, or regular place of religious worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, licensed day care center, public park, residential district, or child or family entertainment business within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid business license, and does not apply when an application for a business license is submitted after a business license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XIV, 5-22-2001)  
Secs. 19.5-55—19.5-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19.5-75. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial enterprise has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the enterprise is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial enterprise that does not have a sexually oriented business license, rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(d)  Violation of subsection (b) of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XV, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-76. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XVI, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-77. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits a misdemeanor if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to the public view or visible by any other person. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if the person appears in a state of nudity, or with knowledge, allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XVII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-78. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who, with knowledge and intent, appears in person in a nude or semi-nude condition in a sexually oriented business, unless the person is an employee who, while nude or semi-nude, is at least ten (10) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two (2) feet from the floor. 
(b)  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is nude or semi-nude in the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or semi-nude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch a nude or semi-nude employee or the clothing of a nude or semi-nude employee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XVIII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-79. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films and videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction, that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The director may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the director or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the entire area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted, as designated in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candle as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow an opening of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make any attempt to make an opening of any kind between the viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall, during each business day, inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The operator of the sexually oriented business shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight (48) inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (14) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he/she, with knowledge, fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XIX, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.50-80. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center; and 
(2)  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one (1) another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multiunit center. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(e)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XX, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-81. - Signage. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein. 
(b)  Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length. 
(c)  Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
(d)  Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
(e)  Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall: 
(1)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(2)  Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area; 
(3)  Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and 
(4)  Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise. 
(f)  The provisions of item (1) of subsection (b) and subsections (c) and (d) shall also apply to secondary signs. 
(g)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXI, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-82. - Sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business is prohibited. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-83. - Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry; attendant required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented businesses' regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXIII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-84. - Massages or baths administered by person of opposite sex. 
It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, regardless of whether in a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, massage parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXIV, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-85. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXV, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-86. - Exemptions. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXVI, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-87. - Notices. 
(a)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the director or any other city office, division, department or other agency under this chapter to any applicant, operator or owner of a sexually oriented business may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the license, or any notice of address change that has been received by the director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the director or his designee shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given to the director by any person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the director. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the license application and each operator to furnish notice to the director in writing of any change of residence or mailing address. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXVII, 5-22-2001)  
Sec. 19.5-88. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid business license or in violation of section 19.5-53 of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-O-5B, § XXVIII, 5-22-2001)  
Chapter 20 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, adopted October 1, 2013 , repealed and replaced ch. 20, §§ 20-1—20-3, with §§ 20-1—20-18. Former ch. 20, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 84-O-5, §§ I—III, adopted May 1, 1984. 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; planning, Ch 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; development code, App. B. 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Jurisdiction. 
The sign regulations of this chapter shall apply within the city limit and the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform sign standards which promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony and pride, thereby strengthening the economic stability of the city business, cultural and residential areas. Objectives to be pursued in applying specific standards are as follows: 
A.  To identify individual business, residential or public uses without creating confusion, unsightliness or visual obscurity of adjacent businesses. 
B.  To assure that all signs in terms of size, scale, height and location are properly related to the overall adjacent land use character and development lot size. 
C.  To assure that all signs are compatible with other adjacent users. 
D.  To assure that all signs, sign supports and sign bases shall be so constructed and designed to provide for design compatibility with the development. 
E.  To ensure that signage is consistent with the community values of the city and are in character with the city's comprehensive plan. 
F.  To regulate signage to provide the safest possible environment for residents, businesses, and visitors. 
G.  To regulate the form and allotment of signs within the city to preserve the positive city image, harmony, and pride and thereby strengthening the economic stability of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-3. - Definitions. 
Attached sign means any permanent sign attached, painted, or in some way affixed directly to a building surface. 
Awning sign means any sign or advertising painted on, printed on, attached to, or supported by an awning attached to a building or structure. 
Banner sign means a sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material, including but not limited to flags and pennants. 
Billboard (outdoor advertising). See definition for "off-premise sign." 
Building front means the face of a building fronting an improved public street. 
Canopy sign means a sign attached or affixed to a canopy that is attached to or comprises an extension of a building. 
City means the city of Marble Falls, Texas. 
Community service (or public service) sign means a sign which solicits support for or advertises a nonprofit community use, public use, or social institution. Such sign topics may include, but shall not be limited to, seasonal holidays such as Christmas or Easter, school activities, charitable programs, religious activities, civic wayfinding/locational signs or events of community interest. Such signs shall be placed only by units of local, state, or federal governments, nonprofit organizations, schools, the chamber of commerce, or normally recognized religious organizations. 
Contractor (or construction sign) sign, commercial means a sign located on the premises of a permitted commercial construction project, which may be erected for a limited amount of time, identifying any or all of the property owners, developers, engineers, architects, contractors, mortgagees, or other project participants in the construction or improvement of the premises, but which displays no other goods or services for sale or other advertising. 
Contractor (or construction sign) sign, residential means a sign located on the premises of a permitted residential construction project, which may be erected for a limited period of time, identifying any or all of the property owners, developers, engineers, architects, contractors, mortgagees, or other project participants in the construction or improvement of the premises, but which displays no other goods or services for sale or other advertising. 
Construction traffic signage means a sign or system of signs that are placed to provide temporary wayfinding or detouring of traffic during periods of construction. 
Damaged sign means a sign, which is unsafe, unsecure, disfigured, or broken. 
Detached sign means any sign connected to the ground which is not attached to, applied on, or supported by, any part of a building (such as a wall, roof, window, canopy, awning, arcade, or marquee) inclusive of signs on moveable objects, except signs on vehicles that are moving or are parked only temporarily, incidental to their principal use for transportation. 
Development sign means signs giving the name or names of principal contractors, architects and lending institutions responsible for construction of or in an approved subdivision or land development at the site where the sign is placed. 
Directional sign means a detached sign which contains information designed to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to the location of a facility on the property on which the sign is located. 
Electronic message sign, monument means a sign on which informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of electronically illuminated segments, including but not limited to, LED (light emitting diode) signs, television screens, plasma screens, video boards, or other signs that utilize digital or other image projection technology to display a message seen by the public. This sign differs from the standard electronic message sign because it is erected as part of a monument sign and is regulated herein. 
Electronic message sign means a sign on which informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen composed of electronically illuminated segments, including but not limited to, LED (light emitting diode) signs, television screens, plasma screens, video boards, or other signs that utilize digital or other image projection technology to display a message to the public. 
ETJ means the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the city. 
Feather flag means a temporary detached sign type, that consists of a vertical pole placed into the ground with a fabric flag attached to the pole. Also referred to as tear drop banner. 
Freestanding/pole sign means a permanent detached sign which is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting structure such as a frame or one (1) or more poles which is not attached to any building or any other structure and which is permanently affixed to the ground. Signs that have less than ninety (90) percent of the width or base area in contact with the ground shall be a freestanding sign. This definition does not apply to monument sign. 
Garage sale sign means a garage sale sign provides information regarding a garage, estate, or yard sale and includes information about the location of the sale and the dates and times of the sale. 
Gas/fuel price electronic message sign means an electronic sign type that is distinguished from electronic message signs due to the limited amount of information displayed and the length of time periods the message will remain unchanged. These signs are limited to displaying the gas/fuel prices only to advertise to the general public. Any messaging capacity beyond the gas/fuel price shall constitute an electronic message sign as defined and regulated herein. 
Gross surface area means the total area of a sign including the surface area of a sign, and the masonry area and base to which it is mounted, such as a monument sign or monolith sign. The gross surface area would be the total dimensions of the entire sign structure. 
Height. See "sign height". 
Highway shall apply to all lots and tracts with frontage on the following roadways US Highway 281, RM 1431, RM 2147, and State Highway 71. The high roadway speed limits and larger development size dictate allowances for larger signs on these properties. 
Hologram/laser sign means any sign that generates a projected image into the atmosphere or onto the surface of an object, originating from a device connected to an electrical or battery power source. 
Lot frontage means the distance measured of the length of a lot or tract fronting an improved public right-of-way. 
Landmark sign means one (1) of the following types of signs that exemplifies the cultural, architectural, or commercial identity of the city, is iconic in its location, and contributes to the surrounding neighborhood character: 
A.  Historic sign means a landmark sign that exemplifies the cultural, architectural or commercial history of the city and was constructed more than fifty (50) years before the date of application. 
B.  Vintage sign means a landmark sign that is iconic and culturally significant and was constructed between fifty (50) and twenty-five (25) years before the date of application. 
C.  Replica sign means a landmark sign that is an exact reproduction of a historic sign which no longer exists. 
Maximum height means the maximum sign height allowed by this chapter. 
Maximum size means the established maximum area a sign is permitted to be as regulated herein. 
Monolith sign means a permanent detached sign type in which one hundred (100) percent of the sign structure's width or base area is in contact with the ground and is independent of buildings or structures. This sign form is regulated to a narrow horizontal profile to allow for more vertical height. This sign form is constructed of solid material consisting of a single structure from the ground up to the highest point of the sign, vertical support columns do not add to the regulated width. 
Monument sign means a permanent detached sign type in which ninety (90) percent of the sign structure's width or base area is in contact with the ground and is independent of buildings or structures. This sign form is regulated to a wide horizontal profile but is limited in total vertical height. This sign form is constructed of solid material consisting of a single structure from the ground up to the highest point of the sign. 
Monument sign, multi-tenant means a permanent detached sign type in which ninety (90) percent of the sign structure's width or base area is in contact with the ground and is independent of buildings or structures. This sign form allows larger height and sign surface area for developments with a variety of businesses needing advertising capability all located on the same premises. This sign form is constructed of solid material consisting of a single structure from the ground up to the highest point of the sign. 
Multi-lot shared sign means a single detached sign identifying buildings, businesses, or multifamily complexes located on adjacent lots. 
Neon sign means a gas filled glass tubing sign. 
Nit means in lighting, the nit is a unit of visible-light intensity, commonly used to specify the brightness of a cathode ray tube or liquid crystal display computer display. One (1) nit is equivalent to one (1) candela per square meter. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which was legally in existence prior to the date of adoption by the city of an ordinance or regulation that made the sign unlawful or non-conforming or any sign which was legally in existence prior to the date that the property upon which the sign is located became subject to the sign regulations or sign ordinances of the city which made the sign unlawful or nonconforming. 
Non-highway means shall apply to all lots and tracts fronting a roadway or street, but that do not have frontage on any of the following roadways: US Highway 281, RM 1431, RM 2147, and State Highway 71. The lower speed limits and smaller scale development size dictate allowances for minimally sized signs on these properties. 
Off-premise sign means a sign used for advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment that is sold, produced, manufactured, and/or furnished at a place other than on the property on which said sign is located. 
Opening soon sign means a sign which advertises a business will be accessible to the public within a short time, also includes grand openings. 
Planning and zoning commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city as appointed by the city council. Also termed "commission" herein. 
Pole sign means a permanent freestanding sign type which is supported by one (1) or more poles in or upon the ground. 
Political sign means a sign that advertises a candidate or issue to be voted for on a definite election day. A political sign is associated with a specific election, and is not the same as a sign containing political speech. 
Portable sign means a temporary sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one (1) location to another, including signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure. A portable sign which has its wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign hereunder. 
Projecting sign means any sign, other than an awning sign or canopy sign, the outside edge of which extends more than four (4) inches from the face of a wall to which it is attached, or which extends at any point above or beyond a wall to which it is attached. 
Public service sign. See "community service sign". 
Realty or real estate sign means a sign located on real property that is for rent, lease or sale, said sign being for the purpose of advertising the rent, lease or sale of said property. The real estate sign shall be located on the property it advertises. 
Realty or real estate sign, commercial means a real estate sign located on commercial, industrial, mixed-use, and multi-family developments. Real estate signs, commercial, requires a permit. 
Realty or real estate sign, residential means a real estate sign located on property zoned for residential use. A real estate sign, residential sign shall not include multi-family residential properties. Real estate signs, residential, does not require a permit. 
Reface reface of a sign shall be defined as replacing, restoring, repainting, or repairing the existing advertising sign face area. It does not include resizing the sign, rebuilding, reconstructing, reconfiguring, or expanding the area, size, height, or form of the existing sign structure or existing sign support structure. 
Retaining wall sign means a permanent detached sign affixed to a retaining wall, the retaining wall must be protecting an earth slope or embankment and have a natural appearance to its construction. 
Sandwich board sign means a temporary sign that is also known as an "A" frame sign, which is portable and displayed to provide business information to the public directly adjacent to a business space. There signs are meant to function as the detached sign form for the downtown or main street district areas. 
Searchlight or beacon sign means a sign form that utilizes a high-intensity beam of light with one (1) or more beams, that may rotate or move, directed into the atmosphere or toward any other point, or any type of light projected to attract or distract the attention of persons in a public right-of-way. This definition does not apply to the use of searchlights by government entities. 
Setback means the required distance between any point on private land and the property line abutting the nearest public right-of-way. 
Sign means any device or surface on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures or symbols are painted, printed, stamped, raised, projected or in any manner outlined or attached, and used for advertising purposes. This definition shall include all forms of outdoor advertising. 
Sign height means height shall be measured from the vertical distance between the highest point of the ground elevation within the sign footprint to the highest point of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever point is highest. All signs herein shall be measured by this method. 
Sign reface means replacement of an existing or sign face within an existing sign structure. A reface does not include any structural addition or expansion to the sign structure. 
Significant improvements means improvements to an on-premise non-conforming sign which includes but is not limited to changing a pole sign to a monument sign, a reduction in height or display, surface or panel area square footage, or an increase in setback, or an improvement in materials or landscaping such that an on-premise existing non-conforming sign meets the criteria set out in section 20-14 and becomes more compliant with the sign regulations. 
Special event means a special event is a one (1) time or infrequently occurring event outside normal programs or activities of the sponsoring or organizing entity or business. 
Sponsorship signs means signs placed in approved areas for sponsorship of nonprofit organizations are considered to be sponsorship signs. 
Strip center means two (2) or more separate or distinct businesses occupying a single or combined structure of consistent ownership. 
Surface area of a sign means the total surface which the sign text, images, and message content is printed, painted or displayed including frame and mounting. In cases where the frame and mounting are part of a building or when the frame and mounting could be considered a landscape element the total surface area may be calculated as the perimeter using straight lines and right angles around the sign text, images, and message content. Surface area of a sign is regulated in this chapter as the maximum size. (Gross surface area also relates to this definition). 
Temporary sign means a sign that is added to premises and meant to remain in place only for a limited time. Temporary signs may be attached or detached as prescribed herein. 
Tenant panel means portion of a monument sign, multi-tenant, on which a tenant of the center has signage. 
Time and temperature sign means a sign or part of a sign which is devoted to changeable messages limited to display the current time and temperature. 
Typeset means the process of putting text into an arranged font style, for organized visual display, the use of any common typeface font styles or a visual equivalent would constitute typeset letters, number, and symbols for use on signs regulated in this chapter. This definition does not preclude the use of artistic or cursive to arrange letters and numbers, but is meant to restrict the use of non-professionally arranged signs such as haphazard handwritten messages, spray painted messages, etc. 
Wall sign means a sign erected upon a constructed wall made of cinderblock, stone, brick or similar material, constructed upon cement or concrete footing. This definition shall not be inclusive of fences. 
Window sign means all forms of signs upon, behind, attached to, seen through, or occupying space within a window. This sign form includes all forms of material on which a message may be printed. For the purposes of this regulation, glass doors constitute windows and are subject to all window sign regulations herein. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , § II.A, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-4. - General provisions. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided for herein, no sign shall be erected, structurally changed, refaced, or reconstructed in whole or part, within the city or the ETJ without a permit having been first obtained. 
B.  All signs shall pertain to the identification of the primary uses and/or primary services provided or primary products sold on the premises. 
C.  All signs, where applicable, shall meet the standards of the adopted city building code(s). 
D.  All business locations shall be identifiable by a street number and address sign which is clearly visible from the street. 
E.  All signs regulated herein, must utilize typeset letters and numbers in the design and display of messages upon the sign. 
F.  All signs are prohibited from blinking, flashing, or pulsing lighting or messages to adversely attract attention or otherwise detract from the consistent sign forms in the city. 
G.  All signs are prohibited from being erected upon trees, bridges, fences (unless specified herein), towers, utility poles, automobiles and/or vehicles, junk or abandoned automobiles and/or vehicles and dilapidated buildings shall not be used as sign supports. 
H.  All property in the city shall be allowed one (1) detached sign per property/development unless specified herein. 
I.  No detached sign shall be erected that exceeds thirty (30) feet in height as measured from the base grade elevation of the ground surrounding the supporting structure to the top of the sign. 
J.  There is hereby imposed a setback regulation for all detached signs of ten (10) feet, unless specified herein. 
K.  Any sign that advertises or identifies a business, structure, person, or activity which ceases to operate shall remove the name of the person, business or activity within thirty (30) days of the date that the business, person or activity ceased. The sign panel shall be replaced with a blank panel of similar material. When possible, the existing sign panel may be reversed to utilize the back side of the panel. In no instance shall plywood or similar materials be utilized. This requirement does not apply to the sign structure. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , § II.B, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-5. - Permitting procedures. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction any sign, as defined herein, without complying with the following requirements: 
1.  Completion of a sign permit application; 
2.  Review and approval of a sign permit. 
B.  The procedures to be followed in fulfilling the intent of these sign regulations are as follows: 
1.  A sign permit application must be obtained from the city; 
2.  The sign permit application must be properly completed and returned to the city staff, along with payment of the sign application fee established by council; 
3.  The city manager or his designated representative shall review the sign permit application and, if the application is properly completed and meets the general requirements of this chapter, may approve the application; 
4.  The city manager will forward to the planning and zoning commission any sign permit application that requests a variance to the regulations established in this chapter and any application for a landmark sign permit. Such applications will be considered by the commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting; the applicant shall be notified of the time and place of said meeting, and shall be invited and encouraged to attend; 
5.  The commission will approve, reject or approve upon condition, the sign permit application and the associated variance based upon its findings related to the variance criteria set out in section 20-16; 
6.  The commission will approve, reject or approve upon condition, the landmark sign application based upon the criteria set out in section 20-13; 
7.  In the event of an appeal, the city council, after receiving a report from the commission, may confirm, reverse, or modify the action of the commission; 
8.  All appeals must be in writing and clearly set out the portions of the regulations that are applicable to the appeal and the justification for the appeal; 
9.  The city manager or designee may forward at his discretion any sign application to the planning and zoning commission for its consideration in lieu of review and consideration by the city manager or designee. 
C.  Sign permit application—Information required. An application will not be considered complete until all items listed below are submitted. No application will be submitted to the commission until it is considered complete by the city staff. 
An application for a sign permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address, telephone number of the applicant and date of application; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number of the business and name and telephone number of the owner/manager; 
3.  Numerical location of building structure upon its lot; block and plat designation; and street address upon which the sign is to be located; 
4.  The specific section of these regulation upon which the application is being made; 
5.  Position of the sign on the building or on the ground in both site plan view drawn to scale, and elevation views drawn to scale; 
6.  Two (2) sets of scaled drawings of the plans and specifications, including size and color of the proposed sign and its various parts, the style of lettering, the message, lighting, type of material of which it is fabricated and the method of attachment to the building or to the ground and indicating associated landscaping; 
7.  A color sketch or color photograph of the sign and building, as well as any contiguous street or building in order to display how they would appear in relation to one another; 
8.  Name of person or persons constructing or erecting the sign; 
9.  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, and land to which or on which the sign is to be erected; 
10.  Location, dimensions, and description of any existing sign on the property; 
11.  If required by the commission, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressures in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws of the state or federal government and ordinances of the City; 
12.  If the application is for a variance, a list of the hardships associated with the variance request; 
13.  If the application is for a landmark designation, the information that demonstrates that the sign is entitled to landmark designation as set out in section 20-13. 
D.  Representations by applicant. All representations, whether oral or written, made by the applicant or his agent on behalf of the application for a sign permit under this chapter become conditions upon which the permit is issued. It shall be unlawful for the permittee to vary from such representations unless the permittee first makes application, as required by the provisions of this chapter, to amend the permit and such amendment is approved. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-6. - Types of signs not requiring a permit. 
This section lists sign types and forms not requiring a permit. If the sign form differs from the regulations below, a permit shall be required. All sign types not listed within this section require a permit. 
A.  Street number. A city-assigned street address number is required for all residences and establishments. It must be readable from the street and may be on the building or in the yard and may include the name of the occupant in residential only. 
B.  Contractor signs, commercial. 
1.  Description. Commercial contractor signs shall be non-illuminated, located on private property, larger than the ten (10) square feet residential contractor sign, and shall not be greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area per sign. A commercial contractor sign may be double sided. Constructing a "V" type sign shall be allowed but each side/face may not exceed a ninety (90) degree angle of separation between the sides/faces. 
2.  Setbacks. No sign or any part thereof shall be located within ten (10) feet of any right-of-way line (not to be confused with the curb or pavement line) and within twenty (20) feet of intersecting right-of-way lines. 
3.  Sign allotment. Each appropriately zoned property shall be entitled to a minimum of one (1) commercial contractor sign. For each property line abutting existing street frontage an additional sign is allowed, subject to the regulations herein. The maximum number of signs shall not exceed the total sides fronting existing public streets. Each additional sign allowable for more than one (1) street frontage must be placed on separate street sides, and no stacking of signs on one (1) or two (2) particular street frontages shall be permitted. A minimum distance of one hundred (100) linear feet shall be maintained between commercial contractor signs placed on separate street frontages. Tracts or lots of three (3) acres or larger may be permitted for more than one (1) contractor sign on one (1) frontage; provided that each sign maintain a minimum interval of five hundred (500) linear feet between signs. Not more than four (4) signs shall be allowed on one (1) lot or tract, regardless of the size of the lot or tract. A tract exceeding three (3) acres on multiple street frontages will also be subject to a maximum of four (4) signs. Commercial contractor signs are allowed depending on the zoning district(s), therefore commercial contractor signs may be permitted in NC, DN, DT, GC, IN, BP, and FR districts. If there are commercial contractor signs located on a particular tract or lot there shall not be an allowance for any other realtor signs on the same property. 
C.  Contractor signs, residential. Shall be non-illuminated, located on private property, and shall not be greater than ten (10) square feet in area. Residential realtor signs shall be limited to a single sign per property, unless one (1) of the following conditions apply: properties zoned rural estate district (RE) or existing neighborhood zone district (ENZ.1) shall be allotted a maximum to two (2) residential realtor signs, or any lot with more than one (1) property line abutting existing street frontage an additional sign shall be allowed, subject to the regulations herein. Signs will not be placed so as to create a traffic hazard, as determined by city staff. Temporary banner signs or other similar non-rigid sign material prohibited from being utilized. 
D.  Real estate signs, commercial. 
1.  Description. Commercial real estate signs shall be non-illuminated, located on private property, and is larger than the ten (10) square foot residential realty sign, and shall not be greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area per sign. A commercial realty sign may be double sided. Constructing a "V" type sign shall be allowed but each side/face may not exceed a ninety (90) degree angle of separation between the sides/faces. 
2.  Setbacks. No sign or any part thereof shall be located within ten (10) feet of any right-of-way line (not to be confused with the curb or pavement line) and within twenty (20) feet of intersecting right-of-way lines. 
3.  Sign allotment. Each appropriately zoned property shall be entitled to a minimum of one (1) commercial realtor sign. For each property line abutting existing street frontage an additional sign is allowed, subject to the regulations herein. The maximum number of signs shall not exceed the total sides fronting existing public streets. Each additional sign allowable for more than one (1) street frontage must be placed on separate street sides, and no stacking of signs on one (1) or two (2) particular street frontages shall be permitted. A minimum distance of one hundred (100) linear feet shall be maintained between commercial realtor signs placed on separate street frontages. Tracts or lots of three (3) acres or larger may be permitted for more than one (1) real estate sign on one (1) frontage; provided that each sign maintain a minimum interval of five hundred linear (500) feet between signs. Not more than four (4) signs shall be allowed on one (1) lot or tract, regardless of the size of the lot or tract. A tract exceeding three (3) acres on multiple street frontages will also be subject to a maximum of four (4) signs. Commercial realtor signs are allowed depending on the zoning district(s), therefore commercial realty signs may be permitted in NC, DN, DT, GC, IN, BP, and FR districts. If there are commercial realtor signs located on a particular tract or lot there shall not be an allowance for any other realtor signs on the same property. A commercial realty sign may be affixed to a building or structure on the property, including walls or permanent fences. 
4.  Height. Maximum height is limited to ten (10) feet. 
5.  Duration and permitting. Commercial real estate signs must be removed by fourteen (14) days after sale or lease of the property is final. Failure to comply will result in the city removing and disposing of the sign in accordance with the provisions in this Code. 
6.  [Prohibited materials.] Temporary banner signs or other similar non-rigid sign materials are prohibited. 
E.  Residential real estate signs. Shall be non-illuminated, located on private property, and shall not be greater than ten (10) square feet in area. Residential realtor signs shall be limited to a single sign per property, unless one (1) of the following conditions apply: properties zoned rural estate district (RE) or existing neighborhood zone district (ENZ.1) shall be allotted a maximum to two (2) residential realtor signs, or any lot with more than one (1) property line abutting existing street frontage an additional sign shall be allowed, subject to the regulations herein. Signs will not be placed so as to create a traffic hazard, as determined by city staff. Temporary banner signs or other similar non-rigid sign material prohibited from being utilized. 
F.  Political signs. Political signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area. The placing of political signs on city property is specifically prohibited. The placing of political signs on private property without the permission of the property owner is prohibited. The person running for office and/or political party/group placing a political sign is responsible for compliance with these provisions. 
G.  Garage sale signs. Garage sale type signs in residential areas shall not exceed four (4) square feet in face area. They may not be illuminated, may not be erected earlier than two (2) days preceding the sale and shall be removed within two (2) days following the sale. Signs will show the date(s) of the sale. No permit is required for the sign itself; however, a permit is required to conduct a garage sale. Garage sales signs are only allowed upon the premises where the sale is occurring. 
H.  Sponsorship signs. Off-premise signs may be placed in parks to provide advertising for projects of nonprofit organizations such as little league, softball, soccer and horseshoe pitching arena, etc. Location of signs shall be within the activity area and shall not exceed the size of four (4) feet in height and eight (8) feet in length. No specific individual permit is required for each such sign, however, the organization or project must have prior approval by the city manager or designee, or city council. 
I.  "Open" sign. Open/closed business signs and neon open/closed business signs within a window of a business or attached to the exterior of the business shall not be counted as sign square footage for a building allotment. An "open" sign shall be limited to four (4) square feet. 
J.  Miscellaneous signs. No trespassing or posted property type signs or signs containing political speech shall not exceed four (4) square feet in the area. Signs placed with the intent of warning or advising the public of possible danger will be allowed on private property, but shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in face area. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.D, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 20-7. - Detached signs. 
This section governs the regulation of all forms of freestanding (detached) signage within the city and its ETJ. No sign may be erected, structurally changed, refaced, or reconstructed in whole or part, within the city without a permit having been first obtained. Monument signs are the preferred sign form in the city, therefore these regulations seek to incentivize the erection of monument signs in the city. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  In order to prevent a new sign from visually obstructing existing signs, all new signs must be erected so as to maintain a seventy-five (75) foot separation between other previously erected signs regardless of the sign type. The specific distance separation requirement does not apply to directional signs or temporary detached signs that are placed to provide wayfinding to and within a site; however these signs must be placed to not visually obstruct other signs or traffic sight lines and accessibility to and from the site. 
B.  Monument signs. 
1.  Purpose. To identify a building, business, multifamily complex, or residential subdivision through the use of a ground mounted detached monument. 
2.  Maximum size and height. Based on the geographic location of the property, all monument signs shall be regulated to a classification of either highway or non-highway and be regulated to the following: 
Table B.2. 
Monument Sign sizes and height 
	Highway 	Non-Highway 
Sign surface area 	70 sq. ft. maximum 	50 sq. ft. maximum 
Gross surface area 	90 sq. ft. maximum 	70 sq. ft. maximum 
Width 	14 ft. maximum 	12 ft. maximum 
Height 	8 ft. maximum 	8 ft. maximum 
 
The specified above maximums regulate the largest size or height authorized, unless the sign complies with the provisions of subsection B.3. 
3.  Size and height bonus allowance. 
a.  Monument signs shall be allowed an increase in size and height in accordance with the table below if placement of the sign is made further from adjoining right-of-way than the minimum setback established in subsection B.2. The allowance ratio in the table shall be a specified amount of additional setback distance (example: one (1) ft.) from the prescribed sign setback, for a specified amount of additional size and/or height authorized to be incrementally added to the sign for each increment of specified distance from the prescribed setback. The height and size allowances can be incrementally gained, but shall not exceed the maximum height and size in tables B.3.b. or B.3.c. Based on the geographic location of the property, all monument signs shall be regulated to a classification of either highway, table B.3.b. or non-highway, table B.3.c. 
Formula: additional unit allowed per foot of setback. 
b.  Highway, size and height ratios. 
Table B.3.b. 
Highway 
	Allowance Ratio 	Maximum Size 
Sign surface area 	5 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	100 sq. ft. maximum 
Gross surface area 	10 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	130 sq. ft. maximum 
Height 	1 ft. height per 1 ft. setback 	12 foot maximum 
Width 	None 	None 
 
;adv=6;c.  Non-highway, size and height ratios. 
Table B.3.c. 
Non-Highway 
	Allowance Ratio 	Maximum Size 
Sign surface area 	2.5 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	70 sq. ft. maximum 
Gross surface area 	5 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	100 sq. ft. maximum 
Height 	1 ft. height per 2 ft. setback 	10 ft. maximum 
Width 	None 	None 
 
4.  Allocation. One (1) monument sign per lot or tract is permitted unless: 
a.  A lot has continuous lot frontage on three (3) improved streets and in such case shall be entitled to two (2) additional monument signs shall be permitted, subject to the signs being placed on separate frontages, and a minimum two-hundred (200) feet apart, or; 
b.  A lot or tract has an excess of five-hundred (500) feet of continuous linear lot frontage on a single street and in such case shall be allowed an additional monument sign for each five-hundred (500) feet of frontage with a minimum of three-hundred and fifty (350) feet between each sign. 
c.  In all the above cases, no more than a total of three (3) monument signs shall be allowed per lot. 
5.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Monument signs shall be subject to a minimum ten (10) foot setback. 
b.  Monument signs shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from intersecting right-of-way lines. 
6.  Separation requirement. All monument signs must maintain a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from other detached signs. 
7.  Design. 
a.  The monument shall be a minimum of forty (40) percent solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) to match the building(s). 
b.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. If the sign is located at an intersection, the address number must include the street name as part of the address displayed. In order to prevent confusion and the delay of emergency services, the address shall be displayed so as to face only the street on which the building fronts. 
c.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached or printed directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
d.  Signs proposing to use other equivalent materials than required above consistent with the building architecture or overall sign design may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
8.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is authorized. 
9.  Additional. If a sign is located in a public utility easement, the owner of the property is responsible for removal, relocation or replacement at a utility company's request or upon request of the city. 
10.  Electronic sign allowance. A single electronic message sign is allowed to be erected in combination with only one (1) monument sign on a property regardless of the number of monument signs allowed. Electronic message signs constructed or installed in combination with a monument sign must comply with the electronic message sign, monument standards herein. 
11.  Monument sign bonus/incentive. Any property that erects or maintains a monument sign consistent with these regulations shall receive a twenty-five (25) percent square footage bonus to the overall allotment of signage attached to the building. 
C.  Monolith sign. 
1.  Purpose. To identify a building, business, multifamily complex, or residential subdivision through the use of a sign type that allows more height, yet is limited to narrower width. 
2.  Maximum size and height. Based on the geographic location of the property, all monolith signs shall be regulated to a classification of either highway or non-highway and be regulated to the following: 
Table C.2. 
Monolith Sign sizes and height 
	Highway 	Non-Highway 
Sign surface area 	70 sq. ft. maximum 	50 sq. ft. maximum 
Gross surface area 	110 sq. ft. maximum 	80 sq. ft. maximum 
Width 	8 ft. maximum 	8 ft. maximum 
Height 	14 ft. maximum 	10 ft. maximum 
 
The specified above maximums regulate the largest size or height authorized, unless the sign complies with the provisions of subsection C.3. 
3.  Size and height bonus allowance. 
a.  Monolith signs shall be allowed an increase in size and height in accordance with the table below if placement of the sign is made further from adjoining right-of-way than the minimum set back established in subsection C.2. The allowance ratio in the table shall be a specified amount of additional setback distance (example: one (1) ft.) from the prescribed sign setback, for a specified amount of additional size and/or height authorized to be incrementally added to the sign for each increment of specified distance from the prescribed setback. The height and size allowances can be incrementally gained, but shall not exceed the maximum height and size in tables C.3.b. or C.3.c. Based on the geographic location of the property, all monolith signs shall be regulated to a classification of either highway, table C.3.b. or non-highway, table C.3.c. additional unit allowed per foot of setback. 
b.  Highway, size and height ratios. 
Table C.3.b. 
Highway 
	Allowance Ratio 	Maximum Size 
Sign surface area 	5 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	120 sq. ft. maximum 
Gross surface area 	10 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	160 sq. ft. maximum 
Height 	1 ft. height per 1 ft. setback 	20 ft. maximum 
Width 	None 	None 
 
c.  Non-highway, size and height ratios. 
Table C.3.c. 
Non-Highway 
	Allowance Ratio 	Maximum Size 
Sign surface area 	2.5 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	70 sq. ft. maximum 
Gross surface area 	5 sq. ft. per 1 ft. setback 	100 sq. ft. maximum 
Height 	1 ft. height per 2 ft. setback 	10 ft. maximum 
Width 	None 	None 
 
4.  Allocation. One (1) monolith sign per lot or tract is permitted except that: 
a.  A lot with continuous lot frontage on three (3) improved streets is entitled two (2) additional monolith signs provided that the signs are placed on separate frontages, with a minimum separation of two-hundred (200) feet, address number(s) are only required to be placed on sign(s) fronting the street of the property represented by the sign; monolith signs size and height shall comply with the requirement for which the sign faces or is abutting, highway or non-highway as stated herein; 
b.  A lot or tract that has an excess of five-hundred (500) feet of continuous linear lot frontage on a single street shall be allowed an additional monolith sign for each five-hundred (500) feet of frontage with a minimum of three-hundred and fifty (350) feet of separation between each sign. 
c.  Monolith signs must conform to the size and height limitations based on their location fronting a highway or non-highway. 
d.  In all the above cases, no more than a total of three (3) monolith signs is authorized per lot. 
5.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Monolith signs shall be subject to a minimum ten (10) feet setback. 
b.  Monolith signs shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from intersecting right-of-way lines. 
6.  Separation requirement. All monolith signs shall be erected so as to maintain a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from other detached signs. 
7.  Design. 
a.  Monolith signs shall be a minimum of forty (40) percent solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) matching the building(s) that they represent. 
b.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. If the sign is located at an intersection, the address number must include the street name as part of the address displayed. In order to prevent confusion and the delay of emergency services, the address shall be displayed so as to face only the street on which the building represented by the sign fronts. 
c.  Architectural accent. Monolith signs shall include architectural accents into the sign design. Design elements from the corresponding buildings or project architectural features present in the development shall be included in the sign design. If there are no notable architectural features or attributes associated with the development then one (1) must be added to the sign design to improve the character of the sign. Examples of how this may be achieved is by the addition of a roof canopy to resemble a tower or arched metalwork capping the sign. Each sign is unique and architectural accent to these signs is meant to improve the sign form. 
d.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached or printed directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
e.  Signs proposing to use other equivalent materials than required above consistent with the building architecture or overall sign design may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
8.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is authorized. 
9.  Relocation in utility easement. If located in a public utility easement, the owner of the property is responsible for removal, relocation or replacement at a utility company's or city's request. 
10.  Monolith sign bonus/incentive. Any property that erects or maintains a monolith sign consistent with these regulations is entitled to receive a twenty (20) percent square footage bonus to the overall allotment of signage attached to the building. 
D.  Monument sign, multi-tenant. 
1.  Purpose. To identify a multi-tenant center through the use of a ground mounted detached monument. 
2.  Maximum size and height. 
a.  Sign surface area. Tenant text and logo panels shall be no more than one-hundred and forty (140) square feet total; an additional five (5) feet of sign square footage may be added to the overall sign square footage for each additional one (1) foot of setback distance that the sign is located from adjoining right-of-way; however, the maximum square footage shall not exceed two-hundred (200) square feet. 
b.  Gross area. The gross area of a monument sign, multi-tenant monument sign shall not exceed two-hundred and forty (240) square feet total; an additional ten (10) feet of gross square footage may be added to the overall gross square footage of the sign for each additional one (1) foot of additional setback distance that the sign is located the adjoining right-of-way. However, the maximum square footage shall not exceed three-hundred (300) square feet. 
c.  Maximum height. The monument shall be no more than twenty (20) feet in height. An additional one (1) foot of sign height may be added to the overall height of the sign for each additional one (1) foot of additional setback distance that the sign is located from adjoining right-of-way; however, the maximum height shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
d.  The multi-tenant center name is required to be displayed on the sign and shall be no more than forty (40) square feet and shall not be counted as part of the sign surface area specified in subsection D.2.a. 
e.  The monument shall be no greater than sixteen (16) feet wide. 
3.  Applicability. Lots or tracts on a highway are authorized a monument sign, multi-tenant according to the terms and conditions set out herein. A tenant space means a suite or building with four (4) or more separate building entrances functioning as separate businesses. Subdivided spaces or rented rooms within a larger space or building do not qualify as separate tenant space for the purpose of being eligible for a monument sign, multi-tenant sign. In order to qualify for a monument sign, multi-tenant sign properties must contain businesses that meet the definition of tenant space described in this section and one (1) of the following criteria: 
a.  A lot or tract must have three (3) or more tenants in separate, rentable tenant spaces with a minimum building square footage of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; or 
b.  Lot or tract has two (2) or more buildings, of a minimum combined square footage of eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet, with four (4) or more businesses each with separate entrances; or 
c.  Lot or tract has a building of sixty thousand (60,000) square feet or more; or 
d.  Lot or tract has more than twelve (12) businesses each with a separate entrance; or 
e.  Lot or tract has more than eighteen (18) businesses located on the premises. 
4.  Allotment. One (1) monument sign, multi-tenant per lot or tract is permitted unless; 
a.  The lot or tract has lot frontage on three (3) improved streets and one (1) or more additional driveway access points into the complex then an additional monument sign shall be permitted for a maximum of two (2) additional monument signs, at each driveway access location so long as the signs being placed on separate frontages, with a minimum of two-hundred (200) feet of separation. However, if the lot has lot frontage on three (3) improved streets, but does not have additional driveway access points to the separate street frontages, then two (2) additional monument signs shall be permitted, subject to the signs being placed on separate frontages, with a minimum separation of two-hundred (200) feet apart; or, 
b.  A lot or tract that has an excess of five-hundred (500) feet of continuous linear lot frontage on a highway shall be allowed an additional monument sign, multi-tenant for each five-hundred (500) feet of frontage with a minimum separation of three-hundred and fifty (350) feet between each sign. 
c.  In all the above cases, no more than a total of three (3) monument signs, multi-tenant or monument signs shall be allowed per lot or development. 
5.  Setback requirements. Monument sign, multi-tenant must front a highway and shall be subject to a minimum ten (10) foot setback from the property/lot line; and twenty (20) feet from intersecting right-of-way lines. 
6.  Design. 
a.  Monument signs, multi-tenant shall be constructed with a minimum of fifty (50) percent solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) to match the building(s) that they represent. 
b.  Use of tenant panels for the purpose of providing contact information for leasing space at the multi-tenant center is authorized. 
c.  Architectural accent. Monument signs, multi-tenant shall include architectural accents into the sign design. Design elements from the corresponding building or project architectural features present in the development is required. If there are no notable architectural features or attributes associated with the development, then one (1) must be added to the sign design to improve the character of the sign. An example of how this may be achieved is by the addition of a roof canopy to resemble a tower or arched metalwork capping the sign. Each sign is unique and architectural accent to these signs is meant to improve the sign form. 
d.  All text and logos shall be uniform in color, material and lighting. The use of additional colors for minor accents may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
e.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting a street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. If the sign is located at an intersection, the address number must include the street name as part of the address displayed. An address may be added to sign support poles or other vertical elements of the sign. In order to prevent confusion and the delay of emergency services, the address shall be displayed so as to face only the street on which the building represented by the sign fronts. 
f.  All letters and numbers shall be stencil cut or typeset graphics, and address numbers shall be attached or printed directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
g.  Signs proposing to use other equivalent materials than required above consistent with the building architecture or overall sign design may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
7.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is authorized. 
8.  Relocation in utility easement. If a monument sign, multi-tenant is located in a public utility easement, the owner of the property is responsible for removal, relocation or replacement of the sign at a utility company's or city's request. 
9.  Landscape. A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of the ground surrounding the base of each sign under this section shall be landscaped in a manner that does not conflict with other provisions of this Code. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained so that the visibility of the address numbers is not obstructed. 
E.  Freestanding or pole signs. 
1.  Purpose. To identify a building, business, multifamily complex, or residential subdivision through the use of a freestanding sign or pole sign. 
2.  Maximum size. Freestanding and pole signs is allowed an area equal to one (1) square foot to each two (2) linear foot of building front, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet. A minimum of thirty-two (32) square feet is authorized regardless of building front. 
3.  Maximum height. Freestanding or pole signs shall be no more than twenty (20) feet high. 
4.  Minimum height. Freestanding or poles signs shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet from the ground to the base of the sign. 
5.  Allocation. One (1) freestanding or pole sign per lot or tract is authorized only for highway properties. 
6.  Setback requirements. Freestanding or pole signs shall be subject to a ten (10) foot setback from the adjoining right-of-way; and thirty-five (35) feet from intersecting right-of way lines. 
7.  Separation requirement. All freestanding/pole signs must maintain a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from one another. 
8.  [Panel space.] Each tenant space within a multi-tenant or strip center shall have one (1) panel on the property's single allotted detached sign. 
9.  Design. 
a.  Freestanding/pole signs shall be supported by a one (1) of the two (2) following systems: 
i.  Single vertical pole shall be cladded or skirted from the base/ground to the sign frame. Cladding or skirting shall be one (1) or a combination of the following materials; metal/aluminum panels or plastic clad panels with a steel frame assembly, stucco finish, masonry, or stone. Cladding shall be a minimum width of thirty (30) percent of the sign frame width mounted at the top of the pole, however the cladding shall not exceed six (6) feet in width, or; 
ii.  Two (2) vertical support poles or columns shall support the sign. Columns or posts shall be set apart or separated by a minimum distance of fifty (50) percent to eighty (80) percent of the total sign frame width mounted on the support poles. Columns or posts shall have an architectural horizontal connecting element spanning the distance between the posts that adds character to the structure. 
b.  Any exposed support poles or columns shall be painted a flat black. 
c.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. At minimum the address number must be displayed. If the sign is located near the corner of the property then the street name must be on the sign in addition to the address number. An address may be added to sign support poles or other vertical elements of the sign. 
d.  All text and logos shall be consistent with the sign's theme, such as the use of uniform in color, material, and lighting. The use of additional colors for minor accents may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
e.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
f.  Signs proposing an alternative designs utilizing other materials or colors may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
10.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is authorized. 
11.  [Freestanding/pole signs.] Freestanding/pole signs are prohibited on properties within the city, except those with frontage on highways. 
F.  Directional signs. 
1.  Purpose. To identify the entrance/exit to a building, business, multifamily complex, or residential subdivision through the use of a detached directional sign. 
2.  Maximum size. Ten (10) square feet maximum. 
3.  Maximum height. Four (4) feet. 
4.  Allocation. One (1) per driveway/entrance/exit to business/development. 
5.  Setback requirements. Directional signs shall be subject to a five (5) foot setback, unless the directional sign is less than three (3) feet in height in which case, then a zero (0) setback shall apply. 
6.  Design. 
a.  Directional signs shall be erected on a solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) base to match the building(s), and shall not be mounted on a pole(s). 
b.  No goods or services for sale or other advertising may be displayed on a directional sign. 
c.  Directional signs may include but are not specifically limited to arrows, words, or logos. 
d.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
e.  Signs proposing to use alternative materials consistent with the building architecture may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
7.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is authorized. 
G.  Retaining wall sign. 
1.  Purpose. To identify a building, business, multifamily complex, or residential subdivision through the use of a detached sign mounted on a retaining wall. 
2.  Maximum size. Surface area shall be no more than forty (40) square feet; alternative sign sizes may be considered by the planning and zoning commission up to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet, this is based there being a wide variation of potential retaining wall configurations, such as the height, size, and location. 
3.  Maximum height. The retaining wall sign shall not project above the top of the retaining wall it is constructed upon. 
4.  Allocation. One (1) retaining wall sign per lot or tract is permitted. 
5.  Setback requirements. Retaining wall signs shall be subject to a zero foot setback, if the retaining wall is at a zero (0) setback from the property/lot line, due to the retaining wall sign being required to be attached to a retaining wall; and five (5) feet from intersecting right-of-way lines if the retaining wall is less than five (5) feet height, should the retaining wall be over five (5) feet in height then the sign shall be prohibited from being attached, in such case a minimum fifteen (15) foot setback shall apply. 
6.  Design. 
a.  The retaining wall shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) to match the building(s) for a minimum of ten (10) feet to each side of the surface area of the sign. 
b.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. If the sign is located near an intersection, the address number must include the street name as part of the address displayed. In order to prevent confusion and the delay of emergency services, the address shall be displayed so as to face only the street which the building represented by the sign fronts. 
c.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached or printed directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
d.  Signs proposing to use alternative materials consistent with the building architecture may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
7.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is authorized. 
8.  Additional. If located in a public utility easement, the owner of the property is responsible for removal, relocation or replacement at a utility company's or city's request. 
H.  Wall sign. 
1.  Purpose. To identify a building, business, multifamily complex, or residential subdivision through the use of a detached sign mounted on a wall. 
2.  Maximum size. Shall be no more than thirty (30) square feet; alternative sign sizes may be considered by the planning and zoning commission up to a maximum of eighty (80) square feet, this is based there being a wide variation of potential wall configurations, such as the height, size, and location. 
3.  Maximum height. A wall sign shall not project above the top of the wall it is constructed upon. 
4.  Allocation. One (1) wall sign per lot or tract is permitted. 
5.  Setback requirements. Wall signs shall be subject to a zero (0) foot setback, if the wall is at a zero (0) setback from the property/lot line, due to the wall sign being required to be attached to a wall; and ten (10) feet from intersecting right-of-way lines if the wall is less than four (4) feet in height, should the retaining wall be over four (4) feet in height then the sign shall be prohibited from being attached, in such case a minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback shall apply. In no case shall a wall or the wall sign create a vision obstruction that would conflict with other city ordinances. 
6.  Design. 
a.  The wall shall be a minimum of fifty (50) percent solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) to match the building(s), and a minimum of one-hundred (100) percent solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) for a minimum of ten (10) feet to each side of the surface area of the sign. 
b.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. If the sign is located near an intersection, the address number must include the street name as part of the address displayed. In order to prevent confusion and the delay of emergency services, the address shall be displayed so as to face only the street on which the building represented by the sign fronts. 
c.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached or printed directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
d.  Signs proposing to use other equivalent materials than required above consistent with the building architecture or overall sign design may be approved by the city manager or designee. 
7.  Lighting. Internal sign illumination, individual letter internal illumination, or external ground lighting angled at the sign face is allowed. 
8.  Additional. If located in a public utility easement, the owner of the property is responsible for removal, relocation or replacement at a utility company's or city's request. 
I.  Multi-lot shared signage. 
1.  Purpose. To identify buildings, businesses, or multifamily complexes located on adjacent lots through the use of a single detached sign. 
2.  Applicability. In order to qualify for multi-lot shared signage, the properties must be adjacent to each other, have frontage on the same roadway, and be able to meet the locational requirement set out herein. 
3.  Requirements. 
a.  Permitted sign types. Multi-lot shared signage is limited to monument, monolith, and freestanding or pole sign types. Electronic message signs are not permitted as multi-lot shared signage. 
b.  Allocation. Except as provided in subsection d., only one (1) multi-lot shared sign is permitted per site in lieu of individual property having separate detached signage. Additionally, each property or business may be represented on only one (1) multi-lot shared sign. 
c.  Location requirements. The property(s) on which the sign is not located must have shared vehicular access with the property on which the sign is located or have a driveway entrance within one hundred (100) feet of and on the same street as the shared sign. 
d.  Separation requirements. Multi-lot shared signage must be separated a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from another detached sign on a separate property and a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from another detached sign on any of the properties included on the shared sign. 
e.  Design standards. The sign must meet the design requirements of the applicable sign type (monument signs section 20-7.B, monolith signs section 20-7.C, and freestanding or pole signs section 20-7.E) except the maximum size and height requirements as outlined herein. 
f.  Maximum size and height. The maximum size and height allowances for multi-lot shared signs may be increased as follows: 
i.  Multi-lot shared monument signs may be increased in height by one (1) foot and increased in square footage by thirty (30) percent from that prescribed in section 20-7.B. 
ii.  Multi-lot shared monolith signs may be increased in height by two (2) feet and increased in square footage by thirty (30) percent from that prescribed in section 20-7.C. 
iii.  Multi-lot shared freestanding or pole signs may be increased in height by one (1) foot and increased in square footage by thirty (30) percent from that prescribed in section 20-7.E. 
4.  Signage forfeiture. The shared sign shall count as one of the detached signs permittable under this code for each of the properties included on the sign. Additionally, the monument sign bonus/incentive outlined in section 20-7.B.11 shall not be applicable to the property(s) on which the sign is not located. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , § II.D, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-8. - Electronic signs. 
This section governs the regulation of all permanent forms of electronic signage within the city and its ETJ. No sign may be erected, structurally changed or reconstructed in whole or part, within the city without a permit having been first obtained. 
A.  General regulations. 
1.  The city may order a sign's brightness reduced or other operational characteristics altered if the city finds that the sign interferes with or poses a traffic safety hazard to the operation of vehicles. Upon permitting of a sign the city shall require submittal of technical specifications of the sign's design to review to ensure it does not pose a hazard to the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
2.  All electronic message signs shall be turned off or shall display a blank screen when malfunctioning. 
3.  Brightness standards. The brightness standards are applicable to all forms of electronic message signs in the city. 
a.  All such signs shall be equipped with light sensing devices or a scheduled dimming timer that will automatically dim the intensity of the light emitted by the sign during ambient low-light conditions and at night so that the sign does not exceed the maximum brightness levels allowed in this section. 
b.  Maximum brightness shall not exceed seven thousand (7,000) nits when measured from the sign's face at its maximum brightness during daylight hours and shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) nits when measured from the sign's face at its maximum brightness at night. 
c.  If such sign is located within one hundred (100) feet of a property with residential zoning, the sign must be oriented such that no portion of the electronic sign face is visible from a residentially-zoned property or the brightness is reduced to no more than two hundred fifty (250) nits at night. 
d.  Prior to the issuance of a permit for such sign, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory preset not to exceed the levels specified above. 
B.  Electronic message sign, monument. 
1.  Allocation. One (1) allowed per property. None allowed attached to buildings/structures. 
2.  Maximum size. Shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per side. 
3.  Form. Limited to not more than two (2) sides one (1) sign face per side. 
4.  Messaging standard. Monument electronic message signs must only display all messages as a static or fixed message/image of the entire screen/message board area for each message/image displayed. Static or fixed messages/images must be displayed a minimum of eight (8) seconds before rotating or displaying the next message. Scrolling, blinking, or other forms of moving text is prohibited. 
5.  Color form standard. Monument electronic message signs shall be limited to a black background, and a single uniform text and/or graphic color, being red, amber, white, blue, or green. All programmed messages the sign displays must be displayed utilizing the single selected text/graphic color. The selected message display color must be indicated at the time of permit application, and once selected and permitted, can only be altered by a permit application to amend the Sign's permitted function to another color type. A variation or combination of text/message colors of the messaging is prohibited. Flashing, blinking, or other forms of text manipulation, such as but not limited to enlarging or shrinking of the message/text is prohibited. Scrolling text is prohibited. Static images, graphics, or pictures shall be displayed in the same color as the text elements of the electronic message. Color variations within the electronic message are prohibited. 
6.  Construction/installation standards. Monument electronic message signs are required to be installed within the structural body of the monument sign, and may not be an addition to an already existing sign as an attachment. Monument electronic message signs shall not project outward or upward from the main body of the sign and must be installed or erected within the body of a new or the outline of an existing monument sign structure. All electronic wiring to power the electronic sign shall be concealed within the body of the monument sign and shall not be visible on the exterior of the monument sign. 
7.  Temporary signage forfeiture. Any property or development that chooses to utilize an electronic message sign, monument, shall forfeit the allotment of all forms of temporary signage allowed in this chapter. Temporary signage is meant only to provide an additional sign form to businesses for advertising or communicating information to the public. With the use of an electronic message sign, monument, the property or development has the diverse messaging capability to change messages to the public, and therefore negates the necessity of temporary signs. Once an electronic message sign, monument is erected upon a property all forms of temporary signage allowed by this chapter shall be prohibited; exception shall be for the erection of real estate signs that may be erected to advertise the real estate listing of the property, which is a separate business relationship to the use. 
C.  Electronic message sign, non-monument detached. 
1.  Allocation. One (1) per property, as the solitary detached sign. An electronic message sign shall be only permitted in lieu of the property or business exchanging all of the allowed detached sign square footage for installation and use of an electronic message sign. Therefore, no square footage for any additional detached signage is allowed if an electronic message sign is erected; or if there is an existing electronic messaging sign then no additional detached sign square footage shall be allowed until such time as the electronic message sign is removed from the premises. This includes the multiple detached sign allowance, if the property qualifies for multiple detached signs, any existing or proposed electronic message signage shall constitute a forfeiture of the additional detached signs, allowing only the one (1) singular detached sign, until such time as the electronic message sign is removed. Electronic message sign are not allowed to be attached to buildings/structures. 
2.  Maximum size. Shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side. 
3.  Maximum height. Shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
4.  Form. Limited to not more than two (2) sides one (1) sign face per side. 
5.  Message standard. Electronic message signs must display all messages as a static or fixed message/image of the entire screen/message board area for each message/image displayed. Static or fixed messages/images must be displayed a minimum of ten (10) seconds before rotating or displaying the next message. Scrolling, blinking, or other form of moving text is prohibited. 
6.  Color form standard. Electronic message signs shall be limited to a black background, and a single uniform text and/or graphic color. All programmed messages the sign displays must be displayed utilizing the single selected text/graphic color being red, amber, white, blue, or green. All programmed messages the sign displays must be displayed utilizing the single selected text/graphic color. The selected message display color must be indicated at the time of permit application, and once selected and permitted, can only be altered by a permit application to amend the sign's permitted function to another color type. Flashing, blinking, or other forms of text manipulation, such as but not limited to enlarging or shrinking of the message/text is prohibited. Scrolling text is prohibited. Static images, graphics, or pictures shall be displayed in the same color as the text elements of the electronic message. Color variations within the electronic message are prohibited. 
7.  Construction/installation standards. 
a.  Maximum height. Electronic message signs shall be no more than twenty (20) feet high. 
b.  Setback requirements. Electronic message signs shall be subject to a twenty (20) foot setback from the property line; and thirty-five (35) feet from intersecting right-of way lines. 
c.  Design. 
i.  The supporting column(s) of an electronic message sign shall provide a solid masonry (stone, brick and/or stucco) base that matches the material of the adjacent building of five (5) feet in height from the ground or twenty-five (25) percent of the total sign height, whichever is greater. 
ii.  Any exposed support poles or columns shall be painted a flat black. 
iii.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. At minimum the address number must be displayed. If the sign is located near the corner of the property then the street name must be on the sign in addition to the address number. 
iv.  All electronic wiring to power the electronic sign shall be concealed within the body of the support poles for the sign and shall not be visible on the exterior of the support poles or sign. 
v.  Signs proposing an alternative designs utilizing other materials or colors may be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
8.  Temporary signage forfeiture. Any property or development that choose to permit and utilize electronic message signs, shall forfeit the allotment of all forms of temporary signage allowed in this chapter. Temporary signage is meant only to provide an additional sign form to businesses for advertising or communicating information to the public. With the use of an electronic message sign the property or development has the diverse messaging capability to change messages to the public, and therefore negates the necessity of temporary signs. Once an electronic message sign is erected upon a property all forms of temporary signage allowed by this chapter shall be prohibited; exception shall be for the erection of real estate signs that may be erected to advertise the real estate listing of the property, which is a separate business relationship to the use and advertising of the premises. 
D.  Time and temperature sign. 
1.  Allocation. One (1) allowed per property. None allowed attached to buildings/structures. Time and temperature signs are not allowed to be erected in combination with electronic message signs, standard. 
2.  Maximum area. Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet, per side. 
3.  Form. Limited to not more than two (2) sides one (1) sign face per side. 
4.  Messaging standard. Time and temperature text must be displayed as a static or fixed full-screen message for each message displayed. Time and temperature messages must be displayed a minimum of six (6) seconds before rotating or displaying the next message. Scrolling, blinking, or other form of moving text is prohibited. If at any time any content other than time and temperature messaging is displayed, then the sign shall be classified as an electronic message sign, thereby requiring the sign to comply with all standards applicable within this chapter to electronic messaging signs. 
5.  Color form standard. Time and temperature signs must have a black background, and a single uniform text color of red, white, or amber. Varying text colors of the messaging is prohibited. 
E.  Gas/fuel price electronic message sign. 
1.  Allocation. One (1) allowed per business or property. May be allowed to be attached to buildings/structures or on a detached sign. 
2.  Maximum size. Shall not exceed eighteen (18) total square feet per sign face; which may consist of individual pricing panels six (6) square feet per gas/fuel price panel, with a maximum of three (3) fuel/gas price(s) (Unleaded, Premium, Diesel) per detached sign and/or building/structure. In no instance shall an electronic message panel extend beyond the face of the canopy. 
3.  Form. Limited to not more than two (2) sides with one (1) sign face per side. For purposes of this requirement, the two (2) sign sides may be located on separate faces of a canopy over a fueling area. 
4.  Messaging standard. Gas/fuel numbers must be displayed as a static. Gas/fuel messages must be displayed a minimum of ten (10) seconds before rotating or displaying the next message. Scrolling, blinking, or other form of moving text is prohibited. The advertising of any goods, services, or prices for anything other than gas/fuel upon this sign is prohibited. If at any time any content other than gas/fuel messaging is displayed, then the sign will be classified as an electronic message sign, thereby requiring the sign to comply with all standards applicable within these regulations to electronic messaging signs. 
5.  Color form standard. Gas/fuel signs must have a black background, and a single uniform text color of red, white, green, or amber within each sign panel. Varying text colors within each sign panel of the messaging is prohibited. 
6.  Existing nonconforming signs. Existing nonconforming signs seeking to install electronic gas/fuel price message signs must show substantial improvements to existing sign in conformance with section 20-15 G. 
F.  Electronic message sign, site specific. 
1.  Allocation. One (1) allowed per property. None allowed attached to buildings/structure. 
2.  Maximum area. Shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet. 
3.  Location. This sign form is not for advertising to the general public, but for the communication of information to users/visitors to a specific site. Therefore, these signs are encouraged not face the public right-of-way. The only exception to this standard would be electronic message signs communicating the pricing of gas or fuel pricing available on the site, with the condition that the price is the only information displayed on the sign and subject to the standards herein. 
4.  Messaging standard. Site specific electronic message signs must only display all messages as a static or fixed message/image of the entire screen/message board area for each message/image displayed. Static or fixed messages/images are not limited to a minimum timeframe of display. Scrolling, blinking, or other form of moving text is prohibited. 
5.  Color form standard. Site specific standard electronic messaging signs shall be limited to a black background, and a single uniform text and graphic color of red, white, or amber, except that prices for the separate fuel types may utilized the standard red and green. Varying text colors of the messaging is prohibited. Flashing of text is prohibited. Scrolling text is prohibited. Static images, graphic, or pictures shall be displayed in the same color as the text elements of the electronic message. Color variations within the electronic message are prohibited. 
G.  Searchlight or beacon sign. 
1.  Allocation. None. All searchlight or beacon sign types are prohibited in the city. 
2.  Special event provision. A special event sign permit may be obtained from the development services department for the use of a searchlight or beacon sign for a maximum of two (2) times per year, not to exceed five (5) days each time, for each special event. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2016-O-05A, § II, 5-3-2016 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , §§ II.E—II.I, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-9. - Attached signs. 
This section governs the regulation of all permanent forms of signage attached to a building or structure within the city and its ETJ. Except as otherwise authorized herein, no sign shall be erected, structurally changed or reconstructed in whole or part, within the city without a permit having been first obtained. 
A.  Permanent building signage. Signs, when attached to buildings shall advertise only services or products which are offered within the building to which the sign is attached. 
1.  Construction/installation standards. Such signs shall not extend above the roof line of such building for more than two (2) feet. Under no circumstances shall an attached sign be allowed to extend past the ends of a building or more than two (2) feet above the roof line of a building nor cover more than fifty (50) percent of the front or side of a building. Attached signs shall not extend more than fifteen (15) inches from the face of the building surface, unless it meets the requirements to be classified as a projected or awning signs, which the applicable regulations to those sign categories shall apply. 
a.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset, and address numbers shall be attached directly to the face of the sign. Reflective surfaces are not permitted. 
b.  Lighting. Internal or external lighting of attached signs is allowed. 
2.  Maximum size. The total area of all signs attached to the building shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each one (1) linear foot of building front. Buildings adjacent to a side street shall be allowed to include the linear footage of the side of the building adjacent to an improved side street when calculating the total allowable sign area. 
3.  Awning sign. 
a.  Maximum area/allocation. Awning signs shall be erected under the allotted square footage for total area attached to buildings as prescribed above. 
b.  Awning signs shall not be constructed of banners or non-rigid materials, unless it is constructed as a structural element of the awning itself, such as a business name stitched into or printed upon the material of the awning canopy. 
c.  Awning signs in the main street district. 
i.  An awning sign in the main street district shall not project more than two (2) feet from the awning it is affixed. 
ii.  An awning sign in the main street district can project over sidewalks and walkways in the public right-of-way. 
d.  Awning signs in all other districts. 
i.  An awning sign shall not project more than one (1) foot from the awning it is affixed. 
ii.  An awning sign shall not project over public right-of-way. 
4.  Neon sign. 
a.  Allocation. Neon signs are allowed but must be erected within the allotted attached signs attributed to a building. 
b.  Maximum area. Established by maximum attached sign square footage to building. 
c.  Display. Neon signs are prohibited from pulsing, flashing, or any other function that would create a moving sign. The display of neon signs is to provide a form of fixed illumination. 
d.  Location. Neon signs are prohibited from attachment to any form of detached signage. Neon signs shall be permitted to be attached to buildings within which a business operates. Neon signs are prohibited from attachment to accessory structures or detached structures from the primary business building. 
e.  An "open" neon sign within a window of a business or attached to the exterior of the business shall not be counted as sign square footage for a building allotment. An "open" sign shall be limited to four (4) square feet. 
5.  Projecting sign. No sign structure or sign support attached to a building shall project from the building more than two (2) feet, except for signs placed on a business in the main street district. Such projections must be a minimum of eight (8) feet above the walkway adjacent to the building for head clearance. Projecting signs shall not be supported by any structural support poles, but shall be an extension of the building façade. Projecting signs shall not extend farther than six (6) feet from the building face which it is attached. 
B.  Window signage. 
1.  Purpose. To maintain the functional use of windows in buildings as they are intended to be utilized and minimize the volume of signage within windows on structures. 
2.  Window signs are permitted. The total area of all window signs on any given elevation of a building may not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window area of that elevation. 
3.  No single window sign shall exceed a fifty (50) percent cover of the area of the window. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-10. - Temporary signs. 
This section governs the regulation of all forms of temporary signage within the city and its ETJ. No sign may be erected, structurally changed, refaced, or reconstructed in whole or part, within the city without a permit having been first obtained. 
A.  Attached temporary signs. 
1.  Banner signs. 
a.  Purpose. To allow businesses and organizations the opportunity to advertise special events or functions, such as but not limited to: Opening soon, closing soon, business relocation, specials, sales, promotions, fundraisers, community events, etc. 
b.  Allocation. One (1) temporary banner sign per business limited to the following requirements: 
i.  One (1) temporary banner shall be permitted at a time. 
ii.  A single temporary banner sign may be permitted not more than four (4) times a year, for a maximum of forty-five (45) days for each instance. 
iii.  A minimum of thirty (30) days shall be required between permitting one (1) sign to the next, so the instance of a perpetual banner sign does not occur. 
iv.  A single temporary banner sign may be permitted as the interim permanent sign for a new business for up to sixty (60) days. Prior to the expiration of the sixty (60) day time period application for the permanent sign must be made. The city manager or designee may authorize an extension to the allotted sixty (60) days on a case-by-case basis. 
c.  Maximum size. Thirty-two (32) square feet. 
d.  Location requirements. Temporary banner signs shall only be affixed to buildings or structures. Any temporary banner signs must have a head clearance minimum of eight (8) feet, if they are overhanging pedestrian access routes or paths. Temporary banner signs are prohibited from utilization in residential zoning districts, such as NR, TR, DR, ENZ.2, ENZ.3, or other PDD district equivalents. 
e.  Setback requirements. None, temporary banner signs shall not be detached, and therefore shall only be attached to buildings. 
f.  Design. 
i.  Material for a temporary banner sign must be made of vinyl or an equally weather resistant material. 
ii.  All letters and numbers must be typeset. 
g.  Lighting. The lighting of temporary banner signs is prohibited. 
B.  Detached temporary signs. 
1.  Purpose. To allow businesses and organizations the opportunity to advertise special events or functions, including but not limited to: opening soon, closing soon, business relocation, specials, sales, promotions, fundraisers, community events, etc. 
2.  General regulations. All temporary detached signs shall comply with the following regulations, unless specified herein. 
a.  A permit is required for all temporary detached sign types. 
b.  Only one (1) type of detached temporary sign may be permitted at one (1) time. Combinations of these sign types are prohibited, except that a business conducting a grand opening or business relocation may combine two (2) of these temporary sign types for a sixty (60) day period. 
c.  A permit required under this section must be approved no less than thirty (30) days prior to the installation of signs described by subsections B.2, 3., and 4., except that businesses conducting grand openings, relocations or closings and that have had a temporary sign permitted within the last thirty (30) days need not apply for an additional permit. 
3.  Temporary sandwich board signs. 
a.  Maximum size. Twenty-four (24) square feet; shall not be wider than four (4) feet. 
b.  Maximum height. Six (6) feet. 
c.  Allocation. Each business shall be allowed to a sandwich board signs subject to one (1) of the following methods: 
i.  Two (2) sandwich board signs shall be permitted up to four (4) times a year, for a maximum of thirty (30) days for each instance. If only one (1) sandwich board sign is permitted, the maximum length of time for display extends to forty-five (45) days for each instance. A minimum of thirty (30) days shall pass between the permitting of one (1) sign to the next, except that signs permitted for grand openings, business relocations, or closing events may be permitted for up to sixty (60) days, or; 
ii.  Sandwich board signs may utilize a portion of the thirty (30) days allowed by erecting the sandwich board signs on the weekends only. Each weekend the sandwich board signs are erected shall count as two (2) days deducting from remainder of the original thirty (30) days permitted. Once the thirty (30) days is utilized a new permit for a new thirty (30) day time period must be obtained. Signs on the weekend only time period is the following timeframe, after 5:00 p.m. Fridays and removed by 8:00 a.m. Monday morning. Failure to comply with the weekend only time period may result in the permit being revoked and the loss of temporary sign permit privileges for a period of up to six (6) months. The business shall keep an accounting of when the sign is erected and when it is not. 
iii.  One (1) sandwich board sign may be permitted for a reoccurring weekly event for a single day of the week. The day of the week must be specified upon permitting and may be continued for the duration of the permit. The sign may only be posted and displayed on the single permitted day of the week. Failure to comply with this single-day rule may result in the permit being revoked and the loss of temporary sign permit privileges for a period of up to six (6) months. An annual permit for a reoccurring weekly event temporary sign is required. 
d.  Location requirements. Sandwich board signs shall be located on the premises of the business, organization, or even for which they advertise. Sandwich board signs shall not create a traffic circulation disturbance or a vision obstruction. Sandwich board signs shall not block pedestrian paths, entrances or exits to buildings. Sandwich board signs are prohibited from utilization in residential zoning districts, such as NR, TR, DR, MR, ENZ.2, ENZ.3, ENZ.4, or other PDD district equivalents. 
e.  Design. 
i.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset. 
ii.  Lighting. Internal or external lighting of sandwich board signs is prohibited. 
f.  Removal/storage. The sandwich board signs must be removed and stored daily, upon close of business. 
g.  Maintenance. Sandwich board signs must be maintained in good condition. Visible damage or wear and tear is not permitted. Sandwich board signs shall remain upright on the property and shall be returned to an upright position immediately if the sign falls or is blown over. Signs must be removed and stored indoors during periods of hazardous weather. 
4.  Feather flag signs (tear drop banners). 
a.  Maximum size. Sixteen (16) feet maximum height and three (3) feet wide. 
b.  Allocation. Feather flag signs shall not be used as a permanent sign for a business/development. Each business shall be allowed feather flag signs as follows: 
i.  Two (2) feather flag signs may be permitted for a property for six (6) months for each instance. However, individual businesses within a multi-tenant shopping center may be permitted one (1) feather flag for six (6) months for each instance. 
ii.  A minimum of thirty (30) days shall pass between the permitting of one (1) sign to the next. 
c.  Location requirements. Feather flag signs shall be located within the premises of the business, organization, or event for which they advertise. Feather flag signs shall not create a traffic circulation disturbance or a vision obstruction to neighboring signs or traffic accessibility. Feather flag signs shall not block pedestrian paths, entrances or exits to buildings. Feather flag signs are prohibited from utilization in residential zoning districts, such as NR, TR, DR, ENZ.2, ENZ.3, or other PDD district equivalents. 
d.  Setback requirements. None. Feather flag signs may be placed on the property line provided all other provisions of this section are met. 
e.  Design. 
i.  Material for a feather flag sign must be made of vinyl or an equally weather resistant material. Paper, cardboard, similar material or non-weather resistant material is prohibited. 
ii.  All letters and numbers must be typeset. 
f.  Lighting. The lighting of feather flag signs is prohibited. 
g.  Maintenance. Feather flag signs must be maintained in good condition with no tears, frayed edges, or discoloration. Visible damage, wear and tear, or weathering is prohibited and will result in the sign permit being revoked or denied. Feather flag signs shall remain upright on the property and shall be returned to an upright position immediately if the sign falls or is blown over. Signs must be removed and stored indoors during periods of hazardous weather. 
5.  Plastic stake signs. 
a.  Maximum size. Six (6) square feet per plastic stake sign. 
b.  Maximum height. Three (3) feet. 
c.  Allocation. Each business shall be allowed plastic stake signs per business subject to one (1) of the following methods: 
i.  Four (4) plastic stake signs shall be permitted up to four (4) times a year, for a maximum of fifteen (15) days for each instance. A minimum of thirty (30) days shall be required between permitting one (1) sign to the next, so the instance of a perpetual temporary sign does not occur. 
ii.  The combination or simultaneous permitting of these signs at the same time as feather flags or plastic stake signs is prohibited. Only one (1) type of detached temporary sign type is allowed to be permitted at a time. 
d.  Location requirements. Plastic stake signs shall be located within the property they advertise. Plastic stake signs shall not create a traffic circulation disturbance or a vision obstruction. Plastic stake signs shall not block pedestrian paths, entrances or exits to buildings. Plastic stake signs are prohibited from utilization in residential zoning districts, such as NR, TR, DR, MR, ENZ.2, ENZ.3, ENZ.4, or other PDD district equivalents. 
e.  Setback requirements. None. Plastic stake signs may be placed on the property line provided all other provisions of this section are met. 
f.  Design. 
i.  Material for a plastic stake sign must be made of corrugated plastic, polystyrene, metal, or an equally weather resistant material. 
ii.  All letters and numbers must be typeset. 
g.  Lighting. The lighting of plastic stake signs is prohibited. 
h.  Maintenance. Plastic stake signs must be maintained in good condition. Visible damage or wear and tear is prohibited. Plastic stake signs shall remain upright on the property and shall be returned to an upright position immediately if the sign falls or is blown over. Signs must be removed and stored indoors during periods of hazardous weather. 
6.  Sandwich board signs (main street district only). 
a.  Purpose. To provide a viable detached sign alternative to businesses in the downtown district for visibility of pedestrians. The Marble Falls Downtown Master Plan encourages the use of temporary signs within the district. This section provides regulations for the use of temporary signs within that district. 
b.  Maximum size. Ten (10) square feet; shall not be wider than three (3) feet. 
c.  Maximum height. Four (4) feet. 
d.  Allocation. Each ground-floor store front shall be allowed to display one (1) sandwich board sign. 
e.  Location. 
i.  The sandwich board may be used on the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the business it represents, in an area defined by the edge of sidewalk pavement and two (2) perpendicular lines found by an imaginary extension of the building space lines or lot lines to this curb. Any other locations of sandwich board signs are considered off-premise signage and prohibited by this chapter. Sandwich board signs may not be placed in the street. 
ii.  Sandwich signs must be placed so as not to interfere with the movement of pedestrians upon the sidewalk. The sandwich sign must be placed within two (2) feet of the building face or within one (1) foot of the curb line on the outer edge of the sidewalk or within the landscape area on the outer edge of the sidewalk, if one exists. Sandwich signs may be placed in landscape areas on private property for buildings/sites with conventional setbacks in the main street district. 
iii.  Sandwich signs are not allowed to be placed in the street, parking stalls, or any area that is not sidewalk fronting the business as described in b. above. 
f.  Design. 
i.  All letters and numbers shall be typeset; unless a chalk menu board is used which the message must change daily. 
ii.  Lighting. Internal or external lighting of sandwich board signs is prohibited. 
g.  An annual permit is required for sandwich board signs. 
h.  Removal/storage. The sandwich board must be removed and stored upon close of business daily. 
7.  Balloons or other filled objects. 
a.  Balloons or other gas filled objects may be authorized for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days for business openings and fourteen (14) days for special occasions. A minimum of thirty (30) days shall be required between permitting one (1) sign to the next, so the instance of a perpetual temporary sign does not occur. A written permit shall be obtained from the city. No fee is required. 
b.  The object must be secured to the ground in a location so as to not create a traffic circulation disturbance or a vision obstruction to neighboring signs or traffic accessibility. The object shall not block pedestrian paths, entrances or exits to buildings. 
C.  Community or public service signs shall be limited to commercial and industrial districts and a drawing of all public service signs may be approved by city manager or designee. These signs do require a permit, but there shall be no fee. 
1.  Maximum size. Thirty-two (32) square feet. 
2.  Maximum of sixty (60) days per sign utilized. 
D.  Signage associated with a special or temporary event or concession with the city may be approved in conjunction with approval of the special or temporary event or the concession agreement and if approved in conjunction therewith, a separate sign permit is not required. Signage associated with a temporary or special event normally approved by the city council shall be approved by the council. Signage associated with a temporary or special event normally approved by city staff may be approved by city staff. 
E.  Development signs. Signs announcing or describing a legally approved subdivision or land development may be temporarily erected until the subdivision is completed. Such signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area and may be indirectly lighted. An annual permit is required. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.D, 1-15-2019; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , §§ II.C, II.J—II.M, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-11. - Miscellaneous sign form requirements. 
This section governs the regulation of all permanent forms of other signage within the city and its ETJ. No sign may be erected, structurally changed or reconstructed in whole or part, within the city and its ETJ without having obtained a permit from the city. 
A.  Subdivision sign. A permanent sign erected at the entrance of a subdivision or development. These signs are allowed to only provide geographic information by providing the name of the subdivision or development to the general public. Subdivision signs shall be limited in size to the monument sign regulations as provided above. 
B.  Mobile home park. A monument sign or retaining wall sign of not more than sixty (60) square feet in total area may be erected on property of the mobile home park and may be indirectly lighted. A permit is required. 
C.  Construction traffic signage. Construction traffic signage may be erected only on a temporary, as needed basis and only in conjunction with an approved associated construction project. Such signage shall be limited in content to provide for the safe and efficient circulation of traffic in and around construction sites and associated detours. The city manager or designee shall approve the size, locations, and type of these signs. Construction traffic signage shall be composed of retro-reflective "construction orange" background with black text. 
D.  Wind load pressure requirements. No sign shall be erected that does not meet the wind load pressure requirements as set out in the table which follows this paragraph or as determined by the current adopted building code. Permit applications for new signs and permit renewals required for signs which will have or have a height, in feet above ground, as measured above the average level of the ground adjacent to the proposed structure, of six (6) feet, or more, must be accompanied by a certificate signed by design professional or licensed engineer to the effect that the proposed or existing sign will withstand wind load pressures in pounds per square foot as set out in the following table. Solely at the discretion of the building official, further verification may be required to prove that the wind loading specifications will be met. 
Wind Load Pressure in Pounds Per Square Foot 
Height, in feet above ground as measured above the average level of the ground adjacent to the structure. 
Pressure 	Pounds per Square Foot 
0—5 	0 
6—30 	20 
31—50 	25 
 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , § II.N, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-12. - Prohibited signs. 
Any sign not expressly authorized by this chapter, or specifically exempted from the provisions hereof, or considered a legal nonconforming sign pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Prohibited signs include but are not limited to: 
A.  Signs and supports (other than those placed by the governmental authority such as street name signs) which are located within any public right-of-way. This section shall not apply to signs on commercial vehicles or commercial trailers lawfully operated or parked in such areas, except that this exception shall not otherwise be used to legitimize the use of advertising vehicles and trailers prohibited herein. 
B.  Sandwich or "A" frame signs, sidewalk or curb signs; unless specifically authorized herein. 
C.  Display of merchandise or examples of work are classified as signs, if any reference, thereon, is made to the business itself. In residential districts, no display of works or merchandise may be displayed, except for permitted garage sales. 
D.  All flags are prohibited except those of any nation, state, political subdivision. One (1) flag that shows an emblem or logo of a firm or corporation shall be permitted providing all other regulations are met. 
E.  Any signs which resemble an official traffic-control device or sign, or which bear the words of traffic-control. 
F.  Signs, which by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with or construed as a traffic-control sign, signal or device or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle or which hides from view any traffic or street sign or any signal device. 
G.  Any sign which emits sound, odor or visible matter which serve as a distraction to persons who are within the public right-of-way. 
H.  Portable, wheeled, banner, and/or temporary signs are not allowed, unless specifically authorized herein. 
I.  Off-premise signs are prohibited. No signs shall be erected advertising products or services not available on the site. This provision also includes messages displayed on electronic signs. Electronic signage shall not display advertisement or messages for goods or services not available on the site. 
J.  Signs may not be constructed of scrap materials, paper or other fragile materials, which are not weather-resistant. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-13. - Landmark signs. 
The city appreciates and recognizes potential for historical or iconic signs that contribute to the positive nature of the community. Therefore, the landmark sign procedure exists to allow application and consideration of permitting for these signs. Any sign permitted as a landmark sign may be exempt from the general regulations applicable to signs; except for applicable safety requirements and regulations that are referenced as being applicable to landmark signs. In order to designate a sign as a landmark type sign, the applicant shall submit an application according to the procedures set out in section 20-5 and this section. 
A.  Landmark sign must meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  Materials, technology, and design. Representative of excellence in a particular period of construction; and/or is unique in that it demonstrates extraordinary aesthetic quality, creativity or innovation. 
2.  Integrity. Retains the majority of its character-defining features (materials, technologies, structure, colors, shapes, symbols, text, and/or art) that have historical significance, or are integral to overall sign design, or convey historical or regional context. If character-defining features have been altered or removed, the majority are potentially restorable to their historic function and appearance. 
3.  Safety. Structurally safe or can be made safe without substantially altering its historical appearance. 
4.  Location. The sign is not an off-site sign or billboard, unless approved in accordance with subsection E. 
B.  A historic sign must be constructed more than fifty (50) years before the date of application and must meet all of the criteria for landmark sign designation and must meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  A historic sign may be repaired, restored, and/or adaptively reused if there is sufficient surviving fabric or sufficient historical documentation (photographs, postcards, permits, or other records) on which to base the treatment concept. An existing historic sign may be repaired, restored, or rehabilitated either in place, or off-site and then re-erected on site. 
2.  A historic sign may be repaired or restored to any past appearance prior to fifty (50) years before the date of application. If the owner of an historic sign can provide documentation or physical evidence that the original design included intermittent lighting features (e.g., flashing, blinking, chasing or sequentially lit elements which create the appearance of movement) or moving parts, those sign elements may be repaired and restored. 
3.  A historic sign that will be adaptively reused must retain, repair, or restore the majority of the character-defining features (e.g., materials, technologies, structure, colors, shapes, symbols, text, typography and/or artwork) that have historical significance, or are integral to the overall design of the sign, or convey historical or regional context. Changes to character-defining text are not allowed; any or all text that is not character defining can be changed. Changes to text must either match or be compatible with existing text or the text being replaced, in terms of materials, letter size, font, and color. 
C.  A vintage sign must meet all of the criteria for landmark sign designation and must meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  Age. Constructed between fifty (50) and twenty-five (25) years before the date of application. 
2.  Applications for signs constructed within twenty-five (25) years of the date of application may be considered on the cultural and iconic contribution to the surroundings. 
D.  Replica sign. 
1.  A replica sign is permissible when based on sufficient historical documentation of the sign and its location. A replica sign must use historical materials and technologies, or use contemporary materials and technologies that visually match historical ones. 
E.  Guidelines for relocating a landmark sign. 
1.  Provided that the landmark sign complies with subsections E.2.—4., landmark sign may be relocated as follows: 
a.  To another location on the premises; 
b.  To another location that houses the same or similar business; 
c.  To an areas of similar character within a one (1) mile radius of the present location; or 
d.  To the original location. 
2.  A designated landmark sign shall not be relocated to residentially zoned property. 
3.  A designated landmark signs shall not be relocated within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of a primary structure on a residentially zoned property. 
4.  All relocations are subject to the following: 
a.  Detached signs must be located no less than ten (10) feet from the face of the curb or edge of pavement. Where there is no curb, the measurement shall be taken from the street property line. 
b.  Projecting signs that project into the public right-of-way shall follow the rules and procedures of this chapter, and shall follow the sign permitting process. 
F.  Sign calculations for a landmark sign. 
1.  Where the landmark sign does not identify the business occupying the premises, and is not used by an owner or occupant of the premises to advertise a business currently occupying the premises, the landmark sign shall not count against the total allowable sign area for the premises and shall not count against the number of signs allowed for the premises. 
2.  Where the landmark sign does identify the business occupying the premises or is used or adaptively reused by an owner or occupant of the premises to advertise a business currently occupying the premises, fifty (50) percent of the square footage of the landmark sign shall count toward the total allowable sign area and shall count against the number of signs allowed for the premises. 
3.  One hundred (100) percent of the square footage of a replica sign shall count toward the total allowable sign area for the premises and shall count against the number of signs allowed for the premises. 
G.  Administration and procedures. 
1.  Final approval by the planning and zoning commission. Planning and zoning commission approval shall be required for a landmark sign designation. A landmark permit will be issued as evidence of the designation. The denial of a landmark sign designation by the planning and zoning commission shall be final, unless the applicant files a written appeal to the city council within ten (10) days from the date of the denial. 
H.  Expiration of approval. 
1.  If the approved site plan for landmark sign designation has not been permitted within six (6) months after designation is granted, the designation shall be removed. If the permit lapses and the landmark sign has not been constructed then the designation shall be removed. The applicant may reapply for designation. 
2.  If a landmark permit is issued for a landmark sign in existence on the date of enactment of this chapter, the permit will be valid for the life of the sign so long as the sign maintains compliance with requirement of this section. 
3.  If a landmark sign permit is issued to authorize the repair, replacement or relocation of a landmark sign, the authorization to repair, replace or relocate the landmark sign shall be valid for one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. If the landmark sign is not repaired, replaced or relocated as provided by the landmark permit prior to the expiration of one hundred and eighty (180) days, the permit will automatically expire and the signage will lose its landmark designation. Provided however, that an applicant may request an extension of the deadline for an additional ninety (90) day period if the request is submitted to the city manager or designee prior to the expiration of the initial one hundred and eighty (180) day period. 
4.  If a landmark sign ceases to comply with the requirements of subsection B., or is altered in a way that is not consistent with the criteria applicable to landmark signs, the city will notify the landowner that the sign no longer complies with the requirements that entitle it to landmark designation and the landowner shall have thirty (30) days to repair or correct the deficiencies. If the landowner fails to correct the deficiencies, the landmark permit shall expire and the signage will be subject to the regulations applicable to other signs. If the landowner disagrees with the city's determination, it may appeal the decision to the planning and zoning commission so long as the appeal is submitted prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period. The decision may be appealed from the commission to the city council with the appeal is submitted within ten (10) days of the date of the commission decision. The landmark permit will not expire during the pendency of any appeal and for an additional ten (10) days after the date of the commission's decision, or of the council's decision if an appeal is submitted to the council. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-14. - Fees. 
A sign permit shall be obtained prior to the erection of any sign not exempted herein. Permit fees are established as set out in the Master Fee Schedule, Appendix C. A separate electrical permit is required to be obtained, by a licensed electrician for signs requiring electrical components to be constructed. Any sign(s) erected or refaced without having first obtained a permit shall be subject to a fee of twice (two (2) times) the base permit fee amount to obtain a sign permit. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , § II.O, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-15. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Nonconforming signs are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  On-premise signs. Any nonconforming on-premise sign or sign structure that advertises or identifies a business, structure, person or activity which ceases to operate shall remove the name of the person, business or activity within thirty (30) days of the date that the business, person or activity ceased. This requirement does not apply to the sign structure. The sign structure shall not be structurally changed or reconstructed in whole or part, except for maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols or message without bringing the sign into full compliance with this chapter. Provided however, that a nonconforming sign may be repaired or rebuilt and returned to its original nonconforming state if the sign is damaged by fire or other cause (other than intentional act of owner) and the cost to repair the sign is not more than forty (40) percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. 
2.  Any nonconforming on-premise sign and sign structure that advertises or identifies a business, structure, person or activity which ceases to operate shall remove the sign and sign structure on or before the expiration of one (1) year from the date that the business, person or activity ceased, unless brought into compliance. If the sign or sign structure is located on premises that were occupied by one (1) or more tenants, then the sign and sign structure must be removed on or before the expiration of two (2) years from the date that the business, structure, person or activity ceased to operate, unless brought into compliance. 
3.  Off-premise signs. Any nonconforming off-premise sign shall be removed if at any time the sign or a substantial part of it is blown down, destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols, or other matter on the sign. The sign or a substantial part of it is considered destroyed if the cost of repairing the sign is more than sixty (60) percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. 
B.  In the event that a non-conforming sign loses its nonconforming status as described in subsection A. and is not removed by the owner, the city shall order the owner of the property on which the sign is located to remove the sign or, if the owner fails to do so, the city may remove the sign and file a lien on the property where the sign is located for the city's costs of such removal. Thereafter, no new signs shall be erected except pursuant to requirements of this chapter. 
C.  When nonconforming signs have been damaged by fire or other causes, but less than the applicable amounts that would cause them to lose their nonconforming status the city may issue a "no fee" permit for the necessary repairs to be made to the sign. If the necessary repairs are not completed within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance of the permit, then the sign shall be removed either by the owner or by the city at the owner's expense. 
D.  Signs so removed under the provisions of this section may be kept in storage (but the city is under no duty to do so) for a period of sixty (60) days and if they are not claimed within said period, they may be disposed of by the city. 
E.  Nonconforming electronic message signs existing at the time of adoption of this chapter utilizing multi-colored displays with colors or color schemes not in compliance with applicable color form standards contained herein shall not be required to bring such colors or color schemes into compliance so long as the message display meets all other requirements for electronic message signs, such as timing of messages, absence of flashing lights and similar provisions. 
F.  Existing signs and billboards outside the city limit and ETJ at the time of adoption of these regulation and that are later taken into the city limits or ETJ, shall be treated as nonconforming signs in accordance with this section. 
G.  Non-conforming on premise signs exception. Non-conforming on premise signs may be authorized to make substantial improvements to a sign without bringing the sign into full compliance with the city's sign regulations upon issuance of a limited permit as follows: 
1.  Limited permit. The applicant must demonstrate that substantial improvements to the sign will be undertaken. 
2.  The issuance of a limited permit is discretionary with the city. 
3.  An applicant for a limited permit shall follow the application process described in section 20-5 and submit the information required for regular sign permits. The process for approval of a limited permit will follow the process applicable to issuance of a regular sign permit. 
4.  The issuance of a limited permit shall authorize the permittee to repair and replace the sign in the event that the sign is damaged or destroyed so long as the limited permit has not expired. 
5.  A limited permit shall expire ten (10) years from the date of issuance. 
6.  A limited permit shall expire within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance if the substantial improvements to the sign are not commenced and diligently pursued to completion. 
7.  The substantial improvements to a sign under this section shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Be performed only one (1) time and shall not: 
i.  Increase the degree of existing nonconformity; 
ii.  Increase the illumination of the sign; and 
iii.  Shall not be authorized within any of the following residential zoning districts, such as NR, TR, DR, MR, ENZ.2, ENZ.3, ENZ.4, or other PDD district equivalents. 
b.  A limited permit may be issued to authorize modification or replacement of the sign in the same location, if the modification or replacement reduces: 
i.  The sign area by twenty (20) percent; 
ii.  The height of the sign by at least twenty (20) percent; 
iii.  Relocation of the sign to a minimum ten (10) foot setback; or 
iv.  Both sign area and height of the sign by an amount which, combined, is equal to at least twenty (20) percent of the sign area and height. 
c.  Masonry (brick, stone, or stucco) may be applied to the sign, consistent with sections 20-6.B.7.a., 20-6.C.7.a., 20-6.D.9.a., and 20-6.G.7.a. or an equivalent aesthetic upgrade of alternative design utilizing other materials may be approved by the city manager or designee. An applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the planning and zoning commission. 
d.  The building, project, or facility address must be displayed on any sign fronting the street from which the address is derived. Address numbers and letters shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height. If the sign is located near an intersection, the address number must include the street name as part of the address displayed. In order to prevent confusion and the delay of emergency services, the address shall be displayed so as to face only the street on which the building represented by the sign fronts. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.D, 1-15-2019; Ord. No. 2019-O-02A , § II.P, 2-19-2019)  
Sec. 20-16. - Variance procedure. 
There is a variance request procedure (for requests to deviate from these regulations) established by this chapter. No variance shall be allowed for any sign that is prohibited under these regulations or for any non-conforming prohibited sign type that is required to be removed pursuant to these regulations. 
A.  In order to lessen practical difficulties and prevent unnecessary physical hardships, variances from these regulations may be granted. A practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape, or dimensions of a structure, or the location of the structure, from topographic or physical limitations, locations, or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity. Cost or inconvenience to the applicant of strict or literal compliance with this chapter is not a reason for granting a variance. 
B.  Except for prohibited signs, a variance may be granted with respect to any regulation contained in this chapter in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
C.  The planning and zoning commission may approve, deny or approve with conditions variances to these regulations. The commission may approve a variance with conditions such as reduced size, color alterations or similar conditions to protect the public health, safety and welfare and ensure compatibility with the harmony and character of the city. 
D.  A decision by the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council, if the appeal is filed within ten (10) days of the date of the commission's decision. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-17. - Penalties for violation. 
The penalties established in section 1-9 shall apply to sign regulation violations. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Sec. 20-18. - City's authority to remove illegal signs. 
An illegal sign is any sign that is erected or placed in violation of this chapter and which is not classified as a nonconforming sign. The city may remove any illegal sign after having provided written notice to the owner five (5) days before said sign is removed. Upon removal of any sign pursuant to this section, the city shall use reasonable care to preserve such sign. The city shall not be liable for any damages, direct, indirect or consequential caused by the removal. The city may dispose of any illegal sign if not claimed by the owner within ten (10) days of the date of removal. If the sign does not contain sufficient information to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the sign, no notification prior to removal shall be necessary. If the owner does not reclaim the sign within ten (10) days of the date of removal, the city may dispose of the sign. 
( Ord. No. 2013-O-09C, § II.B, 10-1-2013 )  
Chapter 21 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 13; littering in city parks, § 15-19; littering in Lake Marble Falls, § 15-47; utilities, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Accumulation and removal of garbage and refuse, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477—1, § 4; Solid Waste Disposal Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477—7; Texas Litter Abatement Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477—9a. 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Alley means any public way, generally of less width than a street, used for public utility purposes and right-of-way and an alternate secondary or emergency route for vehicle and pedestrian traffic, generally situated at the rear of or alongside a tier of lots. 
Bags means plastic sacks designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed thirty-five (35) pounds. 
Bin means a plastic 300-gallon capacity receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically; to be primarily used to service commercial businesses. 
Brush means tree cuttings, twigs, branches, leaves, shrubbery, grass clippings and organic material resulting from yard maintenance. 
Bulky waste means items that will not normally fit inside the 96-gallon cart including furniture, mattresses, appliances with coolant removed, rugs, carpet, carpet padding, bundled brush and yard waste and similar items. Bulky waste does not include demolition or construction debris, stumps, tree trunks or limbs exceeding two (2) inches in diameter or three (3) feet in length. 
Bundle means tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspapers and magazines securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding three (3) feet in length or thirty-five (35) pounds in weight. Also, bundled newspaper, magazines and other recyclable paper which may not exceed twenty (20) pounds per bundle and tied with string or rope. 
Cart means a 96-gallon capacity, wheeled, lidded cart for the storage and automated collection of solid wastes from residences and small businesses. 
Commercial establishment means any structure intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial business enterprise. 
Commercial, industrial and institutional refuse means all garbage, rubbish, solid waste, and waste material generated by a business; industry, factory, mall, school, hospital, health care facility, sports facility or complex, excluding excluded waste. 
Construction and demolition (C&D) debris means debris that is produced during new construction, renovation, remodeling, and demolition of buildings and structures. C&D debris includes but is not limited to bricks, concrete, masonry, lumber, paving materials, shingles, glass, plastics, aluminum (including siding), steel, drywall, insulation, asphalt roofing materials, electrical materials, plumbing fixtures, vinyl siding, and corrugated cardboard or packing material for construction materials. 
Container refers to any cart, bin, dumpster or roll-off container; whether for residential, commercial, industrial, municipal or other application. 
Container for recycling (recycling bin) means a plastic 18-gallon capacity bin provided to all residences to store and provide collection of recyclable materials. 
Demolition means the reconstruction, remodeling, or destruction of sixty (60) percent or more of a structure or building. 
Excluded waste means all hazardous waste, hazardous industrial waste, medical waste and large dead animals (as those terms are defined herein). Included in this definition of excluded waste is any waste prohibited from disposal in an MSW facility by 30 TAC 330.15(e). 
Food establishment means cafe, restaurant or other similar establishment serving food or food products, including quick-service drive-ins where food is prepared or served. 
Garbage means any and all small dead animals; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of excluded waste. 
Handicap residential unit means a dwelling where one (1) or more persons reside who, because of temporary or permanent physical conditions, are unable to transport refuse from their residence to the curb for pickup. 
Hazardous waste means a form of excluded waste and is defined as any radioactive, volatile, corrosive, highly flammable, explosive, biomedical, infectious, biohazardous, toxic or listed or characteristic hazardous waste as defined by federal, state, provincial or local law or any otherwise regulated waste. Hazardous waste shall include, but not be limited to, any amount of waste listed or characterized as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or any state agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, and including future amendments thereto, and any other applicable federal, state or local laws or regulations. 
Health officer means the head of the county health department or anyone authorized to act for him. 
Illegally dumped rubbish or trash means any rubbish or trash placed on properties with or without the consent of the owner or person in control where such waste constitutes a nuisance detrimental to the public health and welfare. 
Industrial solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to a process of industry or manufacturing, or mining or agricultural operations. 
Large dead animals means animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10) pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
Licensee means an individual or entity licensed under section 21-16 to participate in waste collection services for temporary C&D waste. 
Manager means the person in charge of real estate used for apartment, institutional or commercial purposes. 
Medical waste means animal waste, bulk blood and blood products, microbiological waste, pathological waste, sharps, and special waste from health care-related facilities as those terms are defined in 25 TAC Section 1.132 (Texas Department of Health, Definition, Treatment, and Disposition of Special Waste from Health Care-Related Facilities). The term does not include medical waste produced on farmland and ranchland as defined in section 252.001(6), Agriculture Code. The term does not include artificial, nonhuman materials removed from a patient and requested by the patient, including, but not limited to, orthopedic devices and breast implants. 
Multifamily means all residential dwelling units of more than two (2) units considered to be condominiums, apartment houses or grouped housing. 
Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, trade, business and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish (or trash), ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and all other solid waste other than excluded waste. 
Occupant means the person residing in a dwelling unit, specifically the head of such household. 
Owner means the record title holder of real property. 
Parkway means the area ordinarily intervening between the curb line of a street and the inside property line. 
Permittee means any person licensed by franchise agreement with the city to contract to collect, remove or dispose of solid waste. 
Producer means an operator or occupant (or a contractor providing services at) of a commercial business, industrial facility, multifamily unit or a residential unit who generates solid waste, special waste, garbage, rubbish, yard waste or recyclable materials. 
Property line means a peripheral boundary of real estate. 
Public utility easement means a right-of-way used or dedicated to be used by any public utility, including, but not limited to, services such as electricity, telephone, gas, water, sewer and drainage. 
Public way means any street, alley, easement or other right-of-way. 
Recyclables are materials that have a known reuse potential and established and available end-use markets and include paper, corrugated cardboard, plastic bottles and jugs, aluminum cans, steel and bi-metal cans and metal that are normally and commonly produced at residences, businesses, industries, institutions, schools and community activities. 
Recycling means an activity where waste materials are collected and diverted from disposal and directed toward reuse or processed for delivery to an end-use market where they are converted into new products. Long-term storage or dumping of materials on the land or in excavation pits is not recycling. 
Residential unit means a dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than two (2) families. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single or multi-level construction, consisting of two (2) or less contiguous or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit. 
Roll-off container means a container that is carried to a construction, remodeling or demolition site on a transport vehicle carriage and placed on the ground separate from the transport carriage. A roll-off container does not have rubber tires or rubber wheels. 
Rubbish means all waste wood, wood chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of excluded waste. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of municipal solid waste on land without creating a nuisance or hazard to public health or safety by utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the solid waste to the smallest practical area, to reduce it to the smallest practical volume and to cover it with a layer of earth at appropriate periodic intervals. 
Small dead animals means animals or portions thereof less than ten (10) pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
Solid waste means useless, unwanted or discarded materials with insufficient liquid content to be freeflowing that result from domestic, industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and community operations which require proper storage, collection, transportation and disposal to prevent environmental pollution inimical to public health, safety and welfare. Solid waste does not include sewage, earth or material used to fill land in accordance with construction codes, mining residues, slag, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents which are not acceptable for disposal in sanitary sewage treatment system or any material included in the definition of excluded waste. 
Special waste means nonhazardous solid waste that is subject to additional governmental regulations or special handling requirements in collection, transportation, processing or disposal as a result of the characteristics of, or processes that generate such waste. Special waste includes, but is not limited to, asbestos, or any waste defined as special by Texas Administrative Code 30 and as further defined in sections 330.3(148), 330.171, 330.173 or any adjunct regulations. Waste may be classified as special because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, physical or biological contents. Septic tank pumpings and grease and grit trap waste are excluded. 
Street means any public thoroughfare for the passage of vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
Stable matter means all manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure and resulting from the keeping of animals, livestock or poultry. The owner, operator or producer of such waste shall be free to compost, disperse or otherwise transport such waste providing such activity does not conflict with any ordinance, law or regulation governing such activity. If the owner, operator or producer of such waste utilizes a bin, dumpster or roll-off container for storage and transport of such waste the storage and transport will be performed by the permittee under terms, prices and documents acceptable to the owner or operator or producer and the city and the permittee; provided that such storage, transport or disposal does not conflict with any ordinance, law or regulation. 
Temporary C&D waste means temporary use of roll-off containers for the collection, transportation and disposal (including recycling and reuse) of C&D debris in accordance with TCEQ regulations. 
Temporary C&D waste activities means the collection, transportation and disposal (including recycling and reuse) of C&D debris through the use of collection vehicles, containers, or the use of roll-off containers in accordance with TCEQ regulations and this chapter. The construction or remodeling activity is temporary in nature; meaning that when the construction or remodeling activity is finished the collection vehicle will be immediately removed from the site. 
Vegetable waste means putrescible solid waste resulting from the processing of plants for food by commercial establishments such as canneries. 
Vehicle means any wheeled conveyance. 
Waste material means all nonhazardous, solid waste (including garbage, rubbish, commercial, industrial and institutional refuse, bulky waste, yard waste and recyclable materials) generated that is not excluded by this chapter. Waste material shall not include any excluded waste. 
Yard waste means grass, leaves, flowers, stalks, stems, tree trimmings, branches, and tree trunks. For yard waste collection services, grass, pine needles, leaves, flowers, stalks, stems, and small tree trimmings (less than three (3) feet in length and less than two (2) inches in diameter) shall be in the cart(s) for regular weekly residential collection. During semi-annual bulky waste collection, yard waste may be placed in bags, boxes or bundles tied with string or rope not to exceed three (3) feet in length or thirty-five (35) pounds in weight per box, bag or bundle. Permittee shall be obligated to collect no more than four (4) cubic yards of material from any residential unit during the semi-annual bulky waste collection events. Any collections needed by a residential unit in excess of such amount must be individually contracted by the residential unit producer. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-2, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-08C, § 1, 8-16-2011; Ord. No. 2011-O-11C, § II.1, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 2018-O-02C, § II, 2-6-2018 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 21-2. - Container specifications. 
(a)  Number. Every person occupying a residential unit or commercial producer and every owner of a multifamily use, commercial, industrial or institutional use shall maintain such premises with a sufficient number of solid waste containers or receptacles to provide for the peak output of municipal solid waste from those premises. A resident may collect and transport or contract with a third party, other than the permittee, for the removal and proper disposal of yard wastes such as grass clippings, leaves, prunings and similar waste normally associated with lawn maintenance activities. 
(b)  Garbage and recycling containers. The permittee shall provide each residential unit with a 96-gallon capacity wheeled lidded cart for once-per-week trash collection. All trash must be in the cart provided that, on the collection day following a holiday, a volume equal to the cart, which is bundled, boxed or bagged outside the cart, will be collected as part of that weekly service. Each residential unit will be provided with an 18-gallon recycling collection bin and provided weekly collection service for recyclables on the same day as regular trash collection. Holidays are defined as New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas as they pertain to collection of solid wastes. 
(c)  Commercial, industrial, municipal and other generators. Commercial, industrial, municipal and other generators will be provided with 96-gallon carts, 300-gallon bins, dumpsters or roll-off containers in sufficient number and size to accommodate efficient storage of solid wastes. Collection will occur at least once per week (on-call dumpsters, every-other-week dumpsters and bins and roll-off containers excepted). 
(d)  Roll-off containers. Roll-off containers will be provided by permittee to permanent commercial or industrial or other generators that produce volumes of solid waste that warrant such large size containers. Roll-off containers and other types of collection vehicles and collection service may be provided by permittee for temporary C&D waste activities, at its discretion, according to the same terms and conditions required of any other producer, licensee or third party authorized herein to provide temporary C&D waste activities.. Loads of heavy, dense material such as dirt, rock or concrete, by example, will be serviced with 20-cubic yard containers. 
(e)  For all other garbage or recycling containers or receptacles not provided by a permittee, all other containers shall be watertight and constructed of a solid and durable grade of metal or plastic. Containers not provided by a permittee shall not be collected or emptied by the city or a permittee. 
(f)  Underground containers. Underground garbage containers are prohibited for use in the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-3, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-08C, § 2, 8-16-2011; Ord. No. 2011-O-11C, § II.2, 12-6-2011)  
Sec. 21-3. - Collection regulations. 
(a)  General. It shall be the duty of every occupant, owner and producer to comply with the regulations regarding the proper disposal of garbage, solid waste, rubbish and waste defined in this chapter and shall adhere to the disposal and collection requirements of this chapter or be subject to the penalties described in section 1-9 (general penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations; abatement; culpable mental state) of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Location of carts, bins, containers, bags, bundles and bulky waste for collection. Each cart(s) or recycling bin, (container, bag, bundle or bulky waste during semi-annual bulky collection events) shall be placed within three (3) feet of the curbside for collection. Curbside refers to that portion of right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled city roadways (including alleys). Carts and recycling bins shall not be placed within five (5) feet of any mailbox, automobile, utility meter or box, fire hydrant, under overhead wires or under low-hanging tree limbs. Carts, bins, containers, bags, bundles and bulky waste shall be placed within three (3) feet of the curb or the edge of the roadway without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or pedestrians. When construction work is being performed in the right-of-way, carts, bins, containers, bags, bundles and bulky waste shall be placed as close as practicable to an access point for the collection vehicle. Permittee may decline to collect any container, bag, bundle or bulky waste not placed in accordance with these requirements or any waste material not in a container, bin, dumpster, roll-off container, bag or bundle (some bulky items such as furniture excepted). 
(c)  Handicapped residential units. Permittee shall provide special assistance with the collection of their cart, at no additional cost, for those residential units which meet the definition of handicapped residential units, and if such units have submitted written notice of such special need and it has been confirmed by the city. 
(d)  Semi-annual bulky waste collection. Semi-annual bulky waste collection is limited to not more than four (4) cubic yards of material per residence per collection event. Any collection needed by a residential unit in excess of such amount must be contracted by the residential unit producer with permittee under terms, prices and documents acceptable to the residential unit producer, the city and the permittee. 
(e)  Compliance. Every owner, occupant, or producer shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Each cart(s) or recycling bin shall be properly placed the night before day of collection after 6:00 p.m. or the day of collection no later than 5:00 a.m. 
(2)  Each cart(s) or recycling bin should be cleaned by the producer on a regular basis. 
(3)  Each cart(s) or recycling bin should not be filled so that it overflows and is subject to spillage. 
(4)  Each cart(s) or recycling bin must be stored within the property no later than 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection. 
(5)  No cart(s) or recycling bin shall be removed or switched from the assigned address unless it is performed by, or with the permission of, the city or the permittee. 
(6)  Excluded waste shall not be deposited in any cart(s), container, bin or recycling bin. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-4, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009; Ord. No. 2012-O-08A, § II, 8-21-2012)  
Sec. 21-4. - Multifamily, commercial, industrial and institutional refuse. 
The collection and removal of solid waste materials from multifamily, commercial, industrial and institutions, as defined in this chapter, shall be performed by permittee. Refuse, garbage and recyclables may only be deposited in the type and size of containers provided by permittee and upon payment of the applicable fee. The placement of containers for collection from multifamily, commercial, industrial and institutional producers shall be determined by the permittee and the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-5, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-5. - Collection and removal of dead animals. 
The bodies of large dead animals shall not be placed in carts, bins or other solid waste containers or in any street, alley, easement or public way. The collection and removal of dead animal bodies weighing more than ten (10) pounds shall not be a service of the city or provided by the city's waste disposal contractor. Persons requiring disposal of large dead animals shall be responsible for contacting an appropriate disposal company and making arrangement for disposal on their own. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-6, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-5.5. - Additional work separately contracted at permittee's election. 
Permittee may provide waste collection and disposal service, and/or recyclables collection services, for waste volumes or types not normally generated, including special waste, according to individual agreements negotiated between permittee and such customers and under such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon by permittee, the city and such customers. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-6. - Certain solid waste materials not handled by city. 
Excluded waste, as defined herein, will not be collected and removed by the city or permittee as a regular service, and each producer generating excluded waste shall dispose of such waste only in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-7, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-6.5. - Temporary C&D debris. 
(a)  The collection, transportation and removal of temporary C&D debris, as defined in this chapter, shall be performed by open competition which may include permittee, the producer, a licensee or other third party. Any rates charged for such services shall not be subject to any franchise fees paid to the city. C&D debris shall be collected and deposited into temporary collection vehicles, trailers, or roll-off containers provided by the producer, permittee, licensee or other third party in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The placement of the temporary containers or roll-offs for collection of the C&D debris shall be determined by the hauler and the owner or occupant and located solely on the owner or occupant's property. No container, vehicle or roll-off shall be placed on any public right-of-way. All pertinent provisions of section 21-3, collection regulations, shall apply to any hauler of such waste, as well as the provisions of section 21-16, regulations pertaining to temporary C&D activities. 
(b)  Storage, collection and transportation activities related to temporary C&D debris may be performed by the producer, permittee, licensee, or other third party as follows: 
(1)  The construction or remodeling activity is temporary in nature; meaning that when the construction or remodeling activity is finished the collection vehicle, roll-off or container will be immediately removed from the site; and 
(2)  The producer, permittee, or licensee responsible for the removal, transport or disposal of debris from the temporary C&D activity will, at the completion of the construction, remodeling or demolition activity, provide the city with a receipt from a legal, permitted or licensed disposal or recycling facility clearly indicating that the load(s) of debris was properly disposed. Persons or entities conducting temporary C&D services and that are not required to obtain a license in accordance with subsection 21-16(g) are not required to provide evidence of disposal hereunder. 
(c)  Other third party as used in this section includes but is not limited to contractors that satisfy the criteria in section 21-16 herein, individual homeowners and individual business owners. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-08C, § 3, 8-16-2011; Ord. No. 2011-O-11C, § II.3, 12-6-2011)  
Sec. 21-7. - Charges for sanitation service—Procedures. 
(a)  Method of charging and billing. The method of charging and billing for sanitation services shall be as follows: 
(1)  All solid waste collection and disposal charges and fees, except for excluded waste and temporary C&D debris and commercial accounts collected by permitee, shall be billed through the accounting and billing mechanics of the department of water and sewer utilities, in a manner which will show each customer's fees and charges separately from the water bill. The charges and fees established and authorized in this section shall be billed to the party in whose name the water service connection is taken where the premises are served with water or sewer and shall be billed to the party in control of the premises at other locations, and if this fact cannot be ascertained, the bill shall be directed to the record owner of such premises. The party who is so billed and to whom services are made available shall be indebted to the city for such services and shall be obligated to make payment thereof as provided in this section. The bill will become delinquent fifteen (15) days after it is rendered. For the purpose of this section, "party" shall mean person, partnership, corporation, association or any other legal entity. Billing activities may be performed by the permittee using similar procedures. 
(2)  In addition to all other legal remedies available for the collection of a debt, the following actions and remedies are authorized for delinquent payment of the charges authorized in this section: 
a.  The city or permittee may refuse to pick up and dispose of the garbage at the delinquent location; 
b.  The water or sewer service, if any, serving the delinquent premises in question may be shut off and terminated; and 
c.  A penalty of ten (10) percent of the total net bill shall be charged in the event of delinquency. 
(3)  All collections by the water and sewer utilities department shall be applied first to the water utilities charges, and the customer shall be deemed to have paid such water and sewer utilities charges first in the event any question should arise as to how outstanding balances should be composed and applied. 
a.  All present water and sewer utilities department customers to be billed hereunder shall be automatically placed on the billing for sanitation services charges, regardless of whether or not a written contract exists between the city and such customers. 
b.  All present water and sewer utilities guaranty deposits upon termination of sanitary service or water service may be applied to any amounts due either for sanitation service charges or fees of water and sewer utilities bills. 
c.  All water and sewer utilities services contracts hereafter entered into between that department and the customer shall contain an agreement that any guaranty deposit upon termination of sanitary service or water service may be applied to sanitation service fees and charges and to water utilities charges that have become due. 
(b)  Basis for charge. Establishment of service charges will be based upon the current use of the property rather than being based upon the zoning. 
(c)  Proration. There shall be no proration of service charges for a portion of a billing period. The initial billing shall be made concurrent with the initial water billing. No final billing for sanitation charges for less than a full billing period shall be rendered. 
(d)  Collection. Except as set forth in this section, collection service shall be provided by the city or permittee for all water and sewer customers within the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-8, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2005-O-11B, § I, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-08C, § 4, 8-16-2011)  
Sec. 21-8. - Same—Residential rates. 
There will be a charge for once-a-week residential garbage and recycling service by the city, the monthly rate of nineteen dollars and eighty-two cents ($19.82) as approved by city council. This rate is for curbside collection, including curbside recycling with an 18-gallon bin and residential bulky pick-up twice a year. 
Additional charges are: 
Residential extra cart .....$6.61 
New residential rates go into effect on October 1, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-2B, § I, 2-10-81; Ord. No. 84-O-9, § II, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 2005-O-11B, § II, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-8B, § I, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-8A, § I, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-08A, § I, 8-25-2008)  
Sec. 21-9. - Same—Commercial rates. 
There will be a charge to commercial garbage service customers of the city, the following monthly rates are based upon container size and frequency of pickup. Rates go into effect October 1, 2008. 
(1)  Commercial 300-gallon bins, once a week, thirty dollars and sixty cents ($30.60). Roll out twice a week fifty-six dollars and ten cents ($56.10) and an extra pickup charge of twenty-five dollars and fifty cents ($25.50) as approved by city council. 
1 time per week .....$51.00 
2 times per week .....91.80 
3 times per week .....132.60 
4 times per week .....172.15 
5 times per week .....214.20 
Extra pickup charge .....35.70 
(2)  Commercial dumpsters: 
Container/ 
Dumpster 
Size 	Frequency of Pickup 
	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 
					
2-yard 	$77.63 	$131.12 	$184.59 	$238.07 	$291.54 
3-yard 	 92.30 	 154.82 	 217.89 	 280.98 	 344.05 
4-yard 	105.27 	 177.39 	 250.07 	 322.75 	 394.88 
6-yard 	119.42 	 229.06 	 323.86 	 396.32 	 513.53 
8-yard 	139.75 	 269.38 	 398.00 	 513.81 	 629.63 
 
Extra pickup on all dumpsters .....$88.13 
6-yard compactor 	$497.98 	$704.03 	$910.08 	$1,116.14 	$1,322.19 
 
Extra pickup .....$209.30 
Lock bar charge per month .....10.20 
Casters on cans charge per month .....15.30 
Charges on roll-off—Open top: 
20-yard box .....556.31 
30-yard box .....567.32 
40-yard box .....633.42 
Delivery fee .....99.14 
Rent/day .....3.30 
Roll-off—City use—Open top **No franchise fee included: 
20-yard box .....464.10 
30-yard box .....474.10 
40-yard box .....535.50 
Delivery fee .....81.60 
(3)  Every-other-week service: 
Dumpster service (for generators of nonputrescible waste): 
2-yard .....$50.46 
3-yard .....60.00 
4-yard .....68.42 
6-yard .....77.62 
8-yard .....90.84 
Commercial 96-gallon carts .....19.59 
(4)  300-gallon second bin rate .....35.70 
(5)  Residential call-in bulky item collection: 
Large furniture (couches, sofas, appliances), each (appliances containing coolants must be purged and tagged by a certified technician) .....$25.00 
Other furniture (mattresses, box springs, chairs, tables), each .....15.00 
Bags, boxes, bundles, each .....3.00 
(Ord. No. 81-O-2B, § III, 2-10-81; Ord. No. 84-O-9, § II, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 2005-O-11B, § III, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 2006-O-8B, § II, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-8A, § II, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-08A, § II, 8-25-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § III, 7-27-2009; Ord. No. 2011-O-08C, § 5, 8-16-2011)  
Sec. 21-9.5. - Bins, containers, trucks and any other equipment. 
All bins, containers, trucks and any other equipment that permittee furnishes to each occupant shall remain the permittee's property. Producers shall use the equipment only for its proper and intended purpose and shall not overload (by weight or volume), move or alter the equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-O-8B, § III, 9-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-8A, § III, 8-27-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-10. - Deposit fee. 
There shall be charged a deposit fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for residential customers and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for commercial customers using the city garbage service. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-2B, § IV, 2-10-81; Ord. No. 2005-O-11B, § IV, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-11. - When bills due and payable. 
All bills for garbage service are due by the fifteenth (15th) day of each month, after the month for which such service is furnished. If due bills are not paid by the fifteenth (15th) day of the month after such service is furnished, a ten (10) percent penalty will be added to the service bill. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-2B, § V, 2-10-81; Ord. No. 2005-O-11B, § V, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-12. - Free service. 
No free service shall be rendered by the city for garbage service. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-2B, § VI, 2-10-81; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-13. - Water customers inside city limits. 
All customers connected to the city water service inside the city limits shall be charged for garbage collection service. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-2B, § VII, 2-10-81; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-14. - Collection and removal of illegally dumped rubbish or trash on private property. 
(a)  Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the director of public works of the city to notify the owner or agent for management purposes of any private premises within the city upon which any rubbish or trash has been illegally placed or disposed, to remove such rubbish or trash within ten (10) days. Such notice shall be in writing and may be served on the owner or agent by handing it to him in person or by registered/certified mail addressed to such owner or agent at his post office address as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or where such address is not shown, then by notice by publication in a paper of general circulation in the city as many as two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days, provided that such notice is not necessary when such waste material is determined by the director of public works to be an immediate health hazard. 
(b)  Failure to comply. The failure by either the owner or such agent, as the case may be, to comply with the notice set out in the preceding subsection, shall render such person guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which the violation is continued or permitted, and subject the person to the civil and criminal penalties described in section 1-9 (general penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations; abatement; culpable mental state) of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Collection and removal by city. Upon the failure of any such owner or agent to comply with the notice, as set out in this section, or upon the written request and authorization of such owner or agent so notified, or if the director of public works determines that such conditions constitute an immediate health hazard, it shall become the responsibility of the director of public works to have such rubbish or trash materials collected and removed from any property within the city. 
(d)  Recovery of costs by city. A charge for the actual expenses incurred for the collection and removal of rubbish or trash shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property each time such collection and removal of rubbish or trash shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property each time such collection and removal of solid waste materials shall be performed, provided that an additional charge can be levied, assessed and collected against such premises for the actual additional cost for such collection and removal. The charges provided for in this section shall be levied, assessed and collected by the city. If any person shall fail to pay such charges so assessed within thirty (30) days after proper notice, the city administrator shall file, with the county clerk, a statement by the director of public works setting out the expenses that the city has incurred pursuant to the provisions of this section. The city shall thereby perfect a privileged lien on the property involved, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to secure the expense to the city, together with ten (10) percent interest from the date such payment is due. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-5, § 1-9, 5-14-80; Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § II, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-15. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
The following provisions shall apply to the franchise agreement between the city and any solid waste company that receives a franchise from the City of Marble Falls: 
(1)  Where a contractual provision includes city facilities, such term shall include the pavilion located at 307 Buena Vista. 
(2)  Whenever newspaper notice is required by a contractual provision related to the franchise agreement between the city and a solid waste company that receives a franchise, such notice shall be through the city's designated newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-07A, § IV, 7-27-2009)  
Sec. 21-16. - Regulations pertaining to temporary C&D activities. 
(a)  Regulations. Except as provided in subsection (g), all individuals or entities, including permittee, who desire to participate in waste collection services for temporary C&D activities shall be required: 
(1)  To obtain an annual construction and demolition debris hauler's license issued by the city. 
(2)  To maintain their collection vehicles, containers, load security tarps, and other equipment in good condition and working order and that all debris is transported in leak proof containers and be fitted/constructed so that the C&D debris is kept covered at all times except when being loaded and emptied; 
(3)  To maintain commercial general liability and property damage, automobile liability and worker's compensation insurance in accordance with, at minimum, the requirements set by Marble Falls; 
(4)  To provide evidence of specific safety training for each of its operators; 
(5)  To provide evidence of proper disposal at disposal sites that are permitted by TCEQ regulations for such disposal or through recycling or reuse efforts; and 
(6)  Identify each vehicle or container the licensee operates within the city by placing clearly legible letters identifying the name of the person or business responsible for the operation of the motor vehicle or container. 
(b)  License application. An application for the construction and demolition debris hauler's license shall be made on forms provided by the city for that purposes along with any application fee. The application requires that the applicant: 
(1)  State the name under which the applicant/owner/operator will conduct business within the city, the business address, and the telephone number. 
(2)  State the make, model, body style and license plate of each motor vehicle to be used in the city. 
(3)  Submit any other information reasonably required by the city to administer this section. 
By submitting the application, the applicant/owner/operator agrees to abide by and be bound by the provisions and regulations of the city's ordinances and to comply with all other state and federal laws applicable to the licensee's activities. Upon proper application, a construction and demolition debris hauler's license will be issued in the name of the person or entity responsible for the operation of the motor vehicle(s) used for C&D debris hauling within the city. 
(c)  Authorization and modifications. The license authorizes only the name on the license to operate such business within the city. A licensee must notify the city of any change in the information submitted in its application for a licensee, including change in the name, address or telephone number of the licensee or in the motor vehicles being operated within the city. Should licensee sell such business, the new owner/operator shall be required to obtain a new license in that owner/operator's name. The notification of change must be given to the city in writing within ten (10) days of the change. 
(d)  Term. The license is valid for a term of one (1) year, unless earlier revoked. 
(e)  Suspension or revocation. The city manager or his designee may suspend or revoke a construction and demolition debris hauler's license, for good cause shown, after notice and hearing. Good cause shall include: 
(1)  Any material misrepresentation in the application for the license or any fraud in its procurement; 
(2)  Any cause which would have prevented the granting of the license in the first place; 
(3)  Misconduct of the licensee, such as the violation of this section or any other provision of the city's ordinances or state law; 
(4)  The violation of any of the conditions of the license issued under this section. 
(5)  Failure to provide evidence of proper disposal of C&D waste. 
If the license is revoked for illegal dumping or hauling, the license may only be restored with the approval of the city manager and payment of a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) renewal after revocation fee. 
(f)  License fee. Each person granted a license under this section must pay a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for a tag for each motor vehicle or container used or operated within the city. 
(g)  Persons and temporary C&D activities exempt. Persons and entities that perform temporary C&D activities are exempt from the requirements of this section 21-16 so long as the temporary C&D activities meet the following conditions: 
(1)  The project for which the temporary C&D services are performed is related to new construction of a residential structure or a remodel of an existing residential structure that does not exceed two thousand nine hundred (2,900) square feet of remodeled area; or 
(2)  The project for which the temporary C&D services are performed is related to new construction of a commercial structure with a footprint that does not exceed twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or a remodel of a commercial structure that does not exceed twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of remodeled area; and 
(3)  The project for which the temporary C&D services are performed is not a demolition activity. Demolition is defined as construction, reconstruction or the tearing down of a project or structure that requires more than sixty (60) percent of the building or structure to be reconstructed or removed; and 
(4)  The collection vehicle/container used by the person or entity providing the temporary C&D services is a rubber tire trailer or truck with a total capacity not exceeding eighteen (18) cubic yards and is not a roll-off type container of any size. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-08C, § 6, 8-16-2011; Ord. No. 2011-O-11C, § II.4, 12-6-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-11C, § II.4, adopted Dec. 6, 2011, amended § 21-16 title to read as herein set out. Former § 21-16 title pertained to regulations pertaining to temporary C&D debris haulers.  
Sec. 21-17. - Brush disposal. 
(a)  Each resident within the city limits will receive curbside pickup of general brush and yard waste at no charge during the regularly scheduled time. The pick-up schedule and frequency will be set by the city and may be amended from time to time as determined by the city. The scheduled time for pick up may include a time frame of up to seven (7) days within which the pick-up will occur. 
(b)  Brush intended to be picked up must be piled at the curb/edge of street and within five (5) feet of the curb and be in place prior to the first scheduled day of pickup in order to guarantee pickup at no charge. Brush placed at the curb after the first day of the assigned week for the pick-up is not guaranteed to be picked up without charge. 
(c)  Residents and property owners who wish to have brush picked up at a time other than the regularly scheduled time may contact the city and request pick up for a fee. The fee will be assessed on the monthly utility bill or submitted in the form of an invoice to the resident and/or property owner. 
(d)  In addition to curb side pick-up, the city will provide a designated brush drop-off location, with posted hours of operation to be determined by the city, for residents and property owners at no charge. The designated drop-off location will be available to contractors or commercial firms for a fee. 
(e)  The city may adopt reasonable fees as described in the Master Fee Schedule, Appendix C, of this Code, which may be amended from time to time for reimbursement of costs associated with the services provided as part of the brush management program, which costs may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Brush disposal. Fees for non-residents, contractors or commercial firms utilizing the city designated brush drop-off location. 
(2)  Brush pick-up. Fees assessed on the resident or property owner's monthly utility bill for pick-up of brush that is not placed at curbside in time for the regularly scheduled pickup. 
(3)  Fees and charges described herein may be combined or separated and shall be billed and collected as generally described in section 21-7. 
(4)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in section 21-17. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by section 21-17 and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(5)  The city manager or his/her designee may, at any time, elect to waive fees assessed for curbside brush pickup or assessed at the designated drop-off site. 
( Ord. No. 2018-O-02C, § II, 2-6-2018 )  
Chapter 22 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way of the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); distribution of handbills in public places restricted, § 3-22; public consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited, § 4-4; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 16; signs, Ch. 20; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 26; franchises, App. A; development code, App. B. 
State Law reference— General authority with reference to streets, sidewalks, etc., Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1015(25)—(27); authority to control streets and alleys, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1082 et seq.; authority of city with respect to street improvements, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1086 et seq.; alternate street improvement provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1105b. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Obstruction of drainage ditches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fill up or otherwise obstruct any drainage ditch on or along any street or alley in the city. 
(Ord. No. 32-O-6(8), § 1, 6-7-32)  
Secs. 22-2—22-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLOSING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 22, Article II, §§ 22-16—22-24, was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, adopted Nov. 23, 1999, included herein as a new Art. II., §§ 22-16—22-15. Former Art. II, §§ 22-16—22-24, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 91-O-1A, adopted Jan. 17, 1991. 
 
Sec. 22-16. - Reference to City Charter. 
Provisions for the closing of streets and alleys are also provided in section 10.12 of the City Charter. The procedures and regulations set out herein are consistent with the requirements of the Charter and set out additional regulations to be followed in the closing of streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-17. - Public hearing generally. 
The city council, on its own initiative, may call a public hearing to determine whether or not any street or alley in the city, or any portion thereof, should be closed or abandoned as a public thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-18. - Petition for hearing. 
The city council shall be required to call a public hearing on the closing of any street or alley, or any portion thereof, upon receipt by the city secretary of a petition, meeting the requirements set out herein, requesting such hearing, from any person or entity (hereinafter referred to as petitioner) owning property adjacent to such street or alley section to be closed. The petition must legally describe that portion of the street or alley to which the request for abandonment applies, specifically state that all people signing the petition fully support the requested closure and it must be signed by at least twenty-five (25) registered voters of the city. The name and address of each person signing the petition must be clearly and legibly printed next to the signature. The Charter provisions regulating examination, certification, and amendment of initiative petitions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-19. - Nonrefundable fee to be paid in advance. 
Before any action is taken, the petitioner shall pay the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in advance to cover the expenses of processing the request. This sum of money shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-20. - Recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. 
Before city council may take final action to adopt any ordinance to close a street or alley the planning and zoning commission shall review the request from the point of view of impact on the future traffic circulation in the city and shall make a recommendation on such matters to the city council. The planning and zoning commission shall not be required to conduct a public hearing and their action may be taken after the city council has conducted its public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-21. - Public hearing. 
The city council shall conduct a public hearing not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the certification of the petition for the primary purpose of discussing the proposed abandonment. Written notice of the public hearing shall be sent to all owners of real property, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, within two hundred (200) feet of the street or alley to be closed no less than eleven (11) days before the public hearing. In addition, notice of the public hearing shall be published in two (2) consecutive issues of the official newspaper of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-22. - Appraisal of real property required. 
Within ninety (90) days after the city council public hearing and planning and zoning commission recommendation, but before city council final action, the petitioner shall provide an appraisal by a certified appraiser of real property. The cost of the appraisal is to be paid in full by the petitioner. Upon written application by the petitioner stating the need therefor, this time period may be extended by the city manager. Such extension shall be in writing. 
The petitioner may elect, in writing, to utilize the average appraised values of the land immediately adjacent to the street or alley to be closed as shown on the most recent approved municipal tax roll. Such average value shall be calculated by city staff. 
If the requested closure is approved by city council, the actual selling price shall be determined solely by the city council, but in no case shall the selling price be less than the appraised value as determined under this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-23. - Action by city council. 
No street or alley shall be closed except by ordinance adopted and approved by no less than five (5) affirmative votes of the city council. Such ordinance shall include a description of the street or alley to be abandoned in relation to adjacent lots and blocks along with a map showing the location of the street or alley and adjacent lots. No ordinance affecting the closure of a street or alley shall become effective until thirty (30) days after the passage of the ordinance. 
If, during such thirty-day period, a referendum petition is presented to the city secretary which in all respects conforms to the referendum provisions of Article 6 of the Charter, and same is found sufficient, then the secretary shall certify the sufficiency of same to the city council, and an election shall be called submitting the question of whether or not the sale or lease shall be consummated. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-24. - Replat required. 
Unless otherwise approved by council, when the abandonment of a street or alley results in lots that do not front upon an improved street, said lots shall be replatted so that all resulting lots have frontage upon an improved street. Said replat shall be presented to and approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council within nine (9) months of the date of the ordinance abandoning said street or alley or the ordinance abandoning the street or alley shall become null and void. Should said ordinance become null and void the purchase price paid for the abandoned street or alley shall be refunded to the petitioner. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Sec. 22-25. - Appeals. 
Any person deciding to appeal the decision of the city council to a court of competent jurisdiction, shall do so within ten (10) days after enactment of the ordinance closing the street or alley, or portion thereof, and if no appeal is taken within such ten-day period, then the ordinance shall never be questioned in any court of this state. 
(Ord. No. 99-O-11B, § II, 11-23-99)  
Secs. 22-26—22-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISE OPERATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Franchises generally, App. A. 
 
Sec. 22-41. - Fee for use of public property without franchise agreement. 
On the first day of May of each year, any person occupying or using the streets, highways, rights-of-way, easements, alleys, parks or other public property owned by the city within the corporate limits of the city without a franchise agreement from the city shall, as a condition to further occupancy, pay to the city annually for such use and privilege, a rental equal to two (2) percent of the gross receipts received by such person from his business conducted within the city for the preceding year or any portion of the preceding year during which such time such operations were carried on. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-4A, § 1, 4-13-76)  
Sec. 22-42. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any person who is presently operating under any franchise agreement with the city or who is obligated by franchise or other contract to pay a greater rate than specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-4A, § 2, 4-14-76)  
Sec. 22-43. - Sworn report of gross proceeds. 
Every person using the streets, highways, rights-of-way, easements, alleys, parks or other public property or using any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole, gas or water pipelines, other pipelines or any other types of fixtures or appurtenances which are affixed thereon, shall, on the first day of April of each year, file with the city secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts from the business conducted by such person for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-4A, § 3, 4-13-76)  
Sec. 22-44. - Examination of books, records. 
The city council may, when it sees fit, have the books and records of any person required to pay the rental charge imposed by this article examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether the statement filed in accordance with this preceding section is accurate. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by other methods. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-4A, § 4, 4-13-76)  
Sec. 22-45. - Authorization to use public property. 
Upon receipt of the rental charge imposed by this section, the city secretary shall deliver to the person paying the same a receipt therefor, which receipt shall authorize such person to use and occupy the streets, highways, rights-of-way, easements, alleys, parks and other public property of the city in carrying on its business for twelve (12) months from such date. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-4A, § 5, 4-13-76)  
Sec. 22-46. - Rental charge additional to ad valorem taxes and other taxes. 
The rental charge provided for in this article is not charged as a tax but is made for the privilege enjoyed by the person upon whom it is imposed of using the streets, highways, rights-of-way, easements, alleys, parks and other public property of the city in the conduct of their businesses. Such charge is additional to all ad valorem and franchise taxes and to all taxes of every nature imposed on such person. 
(Ord. No. 76-O-4A, § 6, 4-13-76)  
Chapter 24 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements in assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(8); administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Taxation generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 122, Vol. 20; Property Tax Code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, are defined as follows: 
Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room, sleeping space, bed or other facility for occupancy. 
Hotel means any building, trailer or other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration. The term hotel shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
Occupant means anyone who for a consideration uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, sleeping space, beds or other facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or sleeping space or other facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Tax collector means the city secretary or her designated agent or agencies. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-1C, § 1, 1-12-82) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 24-2—24-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local Sales and Use Tax Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1066c. 
 
Sec. 24-16. - Imposed. 
The majority of the qualified voters having voted for the adoption of the local sales and use tax, the tax is hereby imposed in the city and shall become effective as provided in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1066c. 
(Ord. No. 67-O-12A, § II, 12-18-67)  
Sec. 24-17. - On receipts from sale, etc., of gas and electricity. 
The city, by majority vote of its city council, hereby votes to retain the taxes authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art 1066c) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by section 6 of House Bill No. 1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session. 
(Ord. No. 79-O-4, § 1, 4-10-79)  
Secs. 24-18—24-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Occupancy tax authorized, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1269j—4.1. 
 
Sec. 24-31. - Levy; rate; exceptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day. Such tax shall be equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident. 
(c)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(d)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon the United States government and its employees, including military personnel, traveling on official business. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-1C, § 2, 1-12-82; Ord. No. 85-O-11C, § 1, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 96-O-11A, 11-26-96)  
Sec. 24-32. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel located within the incorporated boundary or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall collect the tax imposed in section 24-31 for the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-1C, § 3, 1-12-82; Ord. No. 2004-O-7B, § I, 7-26-2004)  
Sec. 24-33. - Reports. 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article shall file a report with the tax collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on the city's behalf on such occupancies and any other information as the tax collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay over the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the tax collector at the time of payment of such tax, a copy of the quarterly tax report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-1C, § 4, 1-12-82)  
Sec. 24-34. - Rules and regulations. 
The tax collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-1C, § 5, 1-12-82)  
Sec. 24-35. - Violations. 
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed in this article, make reports as required and pay to the tax collector the tax imposed in this article, shall fail to collect such tax, shall fail to file such report, or shall fail to pay such tax, or if such person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-1C, § 6, 1-12-82)  
Sec. 24-36. - Penalties. 
If any person shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall fail to pay to the tax collector the tax as imposed in this article when such report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five (5) percent of the amount due as a penalty and after the first thirty (30) days he shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due. 
(Ord. No. 82-O-1C, § 7, 1-12-82)  
Chapter 25 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, repealed former Ch. 25, §§ 25-1—25-255, and enacted a new Ch. 25 as set out herein. Former Ch. 25 pertained to the same subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation of chapter. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing specific traffic and parking regulations applying to certain streets saved from repeal, § 1-6(12); placing handbills on vehicles prohibited, § 3-21; operation of motor vehicles and parking in cemeteries, § 7.5-5; emergency medical services vehicle, Ch. 9; junked vehicles, § 13-41 et seq.; offenses, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; development code, App. B.; Operation of motor vehicles and parkin in cemeteries, § 7.5-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Adoption by reference of state laws concerning operation and movement of vehicles. 
The provisions of Chapter 545 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, concerning operation and movement of vehicles are adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as if set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets except: 
(1)  Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(2)  Where otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-3. - Compliance with chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-4. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer, or in the case of fire or other emergency any fire department official, given to direct or control traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-5. - Application of chapter—To pushcarts, animal-drawn vehicles, etc. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-6. - Rights of owners of real estate. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner and not as matter of right from prohibiting such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in this chapter, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-7. - Parties to violation. 
Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or abets in the commission of, any act declared in this chapter to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, whether individually or in connection with one (1) or more other persons or as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense; and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this chapter is likewise guilty of such offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-8. - Responsibility of owners, employers, etc. 
It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-9. - Municipal court fee. 
(a)  Defensive driving course administrative fee. The municipal court of the City of Marble Falls, Texas, shall charge a fee in the maximum amount permitted by state law from every person requesting a defensive driving course and dismissal of certain misdemeanor offense charges. 
(b)  Collection and deposit of fees. 
(1)  Collection of fee. The municipal court clerk or the municipal judge shall collect the entire defensive driving course administrative fee at the time a person enters a plea either in person or in writing of no contest or guilty and presents to the court an oral or written request to take a defensive driving course. 
(2)  Deposit of fee. The municipal court clerk or the municipal judge shall deposit all defensive driving course administrative fees collected into the municipal treasury and credited solely to the budget allocated for the municipal court for any given fiscal accounting year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-10. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the "fund"). 
(b)  The municipal court of the City of Marble Falls (the "municipal court") is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount permitted by state law against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor offense shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(d)  The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. All Fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the City of Marble Falls, Texas shall be segregated into the fund. 
(e)  The fund shall be used only for the purposes authorized by article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it may be amended from time to time, for financing security personnel for the municipal court or to finance items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the building or buildings housing the municipal court. 
(f)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-11. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund (the "technology fund"). 
(2)  The technology fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the maximum amount permitted by state law. 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred disposition community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after the adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director of the City of Marble Falls, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The technology fund shall be used only for the purposes authorized by article 102.0172 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it may be amended from time to time, for financing the purchase of or maintaining technological enhancements for the Municipal Court of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
(2)  The technology fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Secs. 25-12—25-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-31. - Police officers—Duty to enforce traffic laws. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to enforce all street traffic laws of the state and city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-32. - Same—Authority to direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department and fire department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department and fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-33. - Arrest without warrant. 
Any peace officer is hereby authorized to arrest without warrant any person found committing a violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Secs. 25-34—25-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS 
 
Sec. 25-46. - Generally. 
(a)  All traffic control devices erected, installed or used for the purpose of regulating, warning, guiding or controlling traffic within the corporate limits of the City of Marble Falls, Texas, shall be uniform and shall be located, as far as practicable, in conformity with the latest edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or its successor, as it may be approved by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(b)  A "traffic control device" is a sign, signal, marking, or device that is: 
(1)  Consistent with the Texas Transportation Code; 
(2)  Placed or erected by the city or other public body having jurisdiction; and 
(3)  Used to regulate, warn or guide traffic. 
(c)  For purposes of this division, the traffic control device designated "No through Truck Traffic" shall mean that it shall be unlawful for any person to operate an overweight vehicle or an oversize vehicle on the designated portion of streets within the city. 
(d)  For purposes of this division, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  The term "overweight vehicle" shall mean any vehicle having a gross vehicular weight of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds or more. 
(2)  The term "oversize vehicle" shall mean any vehicle having four (4) or more axles. For purposes of this division, the number of axles on a vehicle shall include the axles on any trailer being operated in conjunction with the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-47. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
The operator or driver of any animal, animal-drawn vehicle, motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle, motor-assisted bicycle, motor driven cycle, moped, or special mobile equipment shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device erected, installed or used in accordance with this division, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by the Texas Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-48. - Unauthorized devices. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized traffic control device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device, or which attempts to regulate, warn, guide or control the movement of traffic, or which hides from view, interferes with or obstructs the effectiveness of any official traffic control device. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit commercial advertising upon any official traffic control device. 
(c)  Each and every unauthorized traffic control device herein is declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police, his successor or designated representative is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-49. - Unauthorized tampering. 
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, remove or cause to be removed any official traffic control device or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-50. - Failure to comply. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any traffic control device erected pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-51. - Installations by city manager. 
(a)  After the effective date of this division, the city manager shall appoint a traffic control committee made up of persons employed by the city to advise the city manager regarding the location of traffic control devices to be used within the corporate limits of the city. Unless otherwise provided for by law, the city manager shall make final determinations regarding the location of traffic control devices based upon the recommendations of the traffic control committee. 
(b)  The city manager or the city manager's designee shall erect all traffic control devices, as determined pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. A traffic control device erected pursuant to this section shall be an authorized traffic control device of the city. 
(c)  Whenever any traffic control device has been erected pursuant to this section, the city manager shall thereafter provide written notification, which shall be signed by the city manager to the city secretary, stating which type of traffic control device was erected, installed, or put into use, and giving the location and date thereof. The city secretary shall maintain a list of such information among the official papers of the office of the city secretary. 
(d)  In the event of an emergency, as determined by the city manager, the city manager may erect traffic control devices without prior consideration by the traffic control committee. 
(e)  Speed limits, and the city's authority to amend speed limits, are governed by the Texas Transportation Code Section 545.356. Changes to speed limits within the city shall be adopted by the city council in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-52. - Proof of existence of devices. 
Proof of actual existence of any traffic control device purporting to regulate, warn, guide or control the use of any highway, street, or alley, or any activity thereon, by pedestrians or operators or drivers of animals, animal-drawn vehicles, motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles, motor-assisted bicycles, motor driven cycles, moped, or special mobile equipment shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was erected, pursuant to and by the authority granted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-53. - Traffic movement regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations controlling oversized and/or overweight vehicular traffic driving or operating on certain city streets, roadways or highways, or any segment thereof within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Commercial motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles designed or used primarily to transport property, excluding a passenger bus, passenger automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck or pickup truck. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is self-propelled. 
Oversize vehicle means any vehicle having four (4) or more axles. For purposes of this section, the number of axles on a vehicle shall include the axles on any trailer being operated in conjunction with the vehicle. 
Overweight vehicle means any vehicle having a gross vehicular weight of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds or more. 
Semi-trailer means every vehicle of the trailer type so designated or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Trailer means a vehicle that is designed or used to carry a load wholly on its own structure; and is drawn or designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck means a commercial truck, semi-trailer, trailer, truck-tractor, cement mixer, or any combination thereof. 
Truck-tractor means a motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle; and not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be drawn. 
Vehicle means a device in or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a public highway, including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, trucks, truck-tractors, cement mixers, trailers, and semi-trailers, other than a device used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. 
(c)  Restrictions. Except as provided by the exemptions contained herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate an oversized and/or overweight truck or vehicle, truck-tractor, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof upon any municipal street designated as a "no through truck street" within the corporate city limits of the city. 
(d)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to oversized or overweight vehicles that are: 
(1)  Owned, leased, used or in service to the city, the county, the state or the United States; 
(2)  School buses and public buses; 
(3)  Emergency vehicles in route to and returning from an emergency, including any wrecker or tow trucks; 
(4)  Making home deliveries or pickups of goods or services to a residence located on said street; 
(5)  Making business deliveries to or pickups from a business or construction site located on said street; 
(6)  Travel trailers, boats and recreational vehicles; 
(7)  Owned or used in the service of public utilities when in the performance of their duties; or 
(8)  Vehicles operating under a valid permit issued by the Texas Department of Transportation under the applicable provision in the Transportation Code. 
(e)  Through truck traffic shall be prohibited on the following streets and such streets are hereby designated as "No Through Truck Traffic" streets: 
(1)  Main Street District: 
a.  Main Street from Buena Vista to Sixth Street. 
b.  Fifth Street from US 281 to Avenue J. 
c.  Fourth Street from US 281 to Avenue J. 
d.  Third Street from US 281 to Avenue J. 
e.  Avenue H from US 281 to Buena Vista. 
f.  Second Street from US 281 to Avenue J. 
g.  First Street from US 281 to Avenue H. 
h.  First Street from Main Street to Avenue J. 
i.  Yett Street from Avenue H to Avenue J. 
(2)  Avenue F and Avenue G: 
a.  Avenue F from FM 1431 to Twelfth Street. 
b.  Avenue G from FM 1431 to Twelfth Street. 
(3)  Northwest Segment: 
a.  Northwood Drive from Pony Drive to US 281. 
b.  Bluebonnet Drive from Pony Drive to Northwood Drive. 
c.  Lantana Drive from Bluebonnet Drive to US 281. 
d.  Mission Hills Drive from Bluebonnet Drive to US 281. 
e.  Avenue K from Mission Hills Drive to FM 1431. 
f.  Avenue J from US 281 to FM 1431. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 2019-O-09A , § II, 9-17-2019)  
Secs. 25-54—25-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION  
DIVISION 1. - SPEED AND RELATED MATTERS 
 
Sec. 25-91. - Maximum limits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle upon any city street or roadway in Marble Falls at a greater rate of speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, except at the locations stated below. 
(1)  School zones—per section 25-92. 
(2)  The maximum speed limit on the following streets shall be twenty (20) miles per hour. 
a.  Cedar Drive—from Pecan Valley Drive to Orchard Drive. 
b.  Ash Drive—from Pecan Valley Drive to Orchard Drive. 
c.  Mulberry Drive—from Pecan Valley Drive to Orchard Drive. 
d.  Hackberry Drive—from Pecan Valley Drive to Orchard Drive. 
e.  Live Oak Drive—from Pecan Valley Drive to Orchard Drive. 
f.  Pecan Drive—from Pecan Valley Drive to Orchard Drive. 
g.  Vista Drive—from Cedar Drive to Pecan Drive. 
h.  Orchard Drive—from Cedar Drive to Pecan Drive. 
i.  Avenue J—from Backbone Creek Bridge to Johnson Street. 
j.  Johnson Street—from Avenue L to Pecan Valley Drive. 
k.  Pecan Valley Dr.—from Johnson St. south two hundred (200) feet. 
l.  Esperanza Avenue—from West FM 2147 to La Ventana Drive. 
m.  Alegria Circle—from Esperanza Avenue to end. 
n.  La Ventana Drive—from South US 281 to Bendito Way. 
o.  Corazon Drive—from Max Starcke Dam Road to Bendito Way. 
p.  Bendito Way—from Corazon Drive to end. 
q.  Cielo Circle—from Bendito Way to end. 
r.  Elclavar Circle—from Bendito Way to end. 
(3)  The maximum speed limit on the following street shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
a.  Mormon Mill Road—from US 281 to the North city limit. 
(4)  The maximum speed limit on the following street shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
a.  Manzano Mile—from the 2200 block South to its intersection with RM1431. 
(5)  Construction zones. The maximum speed limit in a construction zone shall be set by the city manager or the city manager's designee. A "construction zone" is a portion of a highway or street where road construction, maintenance or utility work activities are occurring and that is marked by signs indicating that it is a construction zone, indicating where the zone begins and ends, and stating: "Fines double when workers present." 
(6)  The maximum speed limits on US 281 shall be as follows: 
FOR NORTHBOUND TRAFFIC 
a.  Beginning at milepoint 37.850 (SH 71) to milepoint 36.273 (1.571 miles North of SH 71), a distance of 1.577 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of sixty-five (65) miles per hour. 
b.  From milepoint 36.273 (1.577 miles North of SH 71) to milepoint 34.550 (one thousand one hundred fifty-one (1,151) feet South of Mark Starke Dam Rd.), a distance of 1.723 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
c.  From milepoint 34.550 (one thousand one hundred fifty-one (1,151) feet South of Mark Starcke Dam Rd.), to milepoint 34.182 (three hundred fifty (350) feet South of Gateway Central), a distance of 0.368 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
d.  From milepoint 34.182 (three hundred fifty (350) feet South of Gateway Central), to milepoint 32.462 (676 feet North of RM 1431), a distance of 1.595 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
FOR SOUTHBOUND TRAFFIC 
e.  Beginning at milepoint 32.462 (six hundred seventy-six 676 feet North of RM 1431) to milepoint 34.182 (three hundred fifty (350) feet South of Gateway Central), a distance of 1.595 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
f.  From milepoint 34.182 (three hundred fifty (350) feet South of Gateway Central), to milepoint 34.550 (one thousand one hundred fifty-one (1,151) feet South of Mark Starke Dam Rd.), a distance of 0.368 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
g.  From milepoint 34.550 (one thousand one hundred fifty-one (1,151) feet South of Mark Starke Dam Rd.), to milepoint 36.273 (1.577 miles North of SH 71), a distance of 1.723 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
h.  From milepoint 36.273 (1.577 miles North of SH 71), to milepoint 37.850 (SH 71), a distance of 1.577 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of sixty-five (65) miles per hour. 
(7)  The school speed zones on RM 1431 shall be as follows: 
FOR EASTBOUND TRAFFIC 
From mile-point 11.087 to mile-point 11.396, a distance of 0.309 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour when flashing. 
FOR WESTBOUND TRAFFIC 
From mile-point 11.396 to mile-point 11.087, a distance of 0.309 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour when flashing. 
(8)  The maximum speed limits on SH-71 shall be as follows: 
FOR EASTBOUND TRAFFIC 
From five thousand three hundred one (5,301) feet west of US 281, at mile point 2.254 (Marble Fall's west city limit) to two thousand two hundred thirty-nine (2,239) feet east of US 281, at mile point 3.682 (Marble Fall's east city limit), a distance of 1.428 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of sixty (60) miles per hour. 
FOR WESTBOUND TRAFFIC 
From two thousand two hundred thirty-nine (2,239) feet east of US 281, at mile point 3.682 (Marble Fall's east city limit) to five thousand three hundred one (5,301) feet west of US 281, at mile point 2.254 (Marble Fall's west city limit), a distance of 1.428 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of sixty (60) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 2015-O-09D, § II, 10-6-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-O-07A, § II, 7-19-2016 ; Ord. No. 2016-O-08A, § II, 8-16-2016 )  
Sec. 25-92. - School zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle of any kind or description at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in any school zone within the city as may be marked or designated as such during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., whenever such school is in session, unless the speed limit or time is otherwise posted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-93. - Signs. 
Whenever the speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour, as prescribed by section 25-91, is, by the provisions of this division or other ordinance of the city council, increased or decreased at any intersection or other place or upon any part of a street, the city manager or their designee shall erect appropriate signs giving notice of such speed limit. No such limit shall be effective unless such signs are erected. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Secs. 25-94—25-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TURNING OR STOPPING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 25-136. - Prohibited turns at intersections. 
(a)  Pursuant to the traffic control committee process established in section 25-51, the city manger or their designee is hereby authorized, to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Secs. 25-137—25-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING 
 
Sec. 25-181. - Parallel, angle parking. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of the street, with the left-hand wheels within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unless signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(c)  Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(d)  Pursuant to the traffic control committee process established in section 25-51, the city manger or their designee, shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within this city unless the state highway engineer has determined that the street is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any railway tracks. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-182. - Heavy vehicles and equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for a person owning or operating motor vehicles or equipment of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross vehicular weight rating or over to park such a vehicle or piece of equipment on city-owned and-maintained streets within the city limits unless such vehicle or piece of equipment is actively engaged in delivering a product or service at the location at which it is parked. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-183. - Parking restricted in residential districts. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Commercial vehicle means every vehicle, including motor vehicles and trailers, designed, maintained or used primarily for the nonrecreational transportation of property and/or people and the gross weight of which exceeds seven thousand (7,000) pounds. This definition shall never be construed to include motor vehicles commonly known as "pickup trucks". 
Pole trailer means every vehicle, not a trailer or semitrailer (as defined above) designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipe or structural members capable generally of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
Recreational vehicle means every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, including motor homes, truck campers, travel trailers, and camping trailers. 
Residential district means any area within the city zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, RE-1, RA-1, RT-3, MH-1, MH-2 or MH-3. 
Semitrailer means every vehicle design for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some or part of its weight or load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Tractor trailer means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than part of the weight and load so drawn. 
Trailer means every vehicle, designed or used to carry its load wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a service vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, truck tractor, recreational vehicle or boat on a street in a residential district or on a street bordering a residential district, except as authorized in section 7-295. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provisions found herein. 
(d)  Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Trucks and trailers designed and used for transporting furniture and household goods while in the process of loading or unloading said items. 
(2)  Other trailers or commercial vehicles while in the process of loading or unloading. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 2012-O-08B, § 14, 11-20-2012)  
Secs. 25-184—25-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 25-201. - Adoption by reference of state law concerning pedestrian conduct. 
The provisions of Chapter 552 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, concerning pedestrian conduct are adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as if set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Secs. 25-202—25-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 25-221. - Adoption by reference of state law concerning bicycles and play vehicles. 
The provisions of Chapter 551 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, concerning operation of bicycles, mopeds and play vehicles are adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as if set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 25-222. - Skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, and scooters. 
(a)  No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skate, roller blade, pocket bike, mini-motorbike or scooter on the 100, 200, 300, 400 block of Main Street. 
(b)  This section does not apply to a motorized wheelchair or nonmotorized mobility device. 
(Ord. No. 2011-O-09D, § II, 9-20-2011)  
Chapter 26 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; solid waste, Ch. 21; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; franchises, App. A; development code, App. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § III, adopted Nov. 23, 2009, repealed § 26-1, which pertained to fee for reimbursement of developers for oversizing or constructing water or sewer mains or lines, and derived from Ord. No. 95-O-1B, §§ 1—9, adopted Jan. 10, 1995.  
Secs. 26-2—26-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 7-56 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-16. - Conduct in vicinity of treatment plant. 
Within an area one hundred (100) yards from the intakes into the city water treatment plant on Lake Marble Falls, no person shall: 
(1)  Bathe, swim or wade; 
(2)  Throw or place in the water any waste or refuse or any substance or thing which may contaminate the water; 
(3)  Throw or place such waste, refuse, substance or thing within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the banks of the water or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the normal high water mark of the water; or 
(4)  Keep or bring any animal within such distance from the banks of the water or the normal high water mark (except animals passing over a public road), or wash or clean within such distance thereof any vehicle which has been used for the transportation of any animal. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-7, Art. I, 7-22-80)  
Sec. 26-17. - Wasting. 
No person shall water any grass, tree or plant in such manner that water from the city water system flows into the roadway of any street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-7, Art. II, 7-22-80)  
Sec. 26-18. - Proclamation restricting use. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to issue proclamations from time to time as the amount of available water justifies, imposing or withdrawing any or all of the following restrictions on the use of water from the city's distribution system in all or any part of the city as circumstances may require: 
(1)  No person shall water any grass, tree or plant for a period of up to seven (7) days. Plants which cannot be kept alive without daily watering may be watered from vessels but not by use of a hose when watering is prohibited. 
(2)  Water may not be run into "fill and draw" swimming pools, that is, pools not provided with filtration, pumping and chemical feeding equipment so that the water may be continuously reused. 
(3)  Motor vehicles may not be washed. 
(4)  No person shall use water for crop irrigation or stock watering unless from individual storage and water sources. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-7, Art. III, § 1, 7-22-80) 
Cross reference— Drought contingency plan, § 26-48 et seq.  
Sec. 26-19. - Inserting choke. 
After warning by the city against excessive use of water, if the owner or occupant of any property shall violate any such restriction while the same is in effect, whether convicted in court thereof or not, the city may insert a choke in the service pipe to such property so as to cut down the water supply to an amount necessary for ordinary cooking, drinking and washing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 80-O-7, Art. III, § 3, 7-22-80)  
Secs. 26-20—26-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER WELLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Water wells, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 28.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Backflow preventer means a device or means to prevent backflow into the city's potable water system. 
Cross connection means a physical connection between the city's potable water supply system and any other water system, including water from wells other than the city's wells. 
Existing work means a water well or water system which had been installed prior to September 11, 1984. 
Plumbing inspector means any person employed by the city for the purpose of inspecting work and installations in connection with health and safety laws as provided in, or referred to in, this division. The plumbing inspector shall be licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners in accordance with the Plumbing License Law of 1947, as amended (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243—101). 
Public sewer means a common sewer directly controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries waste water and excludes storm and surface water and groundwater. 
Septic tank means a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, which is designed and constructed so as to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a drainfield or disposal or perforated piping. 
Water main means a water-distribution pipe for public or community use. 
Water wells means bored wells; dug wells and driven wells are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § IV, 9-11-84) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - Intent and purpose. 
For the protection and preservation of life and of the public health, safety, property and general welfare of the people, the following provisions are enacted relating to the construction of water wells and water systems in the city and outside the city, if same be connected to either the city water or sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § III, 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-33. - Permits and licenses generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a water well or water system, as set out in this division without having first procured the necessary licenses and permits as provided for in this division. All workmanship and materials shall meet the requirements of this division in regard to the drilling construction, location and operation of such wells and systems. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § II, 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-34. - Licensing requirements. 
Construction of water wells shall be performed only by those holding a valid water well drillers license issued by the state. The license number shall be displayed during construction at the site of the work. The number shall be clearly readable from the nearest traveled public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § V, 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-35. - Permit, fees and inspections. 
(a)  When permit required. It shall be unlawful to construct a water well or major overhaul of a water well without first securing a water well permit. The driller or work over contractor shall secure written indemnity of the city from the person who has commissioned the well drilling or work over of an existing well before work may commence. 
(b)  When permit not required. Permits are not required for routine maintenance and for existing work. 
(c)  Permits not transferable. Each permit issued under this section shall be personal to the permittee. No such permit shall be assigned or transferred to another person and no person shall permit another person to obtain a permit in his name or permit any new well construction or major overhaul work to be performed under his permit by any person other than a person authorized to do the same. 
(d)  False statement or bad faith. Any person who shall wilfully make any false statement in order to obtain a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provided in section 1-9. Bad faith or unreasonable delay in the performance of work under this division shall be deemed a sufficient reason for suspension of the permit of the well driller so offending and no further permit shall be issued until such act of bad faith or unreasonable delay has been corrected. 
(e)  Issuance of permit: The plumbing inspector or his designated representative shall issue all plumbing permits in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this division. All application for permits shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the well driller; 
(2)  Number of well drillers license; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of property owner; and 
(4)  Sketch of property that shows location of the water well, all buildings, septic tanks, drain fields and other significant structures. The sketch shall also show the location of structures on adjacent property if within ten (10) feet of the property line. 
(f)  Duration of permits. Every permit issued under the provisions of this section shall expire ninety (90) days after the date thereof unless the work authorized by such permit shall have been commenced within such time; every permit shall expire if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for as long as ninety (90) days after it has been commenced. In every case where a permit is permitted to expire, a new permit shall be obtained before any work is resumed. 
(g)  Permit and inspection fees. The permit and inspection fees provided in this subsection shall be paid to the city before the issuance of a permit and before any work is started. The fees shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(h)  Inspections and tests. The plumbing inspector shall have the right to enter the property for the purpose of inspections to ensure compliance with this division. In addition, the plumbing inspector shall have the right to enter the property at any time in the future for the purpose of inspections to ensure that there are no cross-connections. Upon completion of the well, the well driller shall furnish the plumbing inspector a copy of the drillers log and a copy of the water analysis. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VI, 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-36. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Casing. A casing of steel or other approved material shall be provided to prevent caving of the formations penetrated and also to ensure protection of water supply from contamination by water from shallow strata. The wall shall be cased from the bottom of the drilled hole to eighteen (18) inches above the finish grade or more if required to keep surface water from entering casing. 
(b)  Well seal. The annular space between the drilled hole and the well casing shall be sealed with concrete or grout for a depth of at least ten (10) feet below finished grade. The casing shall be covered at the ground with a concrete slab no less than twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four (24) inches by twelve (12) inches. The top of this slab shall protrude six (6) inches above finished grade and shall be sloped away from the casing. The top of the casing shall be provided with a suitable well seal to prevent contamination of the well. If a vent is provided on the casing it shall be equipped with an elbow turned downward and screened with a 16-mesh screen. 
(c)  Disinfection of wells and equipment. Upon completion of the well, but before it is placed into service, the well and equipment shall be disinfected by the use of chlorine (powdered, tablet or solution). 
(d)  Water samples. After the chlorine has been flushed, a sample of water shall be analyzed for purity. The well shall not be placed into service until the water has been tested and found to be suitable for human consumption. 
(e)  Abandonment of wells. Permanently abandoned wells shall be filled with cement grout or concrete. Abandoned wells shall not be used for the disposal of waste water, septic tank effluent or other wastes. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VII, 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-37. - Applicability of state regulations. 
The regulations of the Texas Department of Water Resources and the Texas Water Well Drillers Act as they pertain to the construction of water wells shall be and are hereby incorporated into this division. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VIII(A), 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-38. - Domestic use. 
No more than one (1) household may be served by a single water well if the water is for use inside the house. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VIII(B), 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-39. - Commercial use. 
It shall be unlawful for a commercial water well to be used for domestic (household) use or for consumption by the public. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VIII(C), 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-40. - Location. 
Water wells shall be constructed no closer to property lines or significant structures than the following distances: 
(1)  Front property line: 25 feet; 
(2)  Side property lines: 5 feet; 
(3)  Rear property lines: 10 feet; 
(4)  Buildings: 5 feet; 
(5)  Power lines: 30 feet; 
(6)  Septic tanks and drain fields: 150 feet; 
(7)  Barns and animal pens: 150 feet; 
(8)  Permanent derricks and towers: No closer than 40 feet to side property lines. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VIII(D), 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-41. - Sewer charges. 
The city is required to charge for water discharges into the public sewer on the basis of actual quantity of water discharge into the sanitary sewer. The method of determining this quantity is based on estimates made from the water meter readings; therefore, when a water well is being used the following shall apply: 
(1)  Water well used only for yard watering and other uses not connected with the sanitary sewer: No change in sewer charges is required. 
(2)  Residential water wells used in such a manner that all or a portion of the well water enters the public sewer: Sewer charge shall be based on a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) gallons a month discharged entering the sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Water wells used for purposes other than residential use where all or a portion of the well water enters the public sewer: The person being charged for sewer has the following options: 
a.  Water being discharged into the sanitary sewer will be estimated by the city based on each individual case; or 
b.  A waste water meter shall be installed and maintained by the city, but all costs incurred by the city will be charged to the person using the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VIII(E), 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-42. - Cross connections. 
There shall be no physical connection between water from water wells and the city's water mains. The use of valves, check valves, backflow preventers, etc., as a means of connecting the water systems is prohibited. There shall be a physical separation of at least nine (9) inches (air gap) between systems. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VIII(F), 9-11-84)  
Sec. 26-43. - Debris, etc., on public rights-of-way. 
There shall be no debris, dirty water, mud or other refuse dumped or discharged onto public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 84-O-9A, § VIII(G), 9-11-84)  
Secs. 26-44—26-47. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, adopted March 18, 2014 , amended div. 3, §§ 26-48—26-54, in its entirety. Former div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 2013-O-07D, § II, adopted August 6, 2013. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 8; proclamation restricting use, § 26-18. 
 
Sec. 26-48. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 26-53 of this plan. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-49. - Public education. 
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of town meetings, press releases and utility mass mailings. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-49.1. - Authorization. 
The Mayor or his/her designee for the City of Marble Falls is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare. The mayor or his/her designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-49.2. - Application. 
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-50. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply: 
Aesthetic water use means water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
Commercial and institutional water use means use which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
Conservation means those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer means any person, company, or organization using water supplied by city. 
Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
Industrial water use means the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscape irrigation use means water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
New landscape is defined as vegetation: 
(1)  Installed at the time of new construction of a residential or commercial facility; 
(2)  Installed as part of a governmental entity's capital improvement project; 
(3)  Installed to stabilize an area disturbed by construction; and/or 
(4)  That alters more than five hundred (500) contiguous square feet of an existing landscape. 
Nonessential water use means water uses that are not essential or required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than firefighting. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-51. - Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
(a)  The mayor or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or water demand conditions on a daily/weekly basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan, that is, when the specified "triggers" are reached. 
(b)  The triggering criteria described below are based on current capacities of the city's water plant and distribution system. 
(c)  Stage 1 Triggers—MILD Water Shortage Conditions. 
Requirements for initiation. 
Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water uses, defined in section 26-50, definitions, when (either, any of) the following condition(s) exist or as determined by the mayor or his/her designee. 
A.  When, the combined storage of Lakes Travis and Buchanan reaches 1.4 million acre-feet, pursuant to requirements specified in the city's wholesale water purchase contract with the Lower Colorado River Authority (L.C.R.A.) and notification is received from L.C.R.A. requesting initiation of Stage 1 of the drought contingency plan. 
B.  When total daily water demand equals or exceeds eighty-seven (87) percent of plant capacity for three (3) consecutive days or eighty-eight and one-half (88.5) percent of plant capacity on a single day. 
C.  Continually falling treated water reservoir levels that do not refill above ninety (90) percent overnight. 
D.  Region-wide drought caused by widespread, long term shortages. 
Requirements for termination. 
Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days; or as determined by the Mayor or his/her designee. 
(d)  Stage 2 Triggers—MODERATE Water Shortage Conditions. 
Requirements for initiation. 
Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section 26-50, definitions, of this plan when any of the following condition(s) exist: or as determined by the mayor or his/her designee. 
A.  When, pursuant to requirements specified in the city wholesale water purchase contract with L.C.R.A. and notification from L.C.R.A. is received requesting initiation of Stage 2 of the drought contingency plan. 
B.  When total daily water demand equals or exceeds ninety (90) percent of plant capacity for two (2) consecutive days of ninety-one and one-half (91.5) percent of plant capacity on a single day. 
C.  Continually falling treated water reservoir levels that do not refill above eighty (80) percent overnight. 
D.  Region-wide drought caused by widespread, long term shortages. 
Requirements for termination. 
Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days: or as determined by the mayor or his/her designee. Upon termination of Stage 2, Stage 1 becomes operative. 
(e)  Stage 3 Triggers—SEVERE Water Shortage Conditions. 
Requirements for initiation. 
Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses for Stage 3 of this plan when any of the following condition(s) exist: or as determined by the Mayor or his/her designee. 
A.  When, combined storage of Lakes Travis and Buchanan reaches six hundred thousand (600,000) acre-feet in accordance with the LCRA DCP, or the LCRA Board declares a drought worse than the drought of record and a mandatory curtailment of firm water supplies, and notification is received requesting initiation of Stage 3 of the drought contingency plan. 
B.  When total daily water demand equals or exceeds ninety-five (95) percent of plant capacity for two (2) consecutive days of ninety-six (96) percent of plant capacity on a single day. 
C.  Continually falling treated water reservoir levels that do not refill above seventy-five (75) percent overnight. 
D.  Region-wide drought caused by widespread, long term shortages. 
Requirements for termination. 
Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days, or as determined by the Mayor or his/her designee. Upon termination of Stage 3, Stage 2 becomes operative. 
(f)  Stage 4 Trigger—CRITICAL Water Shortage Conditions. 
Requirements for initiation. 
Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for Stage 4 of this plan when the mayor or his/her designee, determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
A.  When, pursuant to requirements specified in the city's wholesale water purchase contract with L.C.R.A. notification is received requesting initiation of Stage 4 of the drought contingency plan. 
B.  Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
C.  Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply source. 
D.  Region-wide drought caused by widespread, long term shortages. 
Requirements for termination: 
Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three (3) consecutive days, or as determined by the Mayor or his/her designee. 
(g)  Stage 5 Trigger—EMERGENCY Water Shortage Conditions. 
Requirements for initiation. 
Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for Stage 5 of this plan when the Mayor or his/her designee, determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
A.  When, pursuant to requirements specified in the city's wholesale water purchase contract with LCRA notification is received requesting initiation of Stage 5 of the drought contingency plan. 
B.  Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; 
C.  Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply source. 
D.  Region-wide drought caused by widespread, long term shortages; or 
E.  Any other emergency water supply or demand conditions that the L.C.R.A. constitutes a water supply emergency or is associated with a prolonged drought worse than the drought of record requiring the mandatory curtailment of firm water supplies at a level more severe than in Stage 4. 
Requirements for termination: 
The water treatment plant capacity condition listed above as a triggering event for Stage 5 has ceased to exist for five (5) consecutive days; or if L.C.R.A. announces that mandatory water restrictions for firm water customers are no longer required. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-52. - Drought response stages. 
(a)  The Mayor or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 26-51 of this plan, shall determine that a mild, moderate, severe, critical, emergency or water shortage condition exists and shall implement the following notification procedures. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  Notification of the public: The city manager or his/her designee shall notify the public by means of: 
a.  Publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
b.  Direct mail to each customer. 
c.  Public service announcements. 
d.  Signs posted in public places. 
(2)  Additional notification: The city manager or his/her designee shall notify directly, or cause to be notified directly, the following individuals and entities: 
a.  Mayor/chairman and members of the city council/utility board. 
b.  Fire chief(s). 
c.  City and/or county emergency management coordinator(s). 
d.  County judge and commissioner(s). 
e.  State disaster district/department of public safety. 
f.  TCEQ (required when mandatory restrictions are imposed). 
g.  Major water users. 
h.  Critical water users, i.e. hospitals. 
i.  Parks/street superintendents and public facilities managers. 
j.  Wholesale supplier (notify when mandatory restrictions are imposed). 
[(c)  Stages.] 
(1)  Stage 1 Response—MILD Water Shortage Conditions. 
Goal: Achieve a voluntary five (5) percent to ten (10) percent reduction in daily water demand. 
Supply management measures: In order to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand, the city will: 
• Reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains, 
• Audit your utility system for water loss, 
Voluntary water use restrictions: 
Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas by irrigating landscapes only between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 7:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on designated outdoor water use days. Customers with even-numbered street addresses may water on even-numbered days of the month, and customers with odd-numbered street addresses may water on odd-numbered days of the month. 
(2)  Stage 2 Response—MODERATE Water Shortage Conditions. 
Goal: Achieve a ten (10) percent to twenty (20) percent reduction in daily water demand. 
Supply management measures: In order to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand, the city will: 
• Reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains, 
• Audit its utility system for water loss, 
• Reduce irrigation of public landscaped areas, 
Watering Schedule: 
Mandatory lawn watering schedule effective: Customers may water only between 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight twice a week according to the last digit of the customer's street address. Watering by hand held hose can be done at any time. Sprinkler/irrigation watering schedule: 
Residential, odd-numbered addresses: Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
Residential, even-numbered addresses: Thursdays and Sundays. 
Commercial: Tuesdays and Fridays. 
Water use restrictions: Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
A.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated outdoor water use days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 7:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public are contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
B.  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated outdoor water use days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 7:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
C.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
D.  Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city. 
E.  All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of the patron. 
F.  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street. 
G.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
H.  The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited: 
(1)  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(2)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; and 
(3)  Use of water for dust control; except when necessary for land development such as roadway base preparation, concrete and asphalt work and for building construction processes. 
(3)  Stage 3 Response—SEVERE Water Shortage Conditions. 
Goal: Achieve a minimum of twenty (20) percent reduction in daily water demand from a baseline approved by L.C.R.A. 
Supply management measures: In order to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand, the city will: 
• Reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains and recycle line flush water as appropriate for the utility system. 
• Audit the utility system for water loss. 
• Discontinue all bulk water sales to persons outside the city limits intended for resale purposes. 
Watering Schedule: 
Residential, odd-numbered addresses: Tuesday. 
Residential, even-numbered addresses: Thursday. 
Commercial, even-numbered addresses: Monday. 
Commercial, odd-numbered addresses: Friday. 
Public Schools: Wednesday. 
Water use restrictions: All requirements of Stage 2 shall remain in effect during Stage 3 except: 
A.  Irrigation of landscaped areas utilizing spray irrigation which includes hose-end sprinklers, soaker hoses, and automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to a once weekly watering schedule. 
B.  Outdoor watering hours for spray irrigation will be permitted from midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to midnight on designated days. This prohibition does not apply to irrigation of landscaped areas if it is by means of: 
1.  A hand-held hose with a positive shut-off device; or 
2.  Drip irrigation systems; or 
3.  A faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less. 
C.  Irrigation of recreational areas including municipal parks and common areas with potable water must follow the once weekly irrigation schedule. Watering of these areas using an auxiliary source such as recycled water is exempt from these restrictions. 
D.  Irrigation of athletic fields will require a variance for irrigation if irrigation falls outside of the normal watering schedule. Fields should only be irrigated that are being actively used for organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events when the irrigation is necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff, or officials present for the athletic event. 
Additional restrictions: 
The mayor or his/her designee may implement mandatory water restrictions in addition to those detailed in the City of Marble Falls Drought Contingency Plan to protect public health, safety, welfare, infrastructure or available resources in the event of an unusual water system operational event, catastrophic occurrence, severe weather event, or other emergency situation or occurrence necessitating additional restrictions. 
The Mayor or his/her designee may implement mandatory water use restrictions effective immediately upon official public notice. 
(4)  Stage 4 Response. CRITICAL Water Shortage Conditions. 
Goal: Achieve a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent reduction in daily water demand. 
Supply management measures: In order to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand, the city will: 
• Discontinue flushing of water mains. 
• Audit the utility system for water loss. 
• Discontinue irrigation of public landscaped areas using hose end sprinkler systems and/or automated irrigation systems. 
Water use restrictions: All requirements of Stage 3 shall remain in effect during Stage 4 except: 
A.  Irrigation of landscaped areas utilizing spray irrigation including hose end sprinklers and automatic irrigation systems are absolutely prohibited. 
B.  Irrigation of landscaped areas is allowed with a hand-held hose with a working on/off nozzle, bucket, or drip irrigation only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. one (1) day per week on the designated outdoor water use day as outlined in Stage 3. 
C.  Use of water to operate outside water features, including fountains, outdoor misting systems, and splash pads are prohibited. 
D.  The filling or replenishing of water to a single-family residential swimming pool is only allowed if the pool is covered with a pool cover. When not in use. 
E.  Public/community swimming pools are allowed to fill or replenish water in order to maintain safe levels of water quality for human contact. 
F.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited, except in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare. 
Additional restrictions: 
The Mayor or his/her designee may implement mandatory water restrictions in addition to those detailed in the City of Marble Falls Drought Contingency Plan to protect public health, safety, welfare, infrastructure or available resources in the event of an unusual water system operational event, catastrophic occurrence, severe weather event, or other emergency situation or occurrence necessitating additional restrictions. 
The mayor or his/her designee may implement mandatory water use restrictions effective immediately upon official public notice. 
(5)  Stage 5 Response—EMERGENCY Water Shortage Conditions. 
Supply management measures: In order to manage limited water supplies and/or reduce water demand, the city will: 
• Discontinue flushing of water mains. 
• Audit the utility system for water loss. 
• Discontinue irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
Water use restrictions: All requirements of Stages 1—4 shall remain in effect during Stage 5 with the following modifications and additions: 
a.  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
b.  Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare only. 
Additional restrictions: 
The mayor or his/her designee may implement mandatory water restrictions in addition to those detailed in the City of Marble Falls Drought Contingency Plan to protect public health, safety, welfare, infrastructure or available resources in the event of an unusual water system operational event, catastrophic occurrence, severe weather event, or other emergency situation or occurrence necessitating additional restrictions. 
The mayor or his/her designee may implement mandatory water use restrictions effective immediately upon official public notice. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-53. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by mayor or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan. 
(b)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(c)  Administrative violation. Except as otherwise stated herein, each violation of this plan may be enforced as an administrative violation, pursuant to the following: 
Violation 	Residential Customer 	Commercial Customer 
First violation 	Warning letter 	Warning letter 
Second violation within 12-month period from date of initial violation 	$50.00 	$200.00 
Third violation within 12-month period from date of initial violation 	$100.00 	$400.00 
Fourth and subsequent violations within 12-month period from date of initial violation 	$200.00 	$1,000.00 
 
(1)  First violation. The notice of first violation shall be in writing, contain the name and address of the alleged violator (if known), provide a location and brief description of the alleged violation, provide a warning for this first violation and inform him/her of the administrative fees and consequences for subsequent violations, and be forwarded to the alleged violator's utility billing address via first-class mail. 
(2)  Second (and/or subsequent) violation(s). If a person or entity has violated this plan again within the 12-month period immediately following the date of a preceding violation, he/she shall be forwarded a notice of second (or subsequent) violation. The notice of second (or subsequent) violation shall be in writing, contain the name and address of the alleged violator (if known), provide a location and brief description of the alleged violation, inform him/her of the administrative fee that will be added to the alleged violator's next monthly utility bill and the administrative fees and consequences for subsequent violations, and be forwarded to the alleged violator's utility billing address via first-class mail. 
(d)  Criminal violation in lieu of administrative violation; appeal of administrative violation; effect on payment, hearing procedure. 
(1)  Any alleged violator shall be entitled to request and have any alleged violation treated as a Class C misdemeanor subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court in lieu of an administrative violation by filing a written request with the city manager or his/her designee for the same within ten (10) business days of receipt of a notice of violation. Upon receipt of such a letter the city manager or his/her designee shall promptly transfer the matter to the municipal court, where it shall be handled as a Class C misdemeanor. 
(2)  If a violator does not request that the administrative violation be treated as a Class C misdemeanor, he or she may appeal an administrative violation under this article by requesting an appeal within fifteen (15) business days of the date of a notice of violation. The appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the city manager or their designee. Within ten (10) business days of the city manager's receipt of such request, an appeal hearing ("appeal hearing") shall be held. At the appeal hearing, the alleged violator shall present relevant evidence and bear the burden of proof to show by the preponderance of the evidence why he/she should not be held in violation of the plan or the administrative fee should not be assessed. The city manager or their designee shall consider all relevant evidence presented and render a decision in within five (5) business days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing ("appeal hearing decision"). A copy of the appeal hearing decision shall be forwarded to the alleged violator's utility billing address via first-class mail and email. 
(3)  The request for an appeal under this subsection shall not suspend or delay an alleged violator's obligation to pay current outstanding utility fees and/or administrative fines assessed under this article. Upon successful appeal of an alleged administrative violation, the city shall refund all administrative fines paid by or on behalf of an alleged violator pursuant to this article. 
(4)  Any appeal under this subsection shall be conducted via scheduled personal or telephone conference. Such conference shall include the alleged offender, his/her representative, if any, and any testifying witnesses. Prior to the commencement of any telephone or personal conference under this subsection, each testifying witness' name, address, telephone number, and relationship to the alleged violator shall be submitted to the city manager or their designee prior to commencement of such telephone conference, along with any documentary or physical evidence to be presented in such telephone or personal conference. No unidentified witness or un-submitted evidence shall be considered at the hearing. 
(5)  If the alleged violator shall fail to attend a scheduled appeal or final review hearing for any reason, such failure shall constitute a default, render final the pending administrative violation and any assessed administrative fines, and waive the alleged violator's right to appeal. 
(e)  Notices. All notices regarding alleged administrative violations under this article, including without limitation notices of violation and appeal hearing decisions, shall be in writing and forwarded to the alleged violator via first-class mail and/or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the alleged violator's current billing address. All notices forwarded in such manner shall be deemed received by the alleged violator within three (3) days of the mailing's postmark. 
(f)  Class C misdemeanor. Alternatively, and at the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee, fourth and subsequent violations within the 12-month period from the date of the alleged violator's initial violation may be treated as class C misdemeanor offenses. Any person or entity alleged to have violated this plan may be cited to appear in municipal court for such offense, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day that one (1) or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Termination of service. Upon a person or entity's fourth or subsequent violation within the 12-month period immediately following the date of the initial violation and upon due notice to the person or entity as set forth herein, the city shall be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. The city shall be so authorized regardless of whether such violation is being simultaneously enforced administratively, under subsection (c), or criminally, under subsection (f). Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge hereby established at fifty dollars ($50.00) and all other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in a court of proper jurisdiction. This subsection shall not be construed to reduce, diminish, or in any manner restrict the city's right to terminate utility service for nonpayment of fees and fines. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-54. - Variances. 
The city manager or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(3)  Compliance with this plan substantially threatens the applicant's primary source of income, the applicant is employing all reasonable water conservation measures, and approval of the variance will not result in water waste. 
(4)  Watering in a manner or at a time inconsistent with a requirement of this chapter is necessary for treatment of tree diseases and/or pest control; or if the tree is exhibiting effects of drought related stress to be determined and prescribed by a licensed arborist or pest control professional. 
(5)  Watering in a manner or a time inconsistent with a requirement of this chapter is necessary as a result of the property having completed the installation of new landscape as a part of new construction and/or the installation of the new landscape is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy. New landscape is defined as vegetation: 
a.  Installed at the time of new construction of a residential or commercial facility; 
b.  Installed as part of a governmental entity's capital improvement project; 
c.  Installed to stabilize an area disturbed by construction; and/or 
d.  That alters more than five hundred (500) contiguous square feet of an existing landscape. 
(6)  The irrigation for the establishment of the new landscaping must comply with the following: 
a.  For the first ten (10) days following installation, irrigation is permitted daily before 10:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.; 
b.  For the 11 th through the 40 th day following installation, irrigation is permitted twice per week before 10:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.; and 
c.  If the landscape installation is required in order to obtain a certificate of occupancy for a newly constructed single-family home, the applicant shall provide a completed notice of irrigation variance to the city manager or his/her designee at least one (1) full business day before the landscape is installed. 
d.  A one-time extension of the approved variance may be granted by the City Manager or his/her designee only upon the submittal by the applicant of a written request which demonstrates a clear need for the extension to establish the new landscaping. 
(7)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this division shall file a letter requesting a variance with the city within five (5) days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the City Manager or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of the petitioner(s); 
b.  Purpose of water use; 
c.  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief; 
d.  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this division; 
e.  Description of the relief requested; 
f.  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
g.  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date; 
h.  Any other pertinent information appropriate or requested. 
(8)  A variance following its approval may be immediately suspended or revoked if the city manager or his/her designee determines any of the following: 
a.  A violation of the terms of the variance occurs at the location during the effective period of the variance; 
b.  The application submitted to the city manager or his/her designee upon which the variance approval was based included false, misleading, incomplete, or inaccurate information or attachments; or 
c.  The Mayor or his/her designee declares an emergency recall of variances to control use or preserve supply based on protracted drought, an unusual operational event, or other public necessity. 
(9)  Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city manager or his/her designee: 
a.  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance; 
b.  A variance from a requirement of this chapter expires immediately upon the termination, completion, or resolution of the event, occurrence, condition, or activity or which the variance is granted or at a time specified by the city manager or his/her designee; 
c.  Compliance with the water use regulations is required until specific approval is granted by the city manager or his/her designee. An application for a variance does not provide reliance that the variance as requested will be approved. All variances are decided on a case by case basis. 
d.  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(10)  In the event that the city manager or his/her designee denies an application for a variance, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a letter requesting a hearing before the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting and stating the grounds for the appeal. The applicant and the city manager or his/her designee shall be allowed to present information regarding the variance request and reasons for denial. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 2014-O-03A, § II, 3-18-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-08E , § II, 8-20-2019)  
Sec. 26-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-O-09B, § II, adopted Sept. 17, 2013, repealed the Div. 4, §§ 26-55.1, 26-55.2, and enacted a new Div. 4 as set out herein. The former Div. 4 pertained to the same subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 26-55.1. - Utility profile. 
(a)  Water system. The city obtains its raw water supply from Lake Marble Falls through a water supply agreement with the Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA). The city's utility department is the managing municipal entity that operates the surface water treatment facility that withdraws raw water from the Colorado River/Lake Marble Falls and treats and delivers the potable water to its retail service area customers. The city's water utility operates as Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Public Water System #270026 and serves the area defined by TCEQ Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (CCN) #1137. The city currently serves a population of 6,700 comprising of approximately three thousand one hundred and ninety-two (3,192) connections of which approximately seventy-five (75) percent are residential and twenty-five (25) are commercial. The service area boundaries extended to the subdivision of Highland Hills to the north, south to Texas State Highway 71, east to 3151 FM 1431 and west to FM 2400 1431. All residential and commercial properties are connected to the water system. The average daily usage from the three (3) past years is 1.405 mgd. Peak demand of 2.90 mgd for the city occurred in August 2012. The projected population for the service area is as follows: 
YEAR 	POPULATION 
2020 	8,784 
2030 	12,906 
2040 	18,684 
2050 	21,713 
2060 	23,732 
 
A central water plant serves the city; it controls the level in three (3) ground storage tanks, one (1) standpipe, and three (3) elevated storage tanks. 
The water system constraints include geology and some undersized water mains which provide marginal fire flows. 
The city has created a water/wastewater master plan and has initiated several infrastructure improvements to the water system in recent years. The city is currently in phase IV of water plant expansion, going from three (3) mgd to 4.8 mgd. We are replacing a five-hundred-gallon ground storage tank with a six-hundred thousand-gallon storage tank and have replaced multiple aging service lines in the distribution system. 
The city is divided into seven (7) pressure planes to assure better service. The city will continue to improve the distribution system with major construction as funding permits. 
(b)  Wastewater system. The city wastewater system currently has an average daily flow of 1.034 mgd with a peak monthly flow of thirty-five (35) million gallons, which occurred in August 2017. 
There are approximately five (5) percent of water service connections in the city that are served by private sewage facilities. 
An extended aeration activated sludge plant currently serves the city wastewater treatment needs. This plant has four (4) clarifiers, two (2) oxidation ditches, an AquaDisk filtration system and an aerobic digester with belt press. The plant is approaching seventy-five (75) percent threshold. The city has recently upgraded to convert the process to a reclaimed water system enabling the city to produce Type I effluent. The city has begun irrigation of its parks utilizing the treated effluent and saving over sixty-three (63) acre-feet of water annually, reducing the potable water demand. Capital improvements for the coming years include beginning design on a second wastewater treatment plant and extending the reclaimed water system to additional parks and sports fields throughout the city as well as a neighboring municipal golf course to utilize treated effluent for irrigation. 
(c)  Financial data. 
Water Rates: 
Residential and commercial customers shall be charged the minimum monthly rates per metered water connection as established in the water/wastewater rate ordinance. These charges are levied in accordance with the size of the meter serving the customer and the type of customer. 
The city implemented an inclined block water rate structure in 2013 wherein the unit cost of water increases within blocks as water usage increases. The inclined block structure encourages conservation with lower rates for lower volume users and higher rates for higher volume users. Annual audits are conducted to evaluate promoting conservation. The rate structure does not impact low end users alleviating the burden on low income and fixed income residents. 
The water rate for Type I effluent is set at one-half (½) of the current water rate for potable water. 
Water rates for the sale of bulk water will be at the rate established in the water/wastewater ordinance. The purchaser is responsible for providing a container approved for transportation of the water. The sale of bulk water will not be allowed for resale purpose to residents outside the city limits once Stage 3 is reached or any stage beyond that, under the drought contingency plan. 
(Ord. No. 2013-O-09B, § II, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-05A, § II, 5-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-O-05B, § II, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 26-55.2. - Plan elements. 
(a)  Education and public information. 
[(1)]  Education. The city makes available water conservation education materials for its customers on an on-going basis. Such information shall be provided to customers through various mediums including but not limited to: utility bill inserts, pamphlets provided at public facilities, direct mailings, the city website, social media, school presentations, and periodic articles published in the local designated newspaper. When appropriate, the city shall also coordinate education efforts with local water suppliers, agencies, and regulators to promote water conservation education. Additionally, the city will conduct or participate in at least one (1) annual water conservation event or activity. 
[(2)]  Public information. The city has partnered with the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) to implement the state wide public awareness program, Water IQ. The city currently utilizes literature, web links and informational packets to customers with material compiled by the TWDB to raise awareness of the need for water conservation in our community. New utility and change of service customers are provided water conservation literature as well as public service information regarding the status of the drought response stage during the application process. The same information will be made available to existing utility customers through the city website and at city hall. Water conservation information for "water savings methods" that can be practiced with the individual water user is also available in the administration offices. 
(b)  Plumbing codes. The city's currently adopted version of the International Plumbing Code and the International Energy Conservation Code requires saving plumbing devices on all new construction. State and federal laws require that homes constructed after 1992 have low flow (less than three (3) gallons per minute) showerhead, faucet aerators and ultra-low flush (one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons per flush) toilet installed. 
(c)  Retrofit program. The city will make available, through its education and information programs, information for water customer use when purchasing and installing plumbing fixtures, lawn watering equipment or water using appliances. The program will inform existing users of the advantages of installing water saving devices. Additionally, the city in partnership with LCRA, makes available to customers low flow shower heads and faucet aerators at no charge and upon request. 
(d)  Water conservation oriented pricing structure. The city has implemented an inclined block water rate structure where in the unit cost of water increases within blocks as customer usage increases. The inclined block structure has been effective in encouraging conservation with lower rates for lower volume users and higher rates for higher volume users. Annual audits are conducted to evaluate promoting conservation. The rate structure does not impact low end users alleviating the burden on low income and fixed income residents. 
(e)  Universal metering. All water customers, including utility, city offices and public facilities, are presently metered. Also, master metered are currently installed and periodically calibrated at all existing water sources. All new construction is separately metered. 
The city, through its computer billing system, currently monitors water consumption and inspects meters, which vary from its previously established norms. In addition, the city will adopt a meter maintenance and replacement program as follows: 
(1)  Production (master) meters — Test once per year. 
(2)  Meters larger than one (1) inch — Test once per year. 
(3)  Meters one (1) inch or smaller — Test once every ten (10) years. 
Through a successful meter maintenance program coupled with computerized billing, water audits, timely repairs, and leak detection program, the city will keep unaccounted for water losses below fifteen (15) percent. 
(f)  Landscape irrigation conservation initiatives. In order to reduce the demands placed on the water system by landscape watering, the city adopted new landscape regulations requiring all redevelopment and new development to adhere to the city's approved plants and trees list which includes only native, adaptive and drought tolerant trees, plants, grasses and vegetation. Additionally, the city will encourage customers and local landscaping companies to utilize water saving practices in installation and the maintenance of landscaping for residential and commercial institutions. Some of the methods to be promoted are as follows: 
(1)  Require landscape architects to use native and adapted plant materials that can tolerate periods with low water input and require less fertilizers and pesticides to maintain, as well as water efficient irrigation system design and technologies, such as hydro zones to group plant materials of similar water needs. 
(2)  Require licensed irrigation contractors to permit and install all irrigation systems with water efficient features, such as: 
a.  Proper irrigation system design techniques to match the landscape design, accommodate prevailing wind patterns, and minimize overspray onto hardscapes; 
b.  Sprinklers that emit large drops rather than fine mist; 
c.  Irrigation controllers that offer multiple start times, are capable of running multiple programs, have a water budget feature and are rain or moisture sensor capable; 
d.  Rain or moisture sensors to prevent irrigation system operation during rainfall events; 
e.  Drip irrigation where possible, and in all landscaped areas less than ten (10) feet wide (medians, parking islands, etc.). 
(3)  Encourage commercial establishments to use drip irrigation for landscape watering, when practical, and to install only ornamental fountains that recycle and use minimal quantities of water. 
(4)  Encourage the utilization of separate irrigation meters in an effort to more effectively monitor and manage landscape irrigation usage. 
(5)  Partner with LCRA to conduct no cost evaluations of landscape irrigation systems for citizens and provide citizens with information regarding the irrigation technology rebate program. 
(g)  Leak detection and repair. The city conducts monthly water system audits in order to track for unaccounted water. Current loss is calculated to be at eight (8.0) percent. City maintenance technicians also conduct visual inspections at meters on a monthly basis in order to monitor leaks. Additionally, through its computerized billing program, the city can readily identify excessive water use determined to be a water leak. When identified, leaks are repaired immediately. In accordance with the requirements set forth by LCRA and the TWDB, the city performs a comprehensive water system audit annually. 
(h)  Recycle and reuse. In 2017, the city completed the design of the water reuse master plan. The city currently reuses all wastewater effluent produced at the city's wastewater treatment facility for irrigation of city parks, city owned soccer fields, for industrial use and a coastal hay farm. Future capital improvement projects will allow for additional city owned parks, a neighboring municipal golf course, and school sports facilities for irrigation with treated effluent. 
(i)  Drought contingency plan. When conditions indicate a possible water shortage by drought or any other event that could occur to the water supply that would create an emergency situation, the city shall enact the drought contingency plan, chapter 26, article II, division 3. The city prohibits inefficient water management under the various drought response stages in an effort to conserve water. 
(j)  Implementation/enforcement. The city manager and/or his designee will act as the administrator of the water conservation program. The administrator will oversee the execution and implementation of all elements of the program. The administrator will be responsible to supervise the keeping of adequate records from program verification. The administrator will also ensure that the water conservation plan is properly updated and filed every five (5) years with the LCRA and TCEQ. 
The city will adopt the final approved plan and commit to maintain the program for the duration of the city's financial obligation to the state should it be necessary. 
(k)  Annual report. In addition to the above outlined responsibilities, the administrator will submit the annual water conservation implementation report to the TWDB and TCEQ on the status of the water conservation plan. The report will include the following: 
(1)  Public information which has been issued. 
(2)  Public response to plan. 
(3)  Effectiveness of water conservation plan in reducing water consumption by providing production and sales records. 
(l)  Contracts with other political subdivisions. The city will, as part of contract for sale of water to any other political subdivision, require that entity to adopt applicable provisions of the city's water conservation and drought contingency plan or have a plan in effect previously approved by the TCEQ that is at least as stringent as the city's. These provisions will be through contractual agreement prior to the sale of any water to the political subdivision. 
(m)  Conservation goals. The quantitative goals as required by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 288 (30TAC 288) are stated below. The city's annual average total water use is one hundred ninety-six (196) gpcd. The average residential water use is seventy-nine (79) gpcd. The city's annual water loss is twelve and seventy-six-hundredths (12.76) percent or twenty-five (25) gpcd. 
(1)  Five (5) year conservation goals. 
a.  Reduce the average per capita day water use by 2023 with a goal of achieving one hundred ninety-two (192) gpcd. 
b.  Reduce the average residential per capita per day water use by 2023 with the goal of achieving seventy-seven (77) gpcd. 
c.  Complete reuse infrastructure to allow for additional city owned parks and sports fields to be irrigated with treated effluent. 
d.  Conduct an annual survey of scheduled portions of the water distribution system with acoustical leak detection and ultrasonic flow meter testing equipment as an extra measure in reducing water loss. 
e.  The city will work with LCRA to offer irrigation audits to residential and commercial customers. 
f.  Transition from manual meter reading to an automatic metering infrastructure (AMI) system to target water loss more effectively and increase efficiency in metering. 
g.  Reduce water loss by twenty (20) gpcd by 2023. 
(2)  Ten (10) year conservation goals. 
a.  Reduce the average total gallons per capita per day water use by 2028 with a goal of achieving one hundred eighty-nine (189) gpcd. 
b.  Reduce the average residential per capita per day water us by 2028 with a goal of achieving seventy-five (75) gpcd. 
c.  Utilize all available treated effluent for irrigation throughout the city. 
d.  Reduce water loss by eighteen (18) gpcd by 2028. 
(Ord. No. 2013-O-09B, § II, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-05A, § II, 5-1-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-O-05B, § II, 5-1-18 )  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 7-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— General authority to enact rules regulating sewage disposal, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.176. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-56. - Water closets. 
(a)  All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents for the owners, situated in any section of the city where sanitary sewer now exists, or where it may hereafter exist, and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within one hundred (100) feet of any such sewer are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and connect the same with the city sewer. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any such property owners or agents of same or occupants of such property to keep and maintain such water closet and connection thereof in good condition and free from any obstruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any privy vault above or below the ground in the city or any lot or parcel of land, the property line of which, at any point, extends to within a distance of one hundred (100) feet of a city sanitary sewer. All persons now having such privies in such localities are hereby required to abate the same within thirty (30) days after notice to do so, and to construct and to put in water closets and connect the same with the city sewer, as required by this division. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building situated on a lot extending within one hundred (100) feet of any sewer of the city, any portion of which such house is used for any purpose, during any portion of the day, to fail to have at least one (1) water closet connected with the city sewer within thirty (30) days after notice to do so, and to fail to have such water closets suitably arranged for the use as urinal, unless a separate urinal is provided. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owners and occupants of any building, situated within one hundred (100) feet of any sanitary sewer, in which such building, food is cooked or clothing is washed, to fail to have a suitable sink or hopper for the reception of waste water; provided, however, that if the water closet is of the kind suited to such use it may receive the waste water and the sink or hopper may be dispensed with. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or allow any person under his or her control to throw or deposit on the surface of the ground, or in any hole or vault, in or under the surface of the ground, on any lot reaching within one hundred (100) feet of any city sanitary sewer, except in the proper and necessary manuring of the soil, any water which has been used for domestic purposes or any liquid or solid filth, feces or urine. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause or permit anyone under his or her control to throw or deposit, in any city sewer, or in any vessel or receptacles connected with any city sewer, any garbage, hair, ashes, or refuse rags, cotton, cinders or any other matter whatsoever, except feces, urine, the necessary closet paper and liquid slops. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect all wash stands or slop stands in his or her house or yard with the city sewer, or to allow any slops, wash or waste waters of any kind to flow over the pavement or into any open gutter or into the street. 
(Ord. No. 65-O-1, §§ 1—6, 1-14-65)  
Sec. 26-57. - Maintenance of sewer lines. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of sewer lines connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city to keep such lines in good repair. When notified in writing by the city that a leak exists in his sewer line, the owner thereof shall have sixty (60) days to repair such leak. 
(b)  If after sixty (60) days' notice, a sewer line owner fails to cause his leaking sewer line to be repaired, such owner shall be billed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month thereafter for each month the leak remains, not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(c)  If after the expiration of one hundred twenty (120) days after first written notice of a sewer leakage, the owner thereof fails to make necessary repairs to stop the leak, the owner shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 81-O-9, §§ A—C, 9-8-81)  
Secs. 26-58—26-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NONDOMESTIC OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE SEWER DISCHARGES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 26, Article II, Division 2, §§ 26-71—26-95, has been deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, §§ 1—25, included herein as a new Ch. 26, Art. II, Div. 2 at the discretion of the editor. Former Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 85-04A, §§ 1—22, adopted April 9, 1905. 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative; 
B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees centigrade; 
Building sewer (also called the house lateral or house service connection) means the service line extended from the building or structure to the public sewer; 
City means the City of Marble Falls, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf; 
C.O.D. (Chemical Oxygen Demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand; 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer; 
Control point means point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer; 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce; 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater; 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is actually a weight-to-weight ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water; 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater; 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l and BOD is not more than two hundred (200) mg/l; 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a wastewater facilities in excess of its engineered design capacity; 
Person means any individual and includes any corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, or other legal entity; 
pH means the logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration; 
Public sewer means the main pipe or conduit carrying wastewater in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city; 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed; 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation; 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth on the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation; 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed; 
Storm water means rainfall or any other form of precipitation; 
Superintendent means the director of public works of the city or his duly authorized representative; 
Suspended solids (SS) means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely, removable by physical laboratory filtration; 
To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions; 
Trap is a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful materials; 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: (a) no free or emulsified grease or oil; (b) no acids or alkalis; (c) no phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in the receiving water; (d) no toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; (e) no noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; (f) no significant amount (in mg/l) of suspended solids or BOD, as determined by the Texas Water Commission; and (g) color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods; 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities; 
Wastewater means a combination of the water carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present; 
Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes; 
Wastewater treatment plant means any city owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers; 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater; and 
Watercourse means a natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 1, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-72. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment process or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this ordinance.  
Sec. 26-73. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive Chemical Oxygen Demand (C.O.D.) 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperature between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees Centigrade). 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such material; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 2-1. 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable or causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the city. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 3, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-74. - Hazardous metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  The maximum allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are given in Table Six. 
Table Five
Maximum Hazardous Metals Contaminate Levels
Metal 	Average 	Daily 
Composite 	Sample 	Grab 
Arsenic 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 	
Barium 	1.0 	2.0 	4.0 	
Cadmium 	0.05 	0.1 		0.2 
Chromium 	0.5 	1.0 	5.0 	
Copper 	0.5 	1.0 	2.0 	
Lead 	0.5 	1.0 		1.5 
Manganese 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 	
Mercury 	0.005 	0.005 	0.01 	
Nickel 	1.0 	2.0 		3.0 
Selenium 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 	
Silver 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 	
Zinc 	1.0 	2.0 	6.0 	
 
NOTE: These concentration parameters are intended to parallel the standards established by the Texas Water Commission. Any subsequent requirements developed by the commission shall apply and supercede these requirements. 
(b)  No hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers, other than types and concentrations allowed in Table Five, without a permit from the city specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. Prohibited hazardous materials include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony, 
(2)  Beryllium, 
(3)  Bismuth, 
(4)  Cobalt, 
(5)  Molybdenum, 
(6)  Uranium, 
(7)  Rhenium, 
(8)  Strontium, 
(9)  Tellurium, 
(10)  Herbicides, 
(11)  Fungicides, and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 4, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-75. - Particulate size. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimensions are prohibited. 
(b)  The city is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (¾) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 5, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-76. - Storm water and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers. 
(1)  Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage; or make any new connections from inflow sources. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the city may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 6, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-77. - Temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent to one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 7, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-78. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the city. 
(b)  The city may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, additional regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 8, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-79. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by section 26-79(a) include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, including but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than five hundred (500) mg/l, including but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamendability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The city shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Cause treatment costs to exceed those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure or feed lot residue; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 9, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-80. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the city, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Water Commission, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property, or into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The city shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 10, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-81. - Approving authority—Requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: 
(1)  Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; 
(2)  Create a hazard to life or health; or 
(3)  Create a public nuisance; 
Then the city shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The city is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The city shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 11, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-82. - Same—Review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the city shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at their own expense. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 12, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-83. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in amounts that will impede or stop the flow in the public sewers; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at their own expense and as required by the city: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the city; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 13, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-84. - Grease traps. 
When, in the judgment of the code enforcement officer, waste pretreatment is required, an approved type grease trap complying with the provisions of this section shall be installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains and other fixtures or equipment in establishments such as restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, bars and clubs, hotel, hospital, sanitarium, factory or school kitchens, or other establishments where grease may be introduced into the drainage or sewage system in quantities that can effect line stoppage or hinder sewage treatment or private sewage disposal. A grease trap is not required for individual dwelling units or for any private living quarters. 
No grease trap shall be installed which has an approved rate of flow of more than fifty-five (55) gallons per minute (3.5 L/s), nor less than twenty (20) gallons per minute (1.3 L/s), except when specially approved by the code enforcement officer. 
Each plumbing fixture or piece of equipment connected to a grease trap shall be provided with an approved type of flow control or restricting device installed in a readily accessible and visible location in the tailpiece or drain outlet of each such fixture. Flow control devices shall be so designed that the flow through such device or devices shall at no time be greater than the rated capacity of the grease trap. No flow control device having adjustable or removable parts shall be approved. 
Each grease trap required by this section shall have an approved rate of flow which is not less than that given in Table Six for the total number of connected fixtures. The total capacity in gallons (liters) of fixtures discharging into any such grease trap shall not exceed two and one-half (2½) times the certified gpm (liters per second) flow rate of the grease trap as per Table Six. 
Any grease trap installed with the inlet more than four (4) feet (1.2m) lower in elevation than the outlet of any fixture discharging into such grease trap shall have an approved rate of flow which is not less than fifty (50) percent greater than that given in Table Six. No more than four (4) separate fixtures shall be connected to or discharged into any one (1) grease trap. 
For the purpose of this section, the term "fixture" shall mean and include each plumbing fixture, appliance, apparatus or other equipment required to be connected to or discharged into a grease trap by any provision of this section. 
Table Six
Grease Traps
Total Number 
of Fixtures 
Connected 	Required Rate 
of Flow Per Minute, 
Gallons 	Grease Retention 
Capacity, 
Pounds 
1 	20 	40 
2 	25 	50 
3 	35 	70 
 
Grease Traps—Metric
Total Number 
of Fixtures 
Connected 	Required Rate 
of Flow 
(L/s) 	Grease Retention 
Capacity 
(kg) 
1 	1.26 	18.2 
2 	1.58 	22.7 
3 	2.21 	31.8 
4 	3.15 	45.5 
 
Each fixture discharging into a grease trap shall be individually trapped and vented in an approved manner. An approved type grease trap may be used as a fixture trap for a single fixture when the horizontal distance between the fixture outlet and the grease trap does not exceed four (4) feet (1.2m) and the vertical tailpipe or drain does not exceed two and one-half (2½) feet (.8m). 
Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected grease shall be introduced into any drainage piping, or public or private sewer. 
No water jacketed grease trap or grease interceptor shall be approved or installed. 
Each grease trap shall have an approved water seal of not less than two (2) inches (50.8mm) in depth or the diameter of its outlet, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 15, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-85. - Requirements for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes, shall at their own expense, and as required by the city: 
(1)  Install an accessible control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances, where needed, to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste; 
(3)  Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps, etc.) where needed; and 
(4)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 15, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-86. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. It is important to note that the particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, a 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH and oil and grease. 
(b)  Examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by the ordinance shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the city. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The city shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be sampled for flow BOD, TSS and pH at least annually. 
(e)  City may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 16, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-87. - User charge system. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the city system shall pay a charge to cover all costs of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the director of public works, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the User Charge System as established in subsection (e) of this section; 
(3)  Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the "Standard Plumbing Code (SBCCI)" as promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
(4)  A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and 
(5)  Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use. 
(c)  The city will apply excessive revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 17, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-88. - Permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a conditional discharge permit to persons already discharging at the time of adoption of this section if they: 
(1)  Submit an application within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this ordinance on forms supplied by the city; 
(2)  Secure approval by the city of plans and specifications for the facilities when required; and 
(3)  Have complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities, if required; and 
c.  Have provided sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength, when directed to do so by the city. 
(4)  Provided a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to the provisions of this ordinance and approval of the director of public works. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 18, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-89. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of enforcing this section by means of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the permittee's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond the point of having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 19, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-90. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the city; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of sections 2 through 9 as stated above. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection A-2 of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from the wastes. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 20, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-91. - Notice. 
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 21, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-92. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this division beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VI, § 22, 7-13-93)  
Secs. 26-93—26-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § II, adopted Nov. 23, 2009, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 26-111—26-113, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 79-O-05, § 1, adopted May 8, 1979; Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Arts. IV, V. 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 7-56 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-111. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases that are not defined in this section but are defined in this or other sections of the Code of Ordinances shall be given the meaning set forth in those sections. Other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meanings unless the context requires otherwise. Headings and captions are for reference purposes only, and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
City's water and sewer system means the water and sewer facilities owned or operated by the city in the provision of retail water and sewer service within the city's service area. 
City council means the City Council of the City of Marble Falls. 
City means City of Marble Falls, County of Burnet, State of Texas, and includes any official, agent or employee acting on behalf of the city. 
Commission means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successor entity. 
Customer means any person provided water or sewer service, including water treatment and distribution service, or sewage collection, treatment and disposal service, by the City of Marble Falls and its designee. 
ETJ means the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Marble Falls. 
Facilities agreement means an agreement between the city and a service applicant providing for the construction and expansion of the water and sewer system necessary to serve the property or subdivision. 
Meter means any devise used to measure water or sewage flow. 
Person means individual, corporation, organization, government or political subdivision or agency, business trust, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
Plumbing code means the International Building Code or such other codes as may be adopted by the city that are applicable to the regulation of plumbing, plumbing fixtures, cross-contamination protection, and back-flow prevention. 
Qualified service applicant means a person that has met all the applicable requirements as outlined in this chapter in order to obtain water and sewer service within the city's service area. An "applicant" is not a "qualified service applicant" unless and until he or she has met all the applicable requirements outlined in section 26-112 of this chapter. 
Sanitary sewage means the liquid and water carrying wastes discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings and other buildings. 
Service address means a specific, unique address for a location eligible to receive water and sewer service from the city, including a street name, house number, and if applicable, a building or unit identification letter or number. 
Service area means the area served by or certificated to the City of Marble Falls for provision of retail water and sewer service. 
Sewage means sanitary sewage and industrial waste, together with such infiltration water as may be present. 
Water and sewer service means retail water and sewer service provided by the city or its designee directly to the ultimate retail customer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § II, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 26-112. - Water and sewer service application requirements. 
(a)  All persons desiring retail water and sewer service from the city or desiring to transfer service from a service location to another service location shall file an application with the city at the city's designated location. No connection to the city's water and sewer system shall be made before the person has met the application, fee, and extension requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall provide water and sewer service to only qualified service applicants and no water and sewer service application shall be accepted by the city manager unless the application is submitted by a qualified service applicant. The request by a qualified service applicant shall be filled within five (5) working days unless the city and the applicant have entered into a facilities agreement. If the city and the applicant have entered into a facilities agreement, service will be provided in accordance with the facilities agreement. 
(c)  A person is a qualified service applicant if the person has met the following conditions: 
(1)  The person has submitted a completed and signed water and sewer service application to the city manager, has presented a driver's license or social security card to the city, which the city shall keep on file, and has verified that the request for service is for property the person owns or otherwise has legal control over. 
(2)  For subdividers in the city limits or ETJ of the city desiring retail water and sewer service from the city, the subdivider has complied with the city's subdivision regulations to obtain retail water and sewer service from the city for the subdivision. 
(3)  For persons required to obtain a building permit from the city, the person has paid all the required building permitting fees. 
(4)  For persons desiring water and sewer service for property or service connections located outside the city limits of the city, the person has complied with the requirements of section 26-113 of this chapter. 
(5)  The person has paid all applicable charges and fees prescribed by the city's fee schedules, including any applicable impact fees, and tapping and metering charges, all security deposits, and water and sewer connection and plumbing code inspection fees. 
(6)  The person has complied with the city's extension of water and sewer facilities requirements, if necessary, as provided by section 26-114 of this chapter and the facilities have been extended and inspected and accepted by the city. 
(7)  The person has paid all the pro rata charges as required by section 26-114 of this chapter, if applicable. 
(8)  There is water and sewer plant capacity and capacity within the water and sewer system to serve the person or development, or the person or developer has entered into a facilities agreement with the city for the expansion of the water and sewer plant or system. 
(9)  The person requesting water and sewer service has provided a service address to which water and sewer service will be provided and has agreed to provide access to the person's property so that the city can locate, construct, place, and maintain meters and other equipment necessary to connect the person's property to the city's water or sewer system. 
(10)  An inspection of the water and sewer connection has been conducted and approved by the city. 
(d)  The city manager may refuse service to a person if, at the time of the application, the person is indebted to the city for any charge, tax, or fee, or is indebted to another retail public utility for the same kind of service for which the person has applied from the city. 
(e)  No application shall be approved if the city manager determines that the requested service is for unreasonable consumer uses that will threaten or endanger the city's water and sewer system or threaten the city's ability to provide continuous and adequate service. 
(f)  To obtain sewer service from the city, the applicant must either be a current water service customer, or must request water service from the city in accordance with this section. 
(g)  Any person denied service under this article may request review of the city manager's decision. The request shall be made to the city manager, who shall place the request before the city council. The city manager may request additional information of the person denied service. The city council may grant or deny service, after review of the request, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person not employed by the city to uncover and make any connection with the water and sewer system of the city without first obtaining the consent of the city. 
(i)  The city may provide, but is not obligated to provide, water and sewer service to an applicant whose property is located outside the city's service area. If the city decides that it is in the best interest of the city to extend and provide service to a person or subdivider outside the service area, the applicant shall request in writing that the city include the applicant's property within the city's water and sewer certificates of convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § II, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 26-113. - Outside-city water and sewer service requirements. 
(a)  This section applies to any retail water and sewer service provided and requested to be provided by the city to premises that are located, in whole or in part, outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  All customers of the city's water and sewer system, including those customers located in whole or in part outside the corporate limits of the city, shall comply with the cross-contamination and backflow prevention requirements of the city. 
(c)  Any customer receiving utility services outside the city limits may not maintain connection to the city's water or sewer system or connect to the city's water or sewer system unless the customer is in compliance with the applicable city ordinances. Customers receiving water and sewer service must at all times be in compliance with state law, the city's plumbing code, the city's pretreatment requirements, and this and other city ordinances relating to the provision of water and sewer service. Any customer failing to be in compliance or refusing reasonable requests for inspection of facilities connected or to be connected to the city's utilities may be disconnected or declined services. 
(d)  The application for service to property located outside the corporate limits of the city shall include the following statement: 
THE APPLICANT UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES THAT ALL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY (AS NOW WRITTEN AND AS HEREINAFTER AMENDED) RELATING TO WATER AND SEWER SERVICE OR TO PLUMBING MATTERS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACK-FLOW PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS, AND PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS, AND INCLUDING ORDINANCES THAT IMPOSE CRIMINAL SANCTIONS, APPLY TO WATER AND SEWER SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE CITY TO PREMISES OUTSIDE OF THE CORPORATE LIMITS. THE APPLICANT ALSO UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES THAT THE CITY MAY SUSPEND OR DISCONNECT SUCH SERVICES IN THE EVENT THAT THE APPLICANT OR ANY OTHER PERSON AT THE PREMISES TO BE SERVED FAILS TO COMPLY WITH SUCH ORDINANCE. 
THE APPLICANT ALSO UNDERSTANDS THAT THE APPLICANT'S PROPERTY CONNECTED TO THE CITY'S WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM, OR BOTH, WILL BE ANNEXED BY THE CITY AT SUCH TIME THAT IT IS LEGALLY POSSIBLE FOR THE CITY TO ANNEX THE PROPERTY AND WHEN THE CITY COUNCIL DETERMINES IT TO BE IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THE CITY. 
(e)  No water and sewer service application shall be accepted by the city and no new retail water and sewer service shall be provided at premises located in whole or part outside the corporate limits of the city unless a completed and signed application is submitted to the city that meets the requirements described in section 26-112 of this chapter, and the person has complied with the following requirements: 
(1)  The person has paid the prescribed water and sewer connection and plumbing code inspection fees and impact fees if applicable, and has presented to the city managers, or his or her designee, written evidence from the appropriate plumbing official that the plumbing system at the premises to be served has been inspected by the city and is in compliance with the city's plumbing code; 
(2)  The person has complied with the city's utility facilities extension requirements as provided by section 26-114 of this chapter, if necessary; and 
(3)  The person has submitted a written request to be annexed into the corporate limits of the city. If the person's property is not contiguous to the city limits of the city, the written request must be submitted, but will not be effective, until such time as the person's property is contiguous to the city limits of the city. Such request shall be filed in the deed records and shall run with the land. 
(f)  Only applicants located outside the city limits that meet the requirement of this section will be qualified service applicants and thus eligible to obtain water or sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § II, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 26-114. - Extensions of water and sewer service. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements contained in this section, subdividers desiring retail water and sewer service from the city shall comply with the city's subdivision regulations to obtain retail water and sewer service from the city for the development and to extend the city's water and sewer system to the development. 
(b)  Upon meeting the requirements of section 26-112 of this chapter, upon payment of all applicable fees and charges due under this chapter and at the expense of the applicant and upon execution of an agreement with the city regarding the extension of facilities, the city may extend all necessary water and sewer facilities to the property plus the distance across or through the entire frontage of the property for which the application for service has been made. 
(1)  The applicant shall pay the estimated cost to extend the water and sewer facilities prior to construction. If the actual cost to extend the water and sewer mains and facilities is greater than the estimated costs, the applicant shall pay the city the difference between the actual and estimated costs upon completion of the extension project. If the applicant fails to pay the difference in the costs, the city may deny service, and take all actions legally available to it to recover the funds owed to the city. If the estimated cost to extend the water and sewer mains or facilities is greater than the actual cost, the city shall reimburse the applicant the difference between the actual and estimated costs upon completion of the extension project. If the facility is identified on the city's most recently adopted capital improvements plan for its impact fees, the applicant may be entitled to an offset or credit in accordance with section 26-159 of this Code. 
(2)  For facilities that are not identified on the city's most recently adopted capital improvements plan for its impact fees, the owners of all intervening property served by such extension shall be required to pay the pro rata charges at such time as their property is connected to the city's water and sewer system in accordance with the approved pro rata agreement. 
(c)  Upon approval of the city and execution of an agreement with the city, property owner or person requesting extension of water and sewer facilities or mains to his or her property may extend the facilities or mains by a competent and reputable contractor. 
(1)  The facilities shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive and water and sewer utility infrastructure master plans and comply with city standards and specifications, including the city's technical construction standards and specifications. Subdividers shall also comply with the city's subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Detailed construction plans for the improvements complying with the city's construction standards and specifications for public works construction shall be drawn by a registered professional engineer and approved by the city manager prior to any construction. 
(3)  The construction shall be inspected and approved prior to final acceptance by the city manager. 
(d)  The sizes of the facilities proposed to be extended shall be determined by the city in conformance with city's subdivision regulations, any comprehensive and water and sewer utility infrastructure master plans, and the city's technical construction standards and specifications. At a minimum, all water and sewer lines shall be at least eight (8) inches in diameter and must meet the minimum requirements of the city's technical construction standards and specifications. 
(e)  Unless otherwise specified in an agreement between the applicant and the city, the total costs to extend the water and sewer facilities to and across the applicant's property, the costs to construct all on-site and off-site facilities necessary to serve the property, and costs to acquire all off-site easements necessary to provide water and sewer service to the property shall be borne solely by the applicants with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The city may elect to participate in the cost to oversize the facilities. In the event the city elects to oversize facilities, prior to the extension of the facilities, the city and the applicant shall execute an agreement that defines the scope and details of the proposed extension, outlines all the regulations to which the applicant is to abide, and requires the delivery to the city clear and unencumbered title to all proposed improvements and easements before the time of acceptance by the city. The reimbursement cost will be determined by the difference in the cost to construct the facility necessary to serve the property and the cost to construct the oversized facility as determined below: 
a.  If the city constructs the oversized facility, actual low bid prices shall be obtained in accordance with city and state purchasing regulations and shall be used subject to the city's review for reasonableness. The bids shall be unit price bids for the various items of work involved and shall include prices for both the size of the facility needed to provide service to the property and the approved oversize facility. The city will make refunds, subject to the availability of funds, within thirty (30) days of acceptance of the facility. 
b.  If the person requesting extension of water and sewer facilities or mains to his or her property intends to extend the oversized facilities to his or her property as provided by paragraph (c) of this section, the person shall take at least three (3) bids on the installation of the facilities necessary to serve his or her property as specified by the city's engineer, and the larger size that will actually be installed. Copies of the bids, tabulations and figures shall be submitted to the city for review by its staff and consultants. Calculations shall delineate the total cost for installation of the oversize facilities with appurtenances, along with the cost for installing the facilities and appurtenances necessary to serve property with the differences noted for the city. If the city determines the oversizing costs are unreasonable or the person fails to submit adequate information, the city may withdraw its approval for the person to construct the facility. 
(2)  For facilities not included on the city's capital improvements plan for its impact fees, the city and the original applicant may enter into a city council-approved pro rata agreement whereby the city agrees to pay to the original applicant pro rata charges as received from applicants who desire to connect to the facilities, with the total payment not to exceed the amount of the original applicant's cost of off-site improvements, less the applicant's pro rata share. The pro rata share shall be the based on the per linear foot cost of the facility installed by the original applicant multiplied by the number of linear feet across the frontage of the property of the applicant requesting to connect to the facility. The maximum period of time for the pro rata reimbursement to the original applicant for the off-site mains shall not exceed ten (10) years. The applicant shall have no claim against the city for any expenses not reimbursed and any pro rata charges not received within ten (10) years, nor any fees received after ten (10) years. 
(3)  An applicant is not entitled to pro rata reimbursement for the construction of facilities that are identified on the city's capital improvements plan for its impact fees, but may be entitled to an offset or credit against impact fees owed in accordance with section 26-159 of this Code. 
(f)  Pro rata charges shall be collected at the time of application for water and sewer service. 
(g)  In the event that it is determined that additional land is needed for the disposal of wastewater through land application to provide service to the applicant, or that the installation of equipment or appurtenances such as pump stations, elevated or ground storage facilities, lift stations, booster pumps, or similar facilities is necessary in the area between the existing water and sewer utility facilities and the perimeter of the subdivision or property for which the water and sewer service request has been made, the city council shall, taking all circumstances into consideration, determine who shall bear the cost of such necessary land, equipment, and appurtenances, and in what proportion each party shall be liable. 
(h)  In no event will the city be required to make extensions to or to connect individuals, non-developers, or developers to the water and sewer system if there is no capacity in the water and sewer plant or systems to provide the service. The city may enter into a facilities agreement with an applicant for the expansion of the water and sewer plant and/or systems. 
(i)  In no event will the city be required to make extensions to or participate in the cost of improvements under the provisions of this section if there are no funds available, or if, at the discretion of the city, the extension or improvement is not practical, or otherwise warranted, or is for an unreasonable consumer use. 
(j)  All water and sewer utilities are owned and operated by the city. Any extensions of the city's water and sewer facilities made by a qualified service applicant or subdivider, after inspection and acceptance by the city, shall be owned by the city. 
(k)  Where recorded public utility easements in favor of the city do not exist on the property of an individual, non-developer, or subdivider who is requesting water and sewer service from the city, the individual, non-developer, or subdivider shall grant a permanent recorded public utility easement for poles, wires, conduits, drainage channels, storm water and sewers, sanitary water and sewers, water lines, gas lines, or other utilities to the city. A state-owned right-of-way does not constitute a public utility easement in favor of the city. If the applicant is required to extend service, the applicant shall obtain all necessary public utility easements in favor of and dedicated to the city for the location of all off-site facilities required to provide service to the applicant. All easements shall comply with the requirements in the city's subdivision regulations. The location of necessary easements that can not follow roadway frontage shall be approved by the city prior to construction of such water and or sewer lines. The city must be in receipt of properly executed, dedicated, and recorded easements that are in favor of the city for the applicant to be a qualified service applicant. Failure to grant the required easements shall result in the denial of service. 
(l)  A separate connection for each house or building on the property requiring water or sewer service shall be required unless the city manager approves the connection of more than one (1) building located on the single property to a single connection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § II, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 26-115. - Connection to the water and sewer system required. 
(a)  This section applies only to properties within the city limits of the city and to properties that are not subject to the city's subdivision ordinance. Subdividers shall comply with the city's subdivision ordinance regarding connection to the city's water and sewer system. 
(b)  If sewer facilities with adequate capacity require less than two hundred (200) feet of sewer facility extension to any portion of a piece of property, then no alternate sources, such as on-site sanitary sewer systems, may be constructed and the property must be connected to the city's sewer system in accordance with this article unless the property is exempted as provided in this paragraph. The following properties are exempted from this paragraph: 
(1)  On-site sanitary sewer systems existing at the time of adoption of this section shall be exempted from the requirements of this paragraph, but only if they perform adequately, do not cause a nuisance condition to exist, and meet all current state and local permit and health requirements and standards. This exemption does not apply if the on-site sanitary sewer system fails and cannot be repaired without replacement of the system, the on-site sanitary sewer system no longer complies with minimum state or local standards, or the on-site sanitary sewer system causes a nuisance condition to exist. 
(2)  Properties located in a subdivision platted prior to the effective date of this article where the use of on-site sanitary sewer systems was specifically permitted shall be exempt from the requirements of this paragraph. This exemption does not apply if the on-site sanitary sewer system fails and cannot be repaired without replacement of the system, the on-site sanitary sewer system no longer complies with minimum state or local standards, or the on-site sanitary sewer system causes a nuisance condition to exist. 
(3)  Table 1 identifies who is and who is not required to connect to the city's wastewater system. 
Table 1 
CONNECTION TO THE SEWER SYSTEM 
Types of Properties 	Connection Required 
For properties within 200 feet of the existing systems 	Inside city 	Outside city 
No septic system 	The property owner has or intends to construct a building suitable for human occupancy and the project does not trigger the subdivision regulations. 	Yes 	No 
	The person's project triggers the city's subdivision ordinance 	Yes 	Yes 
	The property is located in a subdivision platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance where the use of on-site sanitary sewer systems was specifically permitted. 	No 	No 
Existing septic systems that functions properly and meet current state standards 	The property owner has or intends to construct a building suitable for human occupancy and the project does not trigger the subdivision regulations. 	No 	No 
	The person's project triggers the city's subdivision ordinance 	Yes 	Yes 
Existing septic system that does not function properly or meet current state standards 	The property owner has or intends to construct a building suitable for human occupancy and the project does not trigger the subdivision regulations. 	Yes 	No 
	The person's project triggers the city's subdivision ordinance 	Yes 	Yes 
For properties more than 200 feet from the existing system 		
No septic system 	The property owner has or intends to construct a building suitable for human occupancy and the project does not trigger the subdivision regulations. 	No 	No 
	The person's project triggers the city's subdivision ordinance 	Yes 	Yes 
Existing septic systems that functions properly and meet current state standards 	The property owner has or intends to construct a building suitable for human occupancy and the project does not trigger the subdivision regulations. 	No 	No 
	The person's project triggers the city's subdivision ordinance 	Yes 	Yes 
Existing septic system that does not function properly or meet current state standards 	The property owner has or intends to construct a building suitable for human occupancy and the project does not trigger the subdivision regulations. 	No 	No 
	The person's project triggers the city's subdivision ordinance 	Yes 	Yes 
 
(c)  Every new building intended for human habitation or occupancy shall be connected to the water system by the owner or agent of the premises in accordance with this chapter. All existing buildings or structures intended for human habitation or occupancy located on property that is abutting a new or replaced water line installed after the adoption of this article shall be connected to the water system by the owner or agent of the premises in accordance with this article. The city shall notify the property owners whose properties must be connected to the city's water system that the property owner must apply to connect to the city's water system within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of the notification. Such notice shall also state that, upon failure of the property owner or occupant to connect to the city's water system within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the notice, the city will connect the property to the city's water system, and will charge the cost and expense incurred by the city to connect the property to the water system shall be charged to the owner of such property, and that the city may place a lien on such property for those costs and expenses, may institute suit against the owner to collect the costs incurred by the city, and may undertake other measures within the city's authority to recover the costs. The notice provided for in this section shall be in writing and either served personally or sent by letter addressed to the owner of such property at the address of the property, or at the address as identified by the appraisal district. Table 2 identifies who is and who is not required to connect to the city's water system. 
Table 2 
CONNECTION TO THE WATER SYSTEM 
Type of Property 	Connection Required 
	Inside City Limits 	Outside City Limits 
New building intended for human habitation or occupancy. 	Yes 	No 
Existing building located on a water line that existed at the time the Ordinance was adopted. 	No 	No 
Existing building located on a new or replaced water line that was constructed after the ordinance was adopted. 	Yes 	No 
The person's project triggers the city's subdivision ordinance. 	Yes 	Yes 
 
(d)  Properties required to connect to the city's water system may continue to use existing water wells exclusively for irrigation purposes provided however that the well is permitted through the city's inspection department, has all of the necessary state and local permits or registrations, and there are no cross-connections between the water well and the city's water system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § II, 11-23-2009)  
Secs. 26-116—26-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RATES AND CHARGES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 26-126—26-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER AND SEWER[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 26, Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 26-136—26-142, has been deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Arts. I—V, VII of Ord. No. 93-O-7A, adopted July 13, 1993, included herein as a new Ch. 26, Art. V, Div. 2 at the discretion of the editor. Former Ch. 26, Art. V, Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 81-O-5A, §§ 2—9, adopted May 26, 1981; Ord. No. 84-O-9, § I, adopted Sept. 11, 1984; Ord. No. 85-O-12E, §§ 1—6, adopted Dec. 17, 1985; Ord. No. 86-O-8, § 1, adopted Aug. 14, 1986; Ord. No. 86-O-10, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 1986; Ord. No. 86-O-11, § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 1986; Ord. No. 86-O-12D, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1986 and Ord. No. 88-O-11A, § 1, adopted Nov. 29, 1988. 
 
Sec. 26-136. - Water service. 
(1)  Residential and commercial customers shall be charged the minimum monthly rates per metered water connection as set out in the master fee schedule, appendix C. These charges are levied in accordance with the size of the meter serving the customer and the type of customer. 
(2)  All water usage will be billed as described in the master fee schedule, appendix C based on the total consumption. There are zero (0) gallons of water included in the minimum base charge. 
(3)  The minimum fees shown in Table One shall be charged whether the customer actually uses the services or not. 
(4)  Users outside the city limits will be charged the same rates as specified by all applicable water and sewer fees. 
(5)  There will be no minimum monthly water charges as shown in the master fee schedule, appendix C for sprinkler usage, provided that same occupant has current residential or commercial water as outlined in subsection (2). Sprinkler usage will be billed as described in the master fee schedule, appendix C based on the total consumption. 
(6)  Water rates for the sale of bulk water will be at the rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. The purchaser is responsible for providing a container approved for transportation of the water. The sale of bulk water will not be allowed for resale purpose to residents outside the city limits once Stage 3 is reached or any stage beyond that, under the drought contingency plan. The hours of operation for purchasing bulk water from the City of Marble Falls Public Works Facility are between 8:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. I, § 1, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 2004-O-8H, §§ I, II, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-9B, §§ I—III, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-O-9B, §§ I, II, 9-24-2007; Ord. No. 2009-O-9B, § I, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § IV, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 2010-O-09B, § I, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 2012-O-08E, § II, 9-4-2012; Ord. No. 2013-O-09A, § II, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 2016-O-10A, § II, 10-18-2016 )  
Sec. 26-137. - Water deposits. 
(a)  Each and every metered service shall require the minimum deposit as described in the master fee schedule, appendix C. 
(b)  Deposits will be accepted only in the form of cash, credit card payment, money order, or personal, cashier's, or certified check. 
(c)  After the due process on any delinquent bills, as described in sections 26-139 and 26-140, the user's deposit, or part thereof as may be necessary, will be applied to any delinquent city utility service charges, with all water and sewer service charges satisfied in full with any balance remaining going toward other service charges. In the event such application of the deposit is necessary, or if the customer has ever had three (3) months of delinquent payments in any consecutive twelve-month period, a new deposit of twice the past average monthly bill for that customer or account may be required before service can be continued, reinstated, or granted, to such customer or account at any location. The amount of such deposit shall be due and payable before service will be provided to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. I, § 2, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-O-9B, §§ IV, V, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § V, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 2017-O-08H, § II, 9-5-2017 ; Ord. No. 2018-O-10C , § I, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 26-138. - Sewer service. 
(a)  All residential and commercial customers shall be charged a minimum base charge as set out in the master fee schedule, appendix C. This minimum fee shall be charged irrespective of whether or not the customer used any water or not. 
(b)  Sewer service for residential customers shall be billed per one thousand (1,000) gallons based on the "winter average" usage. The "winter average" is calculated on the amount of water used from November 16 through February 16. 
(c)  The sewer service charge for all commercial customers shall be billed per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used per month for each and every month with no "winter averaging." 
(d)  Customers who pay all of the necessary fees for an additional and separate water meter for lawn irrigation use will not be required to pay any sewer service on water used through that meter, so long as the additional meter is not be used for any purpose other than irrigation. 
(e)  "Master meter" systems (where one (1) entity serves many others through one (1) meter will only be allowed in the situations listed in Table Three and shall be billed for the minimum sewer as described, with no "winter averaging." 
Table Three
Master Meter Minimum Base Charges 
ENTITY DESCRIPTION: NUMBER OF MINUMUMS TO BE CHARGED 
(1)  Apartment buildings and mobile home parks: Each unit or space available shall be considered 0.50 normal residential minimums with no regard for the number of units or spaces actually occupied. 
(2)  Recreational vehicle parks: Each space available shall be considered .015 normal commercial minimums, with no regard for the number of spaces actually occupied. 
(3)  Hotels and Motels: Every available rental room will be considered 0.15 normal commercial minimums, with no regard for the number of rooms actually occupied. 
(4)  Hospitals, schools, and churches: Every lavatory, toilet, or urinal and shower bath shall be considered 0.10 normal commercial minimums. 
(5)  Strip centers: Each business unit located in the center shall be charged the commercial minimum. 
(6)  Malls and office buildings: Each fixture connected to the sewer will be considered 0.25 normal commercial minimums. 
(7)  New construction and remodeling (unoccupied): Shall be considered to be on [one] (1) minimum for water (and sewer when applicable). Solid waste shall be negotiated separately. 
(8)  Other (not listed above): To be established on a case by case basis by the city manager and the finance director. 
Note: In all the above cases, the total units will be rounded up to the next whole number. All normal minimums are at the rates listed in the master fee schedule, appendix C. 
(f)  Customers beyond the city limits shall be charged at the same rate as specified by all applicable sewer fees. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. I, § 3, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 97-O-7A, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 2004-O-8H, § III, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 2006-O-9B, § VI, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2010-O-09B, § III, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-O-10A, § II, 10-18-2016 )  
Sec. 26-139. - Billing date. 
Bills shall be mailed on or about the first day of each month. The billing date shall be the date of mailing. The failure of the user to receive any such bill shall in no way relieve the user of the duty to pay for the service rendered. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. I, § 4, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-140. - Due date. 
(a)  All bills for water and/or sewer services are due on or before the fifteenth day of each month. 
(b)  If payment is not made by the due date, the bill shall be considered delinquent and the city shall promptly mail a second written notice to the nonpaying user stating the amount owed. Delinquent bills shall be charged a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the delinquent bill. 
(c)  If payment is not made within ten (10) days after the second notification, or if arrangements for payment have not been made, the services shall be disconnected. Arrangements must be made prior to the disconnection date. Disconnects will not be made on the last working day before a holiday or the last day of the week except in an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. I, § 5, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-O-9B, § VII, 9-25-2006)  
Sec. 26-141. - Disconnected services. 
No disconnected services shall be reinstated until all charges, including past due amount, penalties and reconnection fees have been paid in full. A reconnection fee will be charged as set out in the master fee schedule, appendix C. After hours reconnections may be performed by an authorized on-call person, who will be responsible for obtaining permission and signature to indicate acceptance of the fee set out in the master fee schedule, appendix C. After hours reconnects should occur only in an extreme situation. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. I, § 6, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-O-9B, § VIII, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2016-O-10A, § II, 10-18-2016 )  
Sec. 26-142. - Adjustments. 
The chief financial officer or the accounting supervisor are authorized to extend the billing for water and sewer to those customers who have had excessive consumption of water due to line breaks or other causes not the fault of the customer. The customer must provide proof of repairs; i.e. statement from repair person or invoice showing cost of items purchased to make the repair. The additional water consumed due to leakage will be adjusted or credited from the customer's account, in a manner which is consistent with city policy. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. I, § 7, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-O-9B, § IX, 9-25-2006)  
Sec. 26-143. - Tap and connection fees. 
(a)  Fees. The tap fees and connection fees shown below shall be charged as stated in the master fee schedule, appendix C. These fees are non-refundable. 
(1)  Water fees. Water fees are composed of a tap fee and a connect fee. Tap fees shall be charged for each actual water tap in the city's system. In addition, a connect fee shall be charged for each individual meter (as outlined in subsection (1)b.) and each master meter (as outlined in subsection (1)c.) 
a.  Water tap fees. All taps existing in-service water mains will be made by the city. Contractor taps will be permitted on the installation of new water mains only, which shall be inspected by the city. 
b.  Water connection fee (individually metered). This fee shall be charged as set in the master fee schedule, appendix C to each individually metered customer at the time they are connected to the city water system. The fee is based upon the size of the meter. A separately metered irrigation system shall be charged and additional connection fee. 
c.  Water connection fee (master meter). Each master meter shall be charged as set in the master fee schedule, appendix C. Hotels and Motels are the only exception. These master meters shall be charged one (1) connection fee for every seven (7) rooms. This fee shall be collected at the time they are connected to the water system. A separately metered irrigation system shall be charged an additional connection fee. 
(2)  Wastewater fees. Wastewater fees are composed of a tap fee and connect fee. Tap fees shall be charged for each actual wastewater tap into the city's system. In addition, a connect fee shall be charged for each individual meter and master meter (as outlined in subsection b. below) 
a.  Wastewater tap fee. All taps to existing in-service wastewater mains will be made by the city. Contractor taps will be permitted on the installation on new wastewater mains only, which shall be inspected by the city. 
b.  Wastewater connection fee. A wastewater connection fee shall be charged for each individually metered (water) connection. Master meters shall be charged a sewer connection fee for each minimum as calculated by Table Three, "Master Meter Minimum Base Charges", in section 26-138. Paragraph (3), Hotels and Motels, in Table Three shall be the only exception. These master meters shall be charged one connection fee for every seen rooms. 
Tap Size 	City Installed 	Contractor Installed 
(New Developments) 
4" 	$800.00 	$125.00 
6" 	$1,000.00 	$200.00 
If Tap requires a Manhole: Actual Cost of Materials 
 
(b)  The fee for replacement or exchange of existing taps and meters, when requested by the customer, shall be as stated in subsection (a)(1)a. and/or b. or the cost of labor and materials, whichever is higher. 
(c)  All taps, water, and wastewater, to existing in service mains, shall be made by the city. All water valves, existing or new, will be operated (opened or closed) by city employees only. 
(d)  A ¾-inch tap may only serve one meter. Larger taps may serve no more than two (2) meters. 
(e)  New water/wastewater mains and appurtenances installed by a developer, or his contractor, shall provide a separate water and wastewater stub out to each lot. Before beginning construction the developer shall pay all associated tap (inspection) fees and obtain a permit through the public works department. 
(f)  City installed taps to existing in-service water and wastewater mains, and all water or wastewater connections, may be requested only for a specific location and shall be issued only in conjunction with a building permit. The specific type of use for the tap, such as residential, commercial, office, industrial, etc. must be stated in the application. 
(g)  Only water meters owned and installed by the city shall be utilized to determine a customer's water and wastewater usage. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. II, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 95-O-11E, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2010-O-02A, 2-22-2010; Ord. No. 2016-O-10A, § II, 10-18-2016 )  
Sec. 26-144. - General conditions. 
In all cases, except as herein noted, the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  Each service installed or connected or reconnected must have a controlled stop valve on the customers side of the meter in the service line. 
(2)  Any water or sewer service provided to any residence, any business or commercial entity, any industry, and/or any other type of separate entity, (even to one on the same tract of land as an existing facility or entity) shall only be through a separate metered service for each entity, facility, store, residence, business, or establishment. Existing services cannot be extended to service any other facility or entity. With prior approval by, and solely at the discretion of the city manager and finance director, an apartment complex, office complex, strip center, mall, hospital, hotel, motel, school, church, mobile home park, or recreational vehicle park, may be exempted from this requirement. Connections existing at the time of adoption of this section will be allowed to remain, but may not be changed, expanded, or upgraded without coming into compliance with this section. The rates for prior existing connections and for those permitted above shall be the either appropriate monthly fees stated herein, or as per Table Three, Number (8), if not otherwise covered. 
(3)  City maintenance of the water service ends at the customer side of the connection to the water meter itself. City maintenance of the sewer service ends where the property line clean out is installed. 
(4)  Criminal charges will be filed by the city on all illegal taps or illegal connections. Before any further service will be provided to the party or parties so convicted, all fines assessed by the court of jurisdiction must be paid in full. 
(5)  The city will allow "courtesy hookups" and must be scheduled for Monday through Friday. This is a free water service connection covering a maximum of three days and allowing for the use of no more than one thousand (1,000) gallons of water. The purpose of this hookup is a one-time service, per occupant, to facilities being prepared for sale or some similar set of circumstances. One-day notice of such a request is required and a deposit for such service may be required. 
(6)  There will be a thirty-dollar ($30.00) service charge for returned checks. 
(7)  New taps shall only be located on the city's dedicated street or alley rights-of-way. 
(8)  Payments for rates, fees, and charges for water and sewer services described in this article will be accepted only in the form of cash, credit card payment, money order, or personal, cashier's, or certified check. Payments made through use of a credit card shall incur an additional fee as set out in the Master Fee Schedule, Appendix "C", which may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. III, 7-13-93; Ord. No. 2006-O-9B, § X, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § VI, 11-23-2009; Ord. No. 2018-O-10C , § II, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 26-145. - Fines. 
(a)  Any person who shall be convicted of violating any part of Ordinance No. 93-O-7A, adopted July 13, 1993, may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person violating this division. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VII, § 1, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-146. - Failure to pay. 
In addition to sanctions provided for by this division, the city may impose sanctions provided by other ordinances or the city for failure to pay the bill for water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste removal services when due. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VII, § 2, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-147. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against any person who negligently, willfully or maliciously causes loss or damage to the public water and sewer systems or treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 93-O-7A, Art. VII, § 3, 7-13-93)  
Sec. 26-148. - Volunteer emergency services fees. 
(a)  The volunteer emergency services (VES) fees include as a voluntary contribution on water bills shall be increased to three ($3.00) dollars (one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for support of the volunteer fire rescue department and one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for support of the volunteer EMS). 
(b)  The fee shall appear on the monthly utility services bill sent to all water customers of the City of Marble Falls. 
(c)  The payment of this fee shall be voluntary. No penalty or sanction of any kind shall be applied to any customer's bill for non-payment of the voluntary fee. 
(Ord. No. 2003-O-9D, § 1, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Secs. 26-149, 26-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER AND SEWER IMPACT FEES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Section II of Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, amended Div. 3, §§ 26-151—26-157, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-O-5C, adopted May 23, 2000. 
 
Sec. 26-151. - Short title. 
This division shall be known and cited as the "Marble Falls Impact Fee Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-152. - Purpose. 
This division is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each development to pay its share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-153. - Authority. 
This division is adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395 and the city Charter. The provisions of this division shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this division. Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution, or otherwise to implement and administer this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-154. - Definitions. 
Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this division. 
Capital improvement means either a water facility or a wastewater facility with a life expectancy of three (3) or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the city. 
Capital improvements advisory committee means the city's planning and zoning commission, together with such ad hoc representatives as may be appointed from time to time to fulfill the composition requirements mandated by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.058. 
City means the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
Credit means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payments or charges for the same type of capital improvements for which the fee has been assessed. 
Exempt development means new development that does not request and does not require water or wastewater service from the city, is exempted under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.022(b), or that receives a valid building permit before September 8, 2009. 
Exhibit 1 is the Development Impact Fee Study, which contains the adopted land use assumptions and the water and wastewater capital improvement plans, and is adopted by reference [Ord. No. 2008-O-07I]. 
Facilities expansion means either a water facility expansion or a wastewater facility expansion. 
Final plat approval or approval of a final plat means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval and the plat has been released for filing with the county. 
Impact fee means either a fee for water facilities or a fee for wastewater facilities imposed on new development by the city pursuant to this division in order to generate revenue to fund or recoup all or part of the costs of capital improvements or facility expansion necessitated by and attributable to such new development. Impact fees do not include the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or the construction of such improvements, imposed pursuant to the city's zoning or subdivision regulations, nor do impact fees include fees placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing developers for oversizing or constructing water or wastewater mains, or pro rata fees for reimbursement of the city's costs for extending water or wastewater mains. Impact fees also do not include charges for water or wastewater services to a wholesale customer such as a water district, political subdivision of the state, or other wholesale utility customer. 
Impact fee capital improvements plan means either a water improvements plan or a wastewater improvements plan adopted or revised pursuant to these impact fee regulations. 
Land use assumptions means the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the impact fee capital improvements plans are based. 
New development means a project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land, which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval and filing with the city of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the city's water or wastewater system, and which has not been exempted from these regulations by provisions herein. 
Nonexempt development means all new development that is not defined herein as exempt development. 
Offset means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to fairly reflect the value of system facilities pursuant to rules herein established or council-approved administrative guidelines, provided by a developer pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations or requirements. 
Plat has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. "Plat" includes replat. 
Property owner means any person, corporation, legal entity or agent thereof having a legal or equitable interest in the land for which an impact fee becomes due. "Property owner" includes the developer for the new development. 
Recoupment means the imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has previously oversized to serve new development. 
Service area means either a water service area or a wastewater service area as identified in Figure 2 of the city's development impact fee study [Ord. No. 2008-O-07I] and within the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, within which impact fees for capital improvements or facility expansion may be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended for those types of improvements or expansions identified in the type of capital improvements plan applicable to the service area. 
Service unit means, for water or wastewater facilities, a living unit equivalent based upon a three-quarter-inch positive displacement water meter, which serves as the standardized measure of consumption, use or generation attributable to the new unit of development. 
Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of water or wastewater facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the impact fees capital improvements plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under subdivision or other applicable regulations. 
System facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. System facility may include a capital improvement which is located offsite, or within or on the perimeter of the development site. 
Water facility means a water transmission line or main, pump station, storage tank, water supply facility, treatment facility or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's water storage or distribution system. Water facility includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. Water facility excludes site-related facilities. 
Water facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water improvement to serve existing development. 
Water improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities impact fees pursuant to this division. 
Water meter means a device for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for domestic or for irrigation purposes. 
Wastewater facility means a wastewater interceptor or main, lift station, treatment facility or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's collection and transmission system for wastewater. Wastewater facility includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. Wastewater facility excludes a site-related facility. 
Wastewater facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing sewer facility to serve existing development. 
Wastewater improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of wastewater facilities fees pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-02B, § II, 2-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-O-10B, § VI, 11-23-2009)  
Sec. 26-155. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division concerning water and wastewater impact fees apply to all new, nonexempt development within the corporate boundaries of the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The provisions of this division apply uniformly within water and wastewater service areas. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-156. - Impact fee as condition of development approval. 
No application for new development shall be approved within the city without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this division, and no building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated hereinunder, unless a different time and/or method of payment has been authorized by agreement between the city and the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-157. - Assessment of impact fees. 
(a)  Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as follows: 
(1)  For new development which has received a final plat prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, and for which no valid building permit is issued on or before the one-year anniversary of such date, the impact fee shall be assessed at the time application is made for the building permit or utility connection, whichever comes first. 
(2)  For land which is unplatted at the time of application for a building permit or utility connection, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit or utility connection, whichever first occurs. 
(3)  For a new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, or for which replatting results in an increase in the number of service units after such date, assessment of impact fees shall be at the time of final plat approval. 
(b)  Following assessment of the impact fee pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the impact fee assessment per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval or other development application that results in approval of additional service units. 
(c)  Following the vacating of any plat or submittal of any replat, a new assessment must be made in accordance with subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(d)  Approval of an amended plat pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 212.016 and the city's subdivision regulations is not subject to reassessment for an impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2009-O-02B, § III, 2-23-2009)  
Sec. 26-158. - Computation of impact fee; payment and collection of impact fees. 
(a)  Impact fees shall be collected at the time the city issues a building permit for land within the corporate limits, or at the time an application for an individual water meter connection to the city's water or wastewater system is filed, for land located outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The city may enter into an agreement with a developer for a different time and manner of payment of impact fees, in which case the agreement shall determine the time and manner of payment. 
(c)  The city shall compute the impact fees for the new development in the following manner: 
(1)  The number of service units shall be calculated based upon the size of meter using Table 1 below. 
Table 1. Service Unit Equivalency Table 
Meter Size (1) 	Maximum Continuous 
Operating Capacity 
(GPM) (2) 	Service Unit Equivalent 
¾" PD (3) 	15 	1.0 
1" PD 	25 	1.7 
1 ½" PD 	50 	3.3 
2" PD 	80 	5.3 
2" Compound 	80 	5.3 
2" Turbine 	100 	6.7 
3" Compound 	160 	10.7 
3" Turbine 	240 	16.0 
4" Compound 	250 	16.7 
4" Turbine 	420 	28.0 
6" Compound 	500 	33.3 
6" Turbine 	920 	61.3 
8" Compound 	800 	53.3 
8" Turbine 	1,600 	106.7 
10" Turbine 	2,500 	166.7 
 
(1)  PD = Positive Displacement Meter 
(2)  Operating Capacities per American Water Works Association C-700-02 
(3)  Typical SF Residential Meter, City of Marble Falls 
(2)  The amount of each impact fee shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units generated by the new development by the impact fee per service unit for the service area. 
(3)  The amount of each impact fee shall be reduced by any allowable offsets or credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in section 26-159. 
(4)  The total amount of the impact fees for the new development shall be calculated and attached to the development application or request for connection as a condition of approval. 
(d)  The amount of each impact fee for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the fee assessed per service unit pursuant to section 26-157 by the number of service units generated by the development. 
(e)  If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees shall be computed with credits for previous payment of fees being applied against the new fees due. 
(f)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined as provided in this section, and such additional fee shall be collected at the times prescribed by this section. 
(g)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, no impact fee may be collected for a new development which was platted prior to the effective date of these regulations and for which a building permit was issued prior to such effective date or within one (1) year thereof; provided that a building permit that expires or is withdrawn for such development shall be subject to collection of impact fees in accordance with this section. 
(h)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, no impact fees may be charged within the service area identified in Figure 2 of Exhibit 1 [Ord. No. 2008-O-07I] that is located outside the corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city unless the property owner and the city agree to the imposition of such a charge by contract in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.011(c). 
(i)  For purposes of determining water impact fees, no additional service units are attributable to the addition of a separate irrigation meter if the irrigation meter is the same size as or smaller than the existing meter. If a larger irrigation is installed, the water meter shall be the difference between that of the existing meter and that of the irrigation meter. 
(j)  In determining the number of service units for wastewater impact fees, no service units will be attributed to irrigation meters. 
(k)  No fee shall be assessed or collected for the water meters used exclusively for interior sprinkler systems used for fire safety measures. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-159. - Offsets and credits against impact fees. 
(a)  If the city requires, as a condition of development approval, or otherwise enters into an agreement with a developer, to have the developer construct, fund, or otherwise contribute toward the cost of a capital improvement or facility expansion included in the adopted water or wastewater capital improvements plan, the city shall provide for reimbursement in the form of credits against impact fees that would otherwise be due from the development. Such credits shall run with the land and shall be used to reduce the amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be owed at the time of collection of impact fees. 
(b)  All offsets or credits against impact fees shall be based upon standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines, including the following standards: 
(1)  No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities. 
(2)  No offset or credit shall be given for an oversized facility which is not identified within the applicable impact fees capital improvements plan, unless the city agrees that such improvement supplies capacity to new developments other than the development paying the impact fee and provisions for offsets or credits are incorporated in an agreement for capital improvements pursuant to section 26-167. 
(3)  In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for an offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to these impact fee regulations or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvements, unless expressly agreed to by the city in writing. 
(4)  The city may participate in the costs of a system improvement to be dedicated to the city, including costs that exceed the amount of the impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvements, in accordance with policies and rules established under the city's subdivision regulations. The amount of any offset shall not include the amount of the city's participation. 
(c)  Offsets or credits created after the effective date of this division shall expire within ten (10) years from the date the offset or credit was created. Offsets or credits arising prior to such effective date shall expire ten (10) years from such effective date. 
(d)  Unless an agreement for capital improvements is executed providing for a different manner of offsetting or crediting impact fees due, an offset or credit shall be applied to reduce an impact fee at the time the impact fee is collected. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-160. - Establishment of accounts. 
(a)  The city's finance department shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each service area for each category of capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this division. Each impact fee collected within the service area shall be deposited in such account. 
(b)  Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be used solely for the purposes authorized in section 26-161. 
(c)  The city's finance department shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in section 26-161. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this division; provided, however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten (10) years from the date the fee is deposited into the account. 
(d)  The city's finance department shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended from each service area. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The city may establish a fee for copying services. 
(e)  The finance department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for said account which shall show the source and disbursement of all funds placed in or expended by such account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-161. - Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts. 
(a)  The impact fees collected for each service area pursuant to these regulations may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital improvements or facility expansion identified in the applicable capital improvements plan for the service area, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facility expansions. Impact fees also may be used to pay fees actually contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant for preparation of or updating the impact fee capital improvements plan. 
(b)  Impact fees collected pursuant to this division shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses: 
(1)  Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified in the applicable capital improvements plan; 
(2)  Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansion; 
(3)  Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; 
(4)  Upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing capital improvements to serve existing development to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or regulatory standards; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements generated by new development; or 
(5)  Administrative and operating costs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-162. - Appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the city council: 
(1)  The applicability of an impact fee to the development; 
(2)  The amount of the impact fee due; 
(3)  The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of an offset or credit; 
(4)  The application of an offset or credit against an impact fee due; 
(5)  The amount of the impact fee in proportion to the benefit received by the new development; or 
(6)  The amount of a refund due, if any. 
(b)  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the offset or credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for determining offsets or credits. 
(c)  The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city within thirty (30) days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other security satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-163. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to these regulations, which has not been expended within the service area within ten (10) years from the date of payment, shall be refunded to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 302.002, or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted within sixty (60) days after the expiration of the ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. An impact fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out basis. 
(b)  An impact fee collected pursuant to these regulations shall also be considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements or facility expansion authorized in section 26-161 within the service area within ten (10) years following the date of payment exceed the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements or expansions during such period. 
(c)  Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to these regulations shall be refunded if: 
(1)  Existing service is available and service is denied; 
(2)  Service was not available when the fee was collected and the city has failed to commence construction of facilities to provide service within two (2) years of fee payment; or 
(3)  Service was not available when the fee was collected and has not subsequently been made available within a reasonable period of time considering the type of capital improvement or facility expansion to be constructed, but in any event later than five (5) years from the date of fee payment. 
(d)  If a refund is due pursuant to subsection (a), (b) or (c), the city shall divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-164. - Rebates. 
(a)  If a tract of land for which an impact fee has been paid is replatted, resulting in a reduction in the number of service units, and the new impact fee to be collected is less than that paid, the city shall rebate the difference, provided that water meters to serve the development have not been installed. 
(b)  If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, no tap purchases for that category of capital improvements have been made to the development, and a modified or new application has not been filed within six (6) months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid. If no application for rebate pursuant to this subsection has been filed within this period, no rebate shall become due. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-165. - Updates to plans and revision of fees. 
(a)  The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every five (5) years, commencing from the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in accordance with the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395, or in any successor statute. If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a), the city council determines that no change to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such update by following the procedures in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.0575. 
(b)  The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors such as market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) to determine whether the land use assumptions and capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-166. - Functions of capital improvements advisory committee. 
(a)  The capital improvements advisory committee shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  Review the capital improvements plans and file written comments on impact fees; 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plans; 
(4)  Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plans and impact fees; and 
(5)  File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the capital improvements plans and identifying perceived inequities in implementing the plans or administering the impact fees. 
(b)  The city shall make available to the capital improvements advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the capital improvements plans. 
(c)  The capital improvements advisory committee shall follow the procedural rules applicable to the city's planning and zoning commission in carrying out its duties and any procedural requirements described in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395 applicable to the committee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-167. - Agreement for capital improvements. 
(a)  An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan, if required or authorized by the city, by entering into an agreement with the city prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The agreement shall identify the estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement be designed and completed to city standards and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the city. The agreement shall provide for the method to be used to determine the amount of the offset or credit to be given against impact fees due for the development. 
(b)  The city and such owner either may agree that the costs incurred or funds advanced will be offset or credited against the impact fees otherwise due from the new development, or they may agree that the city shall reimburse the owner for such costs from impact fees paid from other new developments which will use such capital improvements or facility expansions, or from other funding sources. In the event that the city elects to reimburse an owner for the dedication, construction or financing of a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, the terms of reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by subsection (a). Reimbursement agreements shall further be based on the availability of city funds from all sources including current and projected impact fee fund accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-168. - Use of other financing mechanisms. 
(a)  The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansions designated in the capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public utility districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of impact fees. 
(b)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. 
(c)  The city council may decide that the city shall pay all or a part of impact fees due for a new development pursuant to duly adopted criteria. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-169. - Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation. 
(a)  Impact fees established by these regulations are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits, the sale of water or wastewater taps, or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. 
(b)  This division shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, and improvement standards and requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 26-170. - Relief procedures. 
(a)  Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may petition the city council to determine whether any duty required by this division has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the duty be performed within sixty (60) days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required pursuant to the ordinance and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within sixty (60) days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. This subsection is not applicable to matters which may be appealed pursuant to section 26-162. 
(b)  The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this division, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to the ordinance, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the property. 
(c)  If the city council grants a variance to the amount of the impact fee due for a new development under this section, it may cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the impact fee to the account for the service area in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008)  
[Secs. 26-171—26-176. - Reserved.]  
Sec. 26-177. - Water and wastewater service area. 
(a)  There is hereby established a water service area and a wastewater service area, constituting land within the city limits and within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as depicted in Figures 1 and 2 of Exhibit A, "2018 Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Update" attached to the ordinance from which this division derives and is incorporated by reference herein. 
(b)  The boundaries of the water service area and the wastewater service area may be amended from time to time or new water and wastewater benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 395. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2013-O-08C, § II, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-09A , § II, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 26-178. - Land use assumptions. 
The land use assumptions for the City in Exhibit A, "2018 Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Update," attached to the ordinance from which this division derives is incorporated by reference herein are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2013-O-08C, § III, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-09A , § III, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 26-179. - Water and wastewater capital improvements plans. 
(a)  The capital improvements plans for water and wastewater for the city in Exhibit A, "2018 Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Update" attached to this ordinance from which this division derives is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference herein. 
(b)  The water improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 395. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2013-O-08C, § IV, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-09A , § III, 9-18-2018)  
Sec. 26-180. - Water and wastewater impact fees. 
(a)  The impact fee per service unit for water facilities is two thousand seven hundred sixty-one dollars ($2,761.00). The impact fee shall not be applicable to secondary water meters installed specifically for fire lines or irrigation lines provided the meter does not exceed the size of the water meter for the primary service. 
(b)  The impact fee per service unit for wastewater facilities is three thousand two hundred ninety-three dollars ($3,293.00). 
(c)  The impact fee per service unit for water and wastewater shall correlate to the meter size(s) specified within Exhibit A, "Table 11 and 12 - 2018 Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Update." 
(d)  The impact fees per service unit for water and wastewater facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 395. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-08D, § II, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 2013-O-08C, § V, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 2018-O-09A , § IV, 9-18-2018)  
Secs. 26-181—26-189. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2008-O-10D, adopted Oct. 27, 2008, enacted provisions designated as §§ 26-160—26-166. In as much as there already exists sections so designated, at the discretion of the editor and to avoid duplicate numbers, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 26-190—26-196. 
 
Sec. 26-190. - Program adoption. 
The City of Marble Falls, Texas ("city") developed this identity theft prevention program ("program") pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's Red Flags Rule ("Rule"), which implements Section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003. 16 C. F. R. § 681.2. This program was developed for the utility department of the city ("utility") with oversight and approval by the city council. After consideration of the size and complexity of the utility's operations and account systems, and the nature and scope of the utility's activities, the city council determined that this program was appropriate for the city's utility. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-10D, § II, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 26-191. - Purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Establish an identity theft prevention program. To establish an identity theft prevention program designed to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of a covered account or an existing covered account and to provide for continued administration of the program in compliance with Part 681 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations implementing Sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003. 
(b)  Establishing and fulfilling requirements of the red flags rule. 
(1)  The red flags rule ("rule") defines "identity theft" as "fraud committed using the identifying information of another person" and a "red flag" ("red flag") as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
(2)  Under the rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an "identity theft prevention program" tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. The program must contain reasonable policies and procedures to: 
a.  Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags into the program; 
b.  Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program; 
c.  Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and 
d.  Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft. 
(c)  Red flags rule definitions used in this program. 
City: The City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
Covered account: Under the rule, a "covered account" is: 
(1)  Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and 
(2)  Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft. 
Creditors: The rule defines creditors "to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where nonprofit and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors." 
Identifying information: Defined under the rule as "any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person," including: name, address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, government-issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's Internet Protocol address, or routing code. 
Program: The identity theft prevention program for the city. 
Program administrator: The city manager, or his/her designee, who shall be at a senior management employee level, is the program administrator for the program. 
Utility: The utility is the utility department for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-10D, § II, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 26-192. - Identification of red flags. 
In order to identify relevant red flags, the utility considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft. The utility identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories: 
(a)  Red flags: Notifications and warnings from consumer credit reporting agencies: 
(1)  Report of fraud accompanying a consumer credit report; 
(2)  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or applicant; 
(3)  Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant; and 
(4)  Indication from a consumer credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's usual pattern or activity, including but not limited to: 
a.  Recent and significant increase in volume of inquiries. 
b.  Unusual number of recent credit applications. 
c.  A material change in use of credit. 
d.  Accounts closed for cause or abuse. 
(b)  Red flags: Suspicious documents: 
(1)  Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic; 
(2)  Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document; 
(3)  Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and 
(4)  Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged. 
(c)  Red flags: Suspicious personal identifying information: 
(1)  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth); 
(2)  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, Social Security number or an address not matching an address on a credit report); 
(3)  Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent; 
(4)  Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address); 
(5)  Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer; 
(6)  An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person; 
(7)  A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law social security numbers must not be required) or an applicant cannot provide information requested beyond what could commonly be found in a purse or wallet; and 
(8)  A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer. 
(d)  Red flags: Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account: 
(1)  Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name; 
(2)  Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account; 
(3)  Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity); 
(4)  Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable; 
(5)  Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the utility; 
(6)  Notice to the utility that an account has unauthorized activity; 
(7)  Breach in the utility's computer system security; and 
(8)  Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information. 
(e)  Red flag: Alerts from others: Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, fraud detection service, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-10D, § II, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 26-193. - Detecting red flags. 
(a)  New accounts. 
(1)  In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new account, utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account: 
a.  Detect. 
1.  Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification; 
2.  Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification card); 
3.  Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; 
4.  Request additional documentation to establish identity; and 
5.  Independently contact the customer or business. 
(b)  Existing accounts. 
(1)  In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing account, utility personnel will take the following steps to monitor transactions with an account: 
a.  Detect. 
1.  Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email); 
2.  Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing addresses; and 
3.  Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-10D, § II, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 26-194. - Preventing and mitigating identity theft. 
(a)  In the event utility personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel shall take one (1) or more of the following steps, depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag: 
(1)  Prevent and mitigate. 
a.  Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft; 
b.  Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods; 
c.  Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts; 
d.  Not open a new account; 
e.  Close an existing account; 
f.  Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities; 
g.  Reopen an account with a new number; 
h.  Notify the program administrator for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take; 
i.  Notify law enforcement; or 
j.  Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. 
(2)  Protect customer identifying information. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information: 
a.  Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure; 
b.  Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information; 
c.  Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a set period of time; 
d.  Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis; 
e.  Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup information is secured; 
f.  Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information; 
g.  Request only the last four (4) digits of social security numbers (if any); 
h.  Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and 
i.  Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-10D, § II, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 26-195. - Program updates. 
This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the utility from identity theft. At least annually, the program administrator will consider the utility's experiences with identity theft situations, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts the utility maintains and changes in the utility's business arrangements with other entities, consult with law enforcement authorities, and consult with other city personnel. After considering these factors, the program administrator will determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator will update the program or present the city council with his or her recommended changes and the city council will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-10D, § II, 10-27-08)  
Sec. 26-196. - Program administration. 
(a)  Oversight. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with the program administrator. The program administrator will be responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program. 
(b)  Staff training and reports. Initially, all utility staff shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected. Thereafter, all utility staff shall undergo update training not less than annually. Additionally, all new utility employees shall undergo training. 
All utility staff shall submit reports annually concerning the utility's compliance with the program, the training that has been given and the effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk of identity theft, including recommendations for changes to the program. While incidents of identity theft are to be reported immediately to the program administrator, the annual reports shall contain a recap of the incident and include the steps taken to assist with resolution of the incident. The program administrator shall provide an annual report to the city council addressing the items identified in this subsection. 
(c)  Service provider arrangements. In the event the utility engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more accounts, including but not limited to franchise utility providers, the utility will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft: 
(1)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers have such policies and procedures in place; and 
(2)  Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers review the utility's program and report any red flags to the program administrator. 
(d)  Specific program elements and confidentiality. For the effectiveness of identity theft prevention programs, the red flag rule envisions a degree of confidentiality regarding the utility's specific practices relating to identity theft detection, prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program, knowledge of such specific practices are to be limited to the identity theft committee and those employees who need to know them for purposes of preventing identity theft. Because this program is to be adopted by a public body and thus publicly available, it would be counterproductive to list these specific practices here. Therefore, only the Program's general red flag detection, implementation and prevention practices are listed in this document. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-10D, § II, 10-27-08)  
Chapter 28 - NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION CONTROL  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Authority. 
This chapter is promulgated under the authority of sections 2.01 and 2.02 of the Charter of Marble Falls, Texas Local Government Code Chapters 51, 212, 401, and 402, and Texas Water Code Chapters 7 and 26. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-2. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-3. - Scope of authority and jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to all territory within the incorporated limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. Any person proposing to develop land or improve property within the jurisdiction of the city is subject to the provisions of this chapter. This chapter is also applicable to individual building structures, subdivisions, excavation and fill operations, and similar activities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-4. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-5. - Findings of fact. 
The drainage ways, creeks, rivers, and lake areas of the city are subject to the potential for periodic pollution and erosion which may result in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for pollution reduction and protection, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(1)  All watersheds within the city's jurisdiction are undergoing development or are facing development pressure, which if not properly regulated can adversely impact stormwater quality. 
(2)  All watersheds within the city's jurisdiction, and especially those with abrupt topography, sparse vegetation, and thin and easily disturbed soil, are vulnerable to degradation resulting from development activities. 
(3)  The development of land causes large quantities of soil to be displaced and transported to downstream locations. This soil displacement can create significant soil erosion, degradation of the water quality, and sedimentation problems. Erosion is a dangerous activity in that it contaminates water supplies and water resources. A buildup of sediment degrades water quality, destroys valuable environmental resources and clogs watercourses and storm drains. 
(4)  The continued economic growth of the city is dependent on adequate quality and quantity of water, a pleasing natural environment, and recreational opportunities in close proximity to the city. 
(5)  Specifically, lake, river, creek and floodplain areas in the city are valuable resources to the citizens of the city in that they provide recreational opportunities, improve the aesthetics of the community, convey stormwater runoff and filter water pollutants. 
(6)  If watersheds within the city's jurisdiction are not developed in a sensitive and innovative manner, their water resources, natural environment, and recreational characteristics will be irreparably damaged. As valuable resources, lakes, rivers, creeks and floodplains warrant protection. 
(7)  The city council is desirous of adopting appropriate development rules and regulations for the purpose of protecting the water quality of the watersheds within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-6. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-7. - Statement of purpose. 
Nonpoint source pollution control management policies shall govern the planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance of drainage, erosion, and water quality control facilities within the city and its zone of extraterritorial jurisdiction. This chapter sets forth the minimum requirements necessary to provide and maintain a safe, efficient and effective non-point source pollution control system within the city and to establish the various public and private responsibilities for the provision thereof. Further, it is the purpose of this chapter to: 
(1)  Protect human life, health and property; 
(2)  Minimize the expenditure of public money for building and maintaining nonpoint source pollution control projects and cleaning sediments out of storm drains, streets, sidewalks and watercourses; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base and preserve land values; 
(4)  Preserve the natural beauty and aesthetics of the community; 
(5)  Control and manage the quality of stormwater runoff, the sediment load in that runoff, from points and surfaces within subdivisions; 
(6)  Establish a reasonable standard of design and performance for development which prevents erosion and sediment damage and which reduces the pollutant loading to streams, ponds and other watercourses. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-8. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-9. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of land within the incorporated limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-10. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-11. - NPS technical manual. 
This chapter is designed to require an accompanying Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Ordinance Technical Manual (NPS Technical Manual), which describes in detail the technical requirements to be used to comply with the provisions contained in this chapter. The criteria specified in the latest edition of the NPS Technical Manual, whether adopted in part or in whole, shall become part of the official non-point source pollution management plan for the city. Although the intention of this manual is to establish uniform design practices, it neither replaces the need for engineering judgment nor precludes the use of information not presented. Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to conduct hydrologic and hydraulic studies if approved by the city engineer. The NPS Technical Manual is maintained and available for inspection at the city offices. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Secs. 28-12—28-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 28-21. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings herein after designated. 
Applicant: A person who submits an application for approval required by this chapter. The applicant shall be the owner of the property subject to this chapter acting in person or by and through the owner's authorized representative. Documentation evidencing ownership of the property and the authority of the authorized agent shall be submitted as required by the city manager. 
Application: A written request for an approval required by this chapter. 
Best management practices (BMP): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, management practices, infiltration BMPs, erosion controls, vegetation practices, stormwater and overland flow controls, retention, water quality controls, and treatment facilities designed to prevent, reduce, or treat the discharge the non-point source pollution into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. 
Bond: Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the city. 
Buffer zone: Vegetated area adjacent to a natural creek, swale, or critical environmental feature that is to remain undisturbed and free of impervious cover to the largest extent practicable (as determined by the city). 
Business day: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday, except legal holidays observed by the city. 
City: The City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
City manager: The person holding the position of city manager, as appointed by the city council. For the purposes of this chapter, the city manager may appoint, in writing, a designee to act on his or her behalf. 
City engineer: Such professional engineer or firm of licensed professional consulting engineers that has been specifically employed by the city to assist in engineering-related matters. 
Code: City of Marble Code of Ordinances as amended from time to time. 
Commencement of construction: The disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, or excavating activities or other construction activities. 
Contractor: Any person, other than the owner, engaging in land development activities on land located within the city's jurisdiction. 
Contributing on-site drainage area: The portion of a site that contributes stormwater runoff to a common point of interest. 
Critical environmental feature: Features determined to be of critical importance to the maintenance of water quality, including groundwater recharge areas, springs, natural wetlands, caves, and highly erodible natural features. 
Developer: A person who owns a tract of land and who is engaged in clearing, grubbing, filling, mining, excavating, grading, installing streets and utilities or otherwise preparing that tract of land for the eventual division into one or more lots on which building(s) or other structure(s) will be constructed or placed. 
Development: All land modification activity, including the construction of building, roads, paved storage areas, and parking lots. "Development" also includes any land disturbing construction activities or human-made change of the land surface, including clearing of vegetative cover, excavating, filling and grading, mining, and dredging, and the deposit of refuse, waste or fill. Care and maintenance of lawns, gardens, and trees; minimal clearing (ten feet wide) for surveying and testing; and agricultural activities are excluded from this definition. 
Discharge: Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the stormwater drainage system or into waters of the United States or waters in the state. 
Discharger: Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
Disturbance of land or disturbed land: Construction activities or human-made change of the land surface, including clearing of vegetative cover, excavating, filling and grading, mining, and dredging, and the deposit of refuse, waste or fill, except for care and maintenance of lawns, gardens, and trees, minimal clearing (ten feet wide) for surveying and testing, and agricultural activities. 
Domestic sewage: Human excrement, gray water from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing, and food preparation, other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, including single -family homes, apartment houses and hotels, office buildings, factories, and institutions, that are free from industrial waste. 
Drainage criteria manual: A technical manual containing a description of drainage policies and required methods of hydraulic and hydrologic design and analysis to be used within the City of Marble Falls, Texas and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Easement: An area of restricted use on private property upon which the city or a public utility, or both, shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, and/or other improvements or growths which in any way will endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems within said easements. The city and public utilities shall, at all times, have the right to ingress and egress to and from and upon easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of their respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring of permission of anyone. 
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock fragments by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
ETJ: The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as established by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 42. 
Extremely hazardous substance: Any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR Part 355, Emergency Planning and Notification. 
Facility: Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be discharge of a pollutant. 
Fertilizer: A solid or non-solid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants that is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of one or more fertilizers. The term does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of essential plant nutrients is made. 
Fill: The manmade deposition and compaction of material that will effect elevation. 
Harmful quantity: The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state. 
Hazardous household waste (HHW): Any material generated in a household (including single and multiple residences, hotels, motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, camp grounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR § 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. 
Hazardous substance: Any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302. 
Hazardous waste: Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261. 
Herbicide: A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth. 
Impervious cover: All manmade improvements that prevent the infiltration of water into the natural soil, or prevent the migration of the infiltration as base flow, including but not limited to, roads, pavements, and driveways, parking areas, buildings, pedestrian walkways and sidewalks, concrete, asphalt, masonry, surfaces areas, and paving stone surfaced areas, swimming pool water surface area, densely compacted natural soils or fills which result in a coefficient of permeability less than 1x10-6 cm/sec., all existing manmade impervious surfaces prior to development, water quality and stormwater detention basins lined with impermeable materials, stormwater drainage conveyance structures lined with impermeable materials, interlocking or "permeable pavers," fifty (50) percent of the horizontal surface area of an uncovered deck that has drainage spaces between the deck boards that is located over a pervious surface. Impervious cover does not include existing roads adjacent to the development and not constructed as part of the development at an earlier phase, naturally occurring impervious features, such as rock out crops, landscaped areas and areas remaining in their natural state, water quality controls and stormwater detention basins not lined with impermeable materials, and stormwater drainage conveyance structures not lined with impermeable materials. 
Industrial waste: Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or business. 
Landowner: Any person holding title to or having an interest in land. 
Land user: Any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements with the landowner by which the landowner authorizes use of his or her land. 
Larger common plan of development: Development that is or will be completed in separate stages, in separate phases, or in combination with other construction activities and is identified by documentation that identifies the scope of the project including such things as plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permits, public notice or hearing, or zoning requests. 
Licensed professional engineer (LPE), professional engineer (PE): A person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state board of registration for professional engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas. 
Natural creek or swales: A well-defined natural drainage path capable of conveying stormwater runoff. 
New construction: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the date of adoption of this chapter by the city council. 
NPS pollution controls and best management practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, management practices, infiltration BMPs, erosion controls, vegetation practices, stormwater and overland flow controls, retention, water quality controls, and treatment facilities designed to prevent, reduce, or treat the discharge the nonpoint source pollution into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. 
Oil: Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
Operator: The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet the following two (2) criteria: (1) they have operational control over the facility specifications, including the ability to make modifications in specifications; and (2) they have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions. 
Owner: The person who owns a facility or part of a facility or a lessee. 
Permanent stabilization: Installation of approved permanent measures to prevent erosion with a minimum of eighty (80) percent coverage of perennial vegetation over pervious areas. 
Permittee: A landowner or land user who is undertaking land development activities pursuant to a permit or authorization granted according to the provisions of this chapter. 
Pesticide: A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant, as these terms are defined in Section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code. 
Petroleum product: A petroleum product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol; other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. The term does not include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, or a petroleum product destined for use in chemical manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing. 
Petroleum storage tank (PST): Any one or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes. 
Pollutant: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, filtered backwash, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into or adjacent to water. 
Pollution: The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
Primary treatment: The permanent BMP(s) designed to have substantial removal of the increase in pollutant loads due to the development or redevelopment of a site. 
Redevelopment: Any rebuilding, renovation, remodeling, reconstruction, revision, or replat of an existing development. 
Release: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or the water in the state. 
Revision: Any amendments to a previously approved project. 
Right-of-way: A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street or alley. Where appropriate, "right-of-way" may include other facilities and utilities such as sidewalks; railroad crossings; electrical, communication, oil and/or gas facilities; water, wastewater and drainage facilities; or for any other special use. The use of right-of-way shall also include parkways and medians outside of the paved portion of the street. 
Rubbish: Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, which consists of (A) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; or (B) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
Runoff: That portion of rainfall, melted snow, melted sleet, melted hail, irrigation, or drainage that flows across ground surface and reaches the water in the state, storm drain, or storm sewer. 
Sanitary sewer (or sewer): The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
Secondary treatment: Any additional permanent BMP(s) necessary to meet performance standards not achieved by the primary treatment for a site. 
Sediment: Solid soil material, both mineral and organic, that is being moved or has been moved from its original site by wind, gravity, flowing water or ice. Also, sometimes referred to as "silt" or "sand." 
Sedimentation: Deposit of detached soil particles. 
Septic tank waste: Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Service station: Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
Sewage (or sanitary sewage): The domestic sewage and industrial waste that is discharged into a sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to a sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
Sheet flow: The flow of water in a thin layer over the ground surface. 
Site: The property boundaries of a development, including the limits of construction for any offsite improvements. 
Slope: A measure of change in vertical elevation with respect to horizontal distance between two defined points. 
Solid waste: Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities. 
Start of construction: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
Steep slope: Slope with a grade in excess of twenty (20) percent. 
Stormwater: Any moisture that falls from the atmosphere in a discrete storm event, including snow, sleet, rain, and hail. 
Stormwater drainage system: A conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water. 
Structure: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. When used in the context of stormwater, the term means drainage improvement, such as dams, levees, bridges, culverts, head walls, or flumes. 
Used oil (or used motor oil): Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law. 
Vegetative cover: The cover over a land's surface area with plant life. 
Water in the state (or water): Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
Water quality control: A structure, system, or feature that provides water quality benefits by treating stormwater runoff. 
Water quality standard: The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in Chapter 307 of Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code. 
Watershed: The total area contributing runoff to a stream or drainage system. 
Yard waste: Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations. 
1-year, 3-hour storm event: A rainfall event over a three-hour period as defined in the Drainage Criteria Manual. The 1-year, 3-hour rainfall distribution can be found in Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Secs. 28-22—28-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION CONTROL MEASURES 
 
Sec. 28-31. - Nonpoint source pollution control management prohibitions. 
(a)  Except as authorized by permit or this Code, no person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(b)  Except as authorized by permit or this Code, no person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard. 
(c)  Except as authorized by permit or this Code, no person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state: 
(1)  Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
(2)  Any industrial waste or hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste; 
(3)  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
(4)  Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste; 
(5)  Any wastewater from: 
a.  A commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or public entity that operates more than two such vehicles; 
b.  From the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
c.  A commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
d.  Commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning; 
e.  The washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
(6)  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the blowdown from a boiler; 
(7)  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material; 
(8)  Any runoff or washdown water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul or livestock containment area; 
(9)  Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, or fountain, or spa; 
(10)  Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; 
(11)  Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination or other means if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(12)  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials. This prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from fire fighting by the fire rescue department; 
(13)  Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
(14)  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard; 
(15)  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the stormwater drainage system; or 
(16)  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge complies with all state and federal standards and requirements. 
(d)  Except as authorized by permit or this Code, no person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or associated with land filling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials, in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Except as authorized by a permit or other approval issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or authorized agent under Texas Water Code Chapter 26 or Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 366, no person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the stormwater drainage system, or allow such a connection to continue. 
(f)  Except as authorized by permit or this Code, no person shall cause or allow any pavement washwater from a service station to be discharged into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. No permit is required for existing service stations on the effective date of this chapter. However, washwater from existing service stations and new service stations shall pass through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and sand interceptor before discharge into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-07B, 7-14-2008)  
Sec. 28-32. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-33. - Regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. 
(a)  Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer must comply fully with all state and federal statutes and regulations including, without limitation, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and all federal regulations promulgated pursuant to FIFRA; Chapters 63 and 76 of the Texas Agriculture Code and all state regulations promulgated pursuant thereto; and any other state or federal requirement. 
(b)  Any license, permit, registration, certification, or evidence of financial responsibility required by state or federal law for sale, distribution, application, manufacturer, transportation, storage, or disposal of a pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer must be presented to the city and any city law enforcement officer for examination upon request. 
(c)  No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide or herbicide contrary to any directions for use on any labeling required by state or federal statute or regulation. 
(d)  No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer in any manner that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. 
(e)  No person shall dispose of, discard, store, or transport a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer, or a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer container, in a manner that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer to enter the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. 
(f)  If provided with a display notice containing the provisions of this subsection, pertaining to the regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, or a reasonable description thereof, and the information that any user of the product may obtain further information from the city, any person selling pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers at retail or wholesale shall post the notice prominently where it may be read by purchasers of the product. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-34. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-35. - Used oil regulation. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Discharge used oil into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system, water in the state, or a sewer, drainage system, septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or water course; 
(2)  Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or in a landfill; 
(3)  Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment. 
(b)  All businesses that change motor oil for the public, municipal waste landfills, and fire stations shall serve as public used oil collection centers as provided by state statute. 
(c)  A retail dealer who annually sells directly to the public oil in containers for use off-premises shall post in a prominent place a sign informing the public that improper disposal of used oil is prohibited by law. The sign shall prominently display the toll-free telephone number of the state used oil information center. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-36. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-37. - Impervious cover. 
(a)  This section applies to all new development, re-development, and construction for which a preliminary or development plat, site development plan, or NPS site plan is required, or a building permit is, or will be, required. This section applies regardless if the development is exempt under section 28-51. Although certain percentages of impervious cover are designated in this section, nothing in this section shall release a person from meeting other zoning and land use regulations in this Code. 
(b)  Unless increases are permitted by the use of impervious cover allowances, the impervious cover shall not exceed the allowances required by appendix B of this Code, or, if appendix B does not specifically limit the impervious cover for a particular type of land use, then the impervious cover shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Eighty-five (85) percent of the total area of the site for industrial sites; 
(2)  Eighty (80) percent of the total area of the site for commercial sites; 
(3)  Seventy-five (75) percent of the total area of the site for multi-family sites; and 
(4)  Fifty (50) percent of the total area of the site for residential subdivisions. 
(c)  Subsection (b) of this section does not apply to the downtown district, which is exempt from the impervious cover limitations. 
(d)  No impervious cover shall be constructed within a water quality buffer zone, downstream of a water quality control, or within areas designated for on-site irrigation for treated wastewater effluent disposal. 
(e)  Impervious cover allowances: 
(1)  Isolation of roof runoff, rainwater collection, and irrigation: If approved by the city, the maximum impervious cover limit may be increased by up to five (5) percentage points if roof runoff or rainwater is isolated, treated, and used for irrigation. The roof runoff or rainwater must comply with the pollutant removal performance standards in section 28-63. 
(2)  Use of mitigation land. 
a.  For each three (3) acres of land (transferring tract) that the applicant leaves undeveloped or undisturbed and that is not included in an impervious cover calculation, the applicant may transfer up to one (1) acre of land (receiving tract) for impervious cover, but in no case shall the maximum impervious cover limit be increased by more than ten (10) percentage points. 
b.  Both the transferring and receiving tracts used in the impervious cover allowances shall be located within the corporate limits or ETJ of the city. 
c.  The transferring tract shall not include a water quality buffer zone or critical environmental feature. 
d.  The receiving tract shall comply with the water quality control standards of this chapter. 
e.  The transferring and the receiving tracts shall be concurrently platted and must transfer development intensity at that time. 
f.  The use of mitigation land and the increase in impervious cover limits shall be noted on the plats of the transferring and receiving tracts. 
g.  A restrictive covenant that runs with the transferring tract and describes the use of mitigation land shall be filed in the deed records upon approval by the city of the restrictive covenant. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.E, 1-15-2019)  
Secs. 28-38—28-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NPS POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORIZATIONS 
 
Sec. 28-51. - Projects exempt from article IV. 
The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Single-family residences. New construction of a single-family residence on a single-family lot which is not part of a subdivision. 
(2)  Existing development. Existing development on the effective date of this chapter. If, however, improvements, additions, or revisions to the approved plans are made after the effective date of this chapter that require a site development plan, building permit, or any type of plat, then the landowner or land user must obtain NPS pollution control authorization. 
(3)  Final plats. Landowners or land users developing sites for which final plats have been approved by city before the effective date of this chapter. 
(4)  Utility maintenance. Routine maintenance and installation of utility lines. 
(5)  Developments of one acre or less. Developments or redevelopments of one acre or less that are not part of a larger common plan of development 
(6)  Previously permitted developments. Developments or redevelopments that have already been issued a permit by the Lower Colorado River Authority as of the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.E, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 28-52. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-53. - Nonpoint source pollution control approval. 
(a)  Authorized activities: NPS pollution control authorization required. 
(1)  An authorization by ordinance or an nonpoint source (NPS) pollution control authorization shall be required for all development, redevelopment, or other construction that causes, may cause, or has the potential to cause the discharge of stormwater, NPS pollution, or other pollutant listed in section 28-31 into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. No landowner or land user subject to this chapter may commence or conduct construction or development within the city and in its ETJ without first obtaining an NPS pollution control authorization from the city. At the time the landowner or land user controlling or using the site and desiring to undertake construction or development subject to this chapter, the landowner or land user shall pay all applicable fees required by this chapter and provide the required information for an NPS pollution control authorization with the landowner's or land user's site development plan or preliminary or development plat. By submitting a site development plan or plat, the applicant is authorizing city to enter the site to obtain information required to review and provide approval for the NPS pollution control measures. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all development, redevelopment, or other construction that is required to obtain an authorization by ordinance or an NPS pollution control authorization shall ensure all the required NPS pollution controls and BMPs comply with the performance standards prescribed in section 28-63. 
(3)  All development, redevelopment, or other construction that occurs within the right of way, public easement, or construction that is, or is intended to be, dedicated to the city, shall comply with the TCSS Manual as adopted in section 7-331, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Activities authorized by ordinance. 
(1)  Except as provided by subsections (3) and (4) of this section and if the development is not exempt under section 28-51, the following list of projects are eligible for authorization by ordinance: 
a.  One (1) acre or less of impervious cover with five (5) acres or less of disturbance of land: Developments or redevelopments with one (1) acre or less of impervious cover with five (5) acres or less of disturbance of land. 
b.  Twenty (20) percent or less of overall impervious cover for the site: Developments or redevelopments with twenty (20) percent or less of overall impervious cover for the site. 
(2)  Requirements for projects authorized by ordinance. To qualify for an authorization by ordinance, the projects listed in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall comply with the following: 
a.  Submit a written notice to the city at the same time the request is made for a preliminary or development plat, or site development plan approval, or if no plat or site development plan is required, fourteen (14) business days before the commencement of construction that contains the following information: 
1.  Name of the landowner; 
2.  Location of address of the property; 
3.  Name of development, if applicable; 
4.  Contact information for owner, engineer, and contractor (as applicable; 
5.  Type of project or development; 
6.  Basis for exemption from permit requirements; 
7.  Amount of impervious cover expected as a result of the project; 
8.  Certification of compliance with the non-point source pollution control requirements, as set forth in this chapter and NPS Technical Manual; 
9.  Dated signature of owner's or owners' authorized representative; 
b.  Comply with all applicable TPDES and EPA stormwater requirements. 
c.  Submit to the city all documents submitted to the TCEQ or EPA. 
d.  Comply with guidelines and best management practices set forth in the NPS Technical Manual for controlling erosion, sedimentation and non-point source pollution in a manner and to a level consistent with this chapter and the NPS Technical Manual. 
e.  For developments or redevelopments for which the construction of a permanent BMP, other than vegetative filter strips and infiltration trenches, is required, submit a maintenance plan to the city at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of construction of the permanent BMP. 
(3)  Projects listed in subsection (b) shall comply with all other applicable chapters in the Code, or other applicable ordinances adopted by the city from time to time. 
(4)  If the city, after receipt of the notice required by b. of this subsection, determines that the project as proposed will not meet the performance standards described in section 28-63 of this Code and will cause the water quality to degrade, the city may require the landowner or land user to obtain an individual NPS pollution control authorization or an operating permit. 
(c)  Processing of NPS pollution control authorizations. 
(1)  Submittals. Landowners and land users who must obtain NPS pollution control authorization shall submit the required information in accordance with this chapter and the NPS Technical Manual. 
(2)  Review of NPS pollution control information. 
a.  Construction and development plats. If a person is required to obtain a preliminary or development plat, the person shall submit the information required for an NPS pollution control authorization along with and at the same time the preliminary or development plat is submitted to the city in accordance with appendix B of the City's Code of Ordinances. The city shall review the NPS pollution control information in conjunction with the review of applications for preliminary or development plats. 
b.  Site development plan reviews. If a person is not required to obtain a preliminary or development plat but is required to obtain site development plan approval under appendix B of this Code, the person shall submit the information required for an NPS pollution control authorization along with and at the same time the site development plan application is submitted to the city in accordance with appendix B of the City's Code of Ordinances. The city shall review the NPS pollution control information in conjunction with the review of applications for site development plans. 
c.  NPS site plan reviews: If no preliminary or development plat is required and if no site development plan is otherwise required but the person is required by the chapter to obtain NPS pollution control authorization, the person shall submit the information required for an NPS pollution control authorization in the form of an NPS site plan. The NPS site plan shall be submitted for the total area of the site. The NPS site plan shall include: 
1.  Name and address of the owner and applicant. 
2.  Address and legal description of the property. 
3.  If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner. 
4.  A brief description of the proposed use. 
5.  A site plan, drawn to scale and sufficiently dimensioned as required, showing the following: 
(i)  The date, scale, North arrow, title, name of owner and name of person preparing the site plan. 
(ii)  The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements and required yards and setbacks. 
(iii)  A scale drawing of location and intended use of proposed and existing site improvements and proposed and existing impervious cover, including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, landscaped areas, and utility or services areas. 
(iv)  A scale drawing of location and description of all water quality control and erosion control BMPs as required by this chapter and the NPS Technical Manual. 
(v)  A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing showing major existing vegetation, natural watercourses, creeks or bodies of water and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development. This shall include a delineation of any flood prone areas. 
(vi)  For sites with an average slope greater than ten percent, a plan showing existing and proposed topography and grading and proposed erosion control measures. 
(vii)  Any other information that may be necessary to review the application for compliance with this chapter and the NPS Technical Manual. 
6.  Any applicable fee established by the city council. 
7.  If the site plan does not include the required information, the city may request additional information or return the application as incomplete. 
(3)  Approval process and procedures: 
a.  Approvals in conjunction with preliminary and development plats and site development plans: For NPS pollution control applications submitted in conjunction with a preliminary or development plat or a site development plan required by appendix B of this Code, approval of the NPS pollution control measures shall occur at the same time and in conjunction with plat and site development plan approvals. 
b.  Approvals of NPS site plans: The procedure for approval of an NPS site plan and NPS pollution control measures is as follows: 
1.  Recommendations of planning commission. Not more than thirty (30) days after filing of a completed application, the planning and zoning commission shall prepare a report to the city council recommending approval, approval subject to modifications or disapproval of the NPS site plan. The planning and zoning commission may seek recommendation of city engineer as required. A copy of the report shall be furnished to the applicant. Within ten days after an application is filed with the city, the city will determine if the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the city may return to the applicant the incomplete application or provide the applicant with additional time to submit the required information. The thirty-day review period does not start until a completed application is filed. 
2.  Action by the city council. Within forty (40) days after recommendation from planning and zoning commission, the city council shall consider the application at a public meeting. Consideration may be continued at a subsequent meeting with the concurrence of the applicant. The council shall review the recommendations and act on the application. The council may approve a NPS site plan as submitted, may approve a NPS site plan subject to specific modifications or may disapprove the NPS site plan. The council shall notify the applicant of its action. 
3.  Review and evaluation criteria. Planning and zoning commission and the city council shall review and evaluate NPS site plans to ensure conformance with applicable regulations and standards established by this chapter and the NPS Technical Manual. 
4.  Modification of site plan. The city council may require modification of an NPS site plan as a prerequisite for approval to ensure compliance with this chapter and the NPS Technical Manual. 
5.  Lapse of approval. 
(i)  Unless a longer time shall be specifically established as a condition of approval, an NPS site plan approval shall lapse and shall become void one (1) year after the date on which such approval became effective, unless prior to the expiration of one-year construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward. 
(ii)  An NPS site plan approval subject to lapse may be extended by the city council for an additional period of ninety (90) days, provided that prior to the expiration date, a written request for extension is filed with city. 
6.  New applications. Following the denial or revocation of an NPS site plan review application, no application for an NPS site plan review for the same or substantially the same site plan on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within sixty (60) days from the date of denial or revocation. Any such application filed will be returned to the applicant as an incomplete application. 
(4)  Fees. The fees and charges required to process NPS pollution control authorizations shall be as shown in this Code. 
(5)  Fiscal security. Proof of fiscal security shall be provided with the NPS pollution control authorization. Fiscal security shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in section 28-111. 
(6)  Conditions. In addition to site specific conditions that may be required to comply with the technical standards set forth in the NPS Technical Manual, all permits or NPS pollution control authorizations shall require the permittee to: 
a.  Notify the city within forty-eight (48) hours before commencing any development; 
b.  Obtain a permit or authorization amendment from city prior to modifying the approved NPS pollution controls and BMPs; however, no permit or authorization amendment is required for minor field adjustments of temporary erosion controls; 
c.  Install all NPS pollution controls and BMPs as identified in the approved permit or authorization and ensure those NPS pollution controls and BMPs comply with the applicable performance standards prescribed in section 28-63 or other standard for which a variance has been granted; 
d.  Comply with the requirements of this chapter regarding maintenance plans; 
e.  Repair any siltation or erosion damage resulting from development; 
f.  Inspect all temporary erosion and sedimentation controls after each rain of one-half inch or more, and at least once each week, and make needed repairs; 
g.  Allow the city to enter the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the permit or authorization, or for performing any work necessary to bring the site into compliance with the permit or authorization; 
h.  Designate a location on the site for the posting of notices; 
i.  Keep a copy of the permit or authorization and all development plans on the site or with the permittee's designated representative; 
j.  Upon completion of development, the permittee's registered professional engineer shall certify in writing to the city that the NPS pollution controls and BMPs were constructed and maintained in accordance with the permit or authorization conditions and this chapter; 
k.  Promptly notify the city in writing of any change in the name, address, or telephone number of the permittee; 
l.  Assign the NPS pollution control authorization and all rights and obligations associated there with to the land owner, operator, property owners' association or other entity as applicable, upon completion of construction of the development if the permit or authorization is not already in the name of the entity responsible for the BMPs. 
m.  Pay all fees associated with the approval of the NPS pollution control measures at the time of submittal; 
n.  Perform all activities in accordance with the federal, state or local laws or ordinances; 
o.  Indemnify and hold the city and its authorized agents and its authorized consultants harmless from any and all claims, demands, damages, actions, costs and charges to which the city may become subject and which the city may have to pay by reason of injury to any person or property, or loss of life, or loss of property, resulting from, or in any way connected with the permittee's actions under this NPS pollution control authorization. 
p.  No work is authorized that is not directly addressed in the permit application submitted to the city. 
q.  Nothing in the permit is intended to amend or alter any legal rights or benefits previously granted to or vested in the city. 
r.  Any terms and conditions reached between the city and the applicant. 
(7)  Approval of authorization. The city will issue a NPS pollution control authorization upon the applicant's submission of a complete permit application, payment of the application fee, the city's approval of the NPS pollution control measure, and approval of the plat or site development plan, as applicable. 
(8)  Duration. Except as provided in subsection (c)(7) of this section or sections 28-55 and 28-117 of this chapter, NPS pollution control authorization shall be valid for the life of the site development permit or the building permit for the development. 
(9)  Termination for nonuse. A NPS pollution control authorization will be terminated by the city should the building permit or the site development permit be terminated. Commencement of development means clearing the site and performing initial or rough grading of the improvements. If the city terminates a permit for nonuse and the fiscal security is still in effect, the city may call on the permittee's security in order to provide permanent stabilization of the site. 
(4)  Enforcement. Failure to comply with the provisions of an NPS pollution control authorization is a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2017-0-O9D, § II, 9-19-2017 ; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.E, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 28-54. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-55. - Operating permit. 
(a)  General requirements. Except for projects listed and authorized under section 28-53(b) of this Code, the owners or operators of all new water quality controls for residential and nonresidential development must obtain an operating permit. The application for the operating permit shall be filed concurrently with the application for the NPS pollution control authorization. The owner or operator is responsible for the proper operation and maintenance of the control and for operating permit renewal. The first operating permit will be issued by the city upon: 
(1)  The completion of construction, if applicable; 
(2)  Inspection of the control by the city after review of the maintenance plan accompanying the design engineer's concurrence letter of the completion of construction; 
(3)  Final inspection approval by the city; 
(4)  The issuance of a certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy by the city, if applicable; and 
(5)  Payment of any required fees. 
(b)  Operating permit procedures. All water quality controls shall be maintained in accordance with this chapter, the permit, and the NPS Technical Manual, and in accordance with section 28-109 of this Code, each permitted control will be inspected from time to time by the city to confirm that proper maintenance, as described in the maintenance plan, has occurred prior to renewal of the permit. An operating permit shall be required for developed sites with existing water quality control only when new development or redevelopment occurs. 
(c)  Operating permit information requirements. The permit application shall include the following components and must be submitted to the city with the site development plan for new construction, or not later than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the renewal date shown on an existing permit: 
(1)  Name and address of the development; 
(2)  Name, title and business phone number of the owner or operator; 
(3)  Single point of contact name, phone number, and fax number; 
(4)  Mailing address of the owner or operator; 
(5)  Site development plan number on file with the city for the control; 
(6)  Previous operating permit; 
(7)  Signature block for city approval; 
(8)  Special conditions required by restrictive covenant, or by agreement at a condition of city approval; 
(9)  Maintenance records and date of last maintenance; 
(10)  Name of contractor who performed the required maintenance; 
(11)  Results of required maintenance, including actions take, materials removal, disposal location, components replaced; 
(12)  Evidence of fiscal security, if applicable; 
(13)  Types of BMPs being used. 
(d)  Permit duration. Any operating permit issued by the city shall be issued for a period of five (5) years. 
(e)  Operating permit renewal. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of the permittee to apply to the city for renewal of the permit no later than thirty (30) calendar days before the existing permit expires. The application must be accompanied by payment of the appropriate renewal fee, updated information concerning ownership or facility operation and enforcement status. Upon receipt of all information and fees, including a favorable inspection and maintenance report, the city will renew the permit for a period of five (5) years. 
(2)  Any repair work or modifications of a control not specified in the maintenance plan shall require the permittee's engineer's concurrence letter, prior to renewal of the permit. 
(3)  Permit renewal will be withheld if there is pending enforcement action against the permittee based on any violations of water quality regulations at the site. 
(f)  Permit transfer. The transfer of the operating permit shall require the completion of a new permit application, and must be submitted not later than thirty (30) calendar days after transfer of ownership or operation of the control. 
(g)  Enforcement. Failure to comply with the provisions of the operating permit is a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.E, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 28-56. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-57. - Required plans. 
All plans required by the NPS Technical Manual shall be submitted for review and approval along with the required information necessary for authorization of any NPS pollution control measures. Any required plans shall be incorporated into any permits or authorizations issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-58. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-59. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Maintenance required. All water quality control measures and their appurtenances shall be maintained by the permittee or subsequent landowner(s) or land user(s) pursuant to an approved maintenance plan. The city may require the permittee and subsequent landowner(s) or land users to post fiscal security in a manner described in section 28-111 for the purpose of maintaining all water quality controls required by this chapter. Landowners and land users outside the city limits and not within a utility district may elect to form a maintenance association (MA) in accordance with this section prior to the issuance of an operating permit. All MAs must post fiscal security or create a maintenance fund for the purpose of maintaining all water quality controls required by this chapter. The duties and responsibilities of an MA may be performed by a homeowners' association, property owners' association, or like entity if it meets the requirements of this section of this chapter. The maintenance of all BMPs shall be in accordance with the NPS pollution control authorization or operating permit and the approved maintenance plan. 
(b)  Requirements for MAs. The applicant must submit to the city the approved articles of association for the MA, as well as a map showing the boundaries of its jurisdiction. The MA must have the following general powers which are reflected in the articles of association: 
(1)  Own and convey property; 
(2)  Operate and maintain common property, specifically the water quality controls; 
(3)  Establish rules and regulations; 
(4)  Assess member maintenance fees and enforce said assessments; 
(5)  Sue and be sued; 
(6)  Contract for services to provide operation and maintenance; 
(7)  If the MA is a homeowners' association, it must have as members all the homeowners, lot owners, property owners, or unit owners; 
(8)  The MA shall exist in perpetuity; however, if the MA is dissolved or annexed into the city or a utility district, the articles of association must provide that the property consisting of the water quality controls shall be conveyed to the city or a utility district; and 
(9)  It shall be clearly stated in the chapters of association of the MA that: 
a.  It is the responsibility of the MA to operate and maintain the water quality controls; 
b.  The water quality controls are owned by the MA or described therein as common property; 
c.  There is a method of assessing and collecting the assessment for operation and maintenance of the water quality controls; and 
d.  Any amendment that would affect the water quality controls must be approved by the city. 
(c)  Phased projects. If an MA is proposed for a project which will be developed in phases and subsequent phases will utilize the water quality controls, the MA must have the ability to accept future phases into the MA. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-60. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-61. - TPDES notice of intent and stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
Any owner or operator who intends to obtain coverage as an owner or operator for stormwater discharges from a construction site under the TPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) and the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the city engineer at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of construction. The owner or operator shall make the SWPPP and any modifications thereto available to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-62. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-63. - NPS pollution control and bmp performance standards and design requirements. 
(a)  All development and redevelopment required to obtain an authorization by ordinance or an NPS pollution control authorization under subsection 28-53(b) or (c) shall utilize NPS pollution controls and BMPs to treat stormwater runoff. All NPS pollution controls and BMPs required by this chapter shall be designed in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual and by a professional engineer. All NPS pollution controls and BMPs shall meet the performance standards and design requirements prescribed by this section. 
(b)  Water quality volume: All NPS pollution controls and BMPs shall be designed and sized based on a water quality volume calculated using the methods prescribed in the NPS Technical Manual. The minimum volume of stormwater runoff for water quality control shall be based on the 1-year, 3-hour storm event for the contributing on-site drainage area. 
(c)  Sites in excess of ten acres: The BMPs for sites of ten (10) or more acres shall be designed to achieve an annual removal rate of seventy (70) percent or more for the increase of total suspended solids (TSS) and increase in total phosphorus (TP) resulting from the development or redevelopment. Primary and secondary treatment methods may be used to achieve these removal rates. 
(d)  Overland flow controls. 
(1)  To the maximum extent practical, all roof runoff from nonresidential buildings shall have down spouts disconnected from the site stormwater drainage system. 
(2)  To the maximum extent practical, all stormwater drainage shall be treated using overland flow methods to a vegetated buffer. The vegetated buffer shall be designed in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(3)  Drainage patterns shall be designed to the maximum extent practical to prevent erosion, maintain and recharge of local seeps and springs, and attenuate the harm of contaminants collected and transported by stormwater. Overland sheet flow and natural drainage features and patterns shall be maintained to the maximum extent practical, depending on volumes and velocities of runoff for the development, as opposed to concentrating flows in storm sewers and drainage ditches. 
(4)  Construction of enclosed storm sewers and impervious channel linings are permitted only when the city, on the basis of competent engineering evidence from the applicant, concludes that such storm sewers or impervious linings are protective of water quality. 
(5)  If storm sewers are deemed necessary as specified above, the applicant shall design the stormwater drainage system to mitigate its impact on water quality by using structural devices or other methods to prevent erosion and dissipate discharges from outlets wherever practicable, and by directing discharges to maximize overland flow through buffer zones or grass lined swales. 
(6)  Overland flow facilities for the stormwater drainage system shall be designed in accordance with the criteria of the Drainage Criteria Technical Manual. 
(e)  Infiltration: To the maximum extent practical, water quality controls shall be designed to restore the infiltration capacity of pre-development conditions. Infiltration BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(f)  Steep slopes. 
(1)  Erosion control and water quality control BMPs shall be designed in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(2)  A cut or fill with a finished gradient steeper than thirty-three (33) percent shall be stabilized in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(g)  Vegetation. 
(1)  To the maximum extent practical, landscape shall be preserved in its natural state and shall comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(2)  To the maximum extent practical, xeriscape and low maintenance vegetation shall be included in all nonresidential development and shall be provided in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(3)  To the maximum extent practical, the use of herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers shall be minimized. 
(4)  If pesticides and fertilizers will be used, a pesticide and fertilizer management plan shall be submitted providing information regarding proper use, storage, and disposal of pesticides and fertilizers. The plan shall indicate likely pesticides and fertilizers to be used. The plan shall include two (2) lists of pesticides and fertilizers: (1) those which, due to their chemical characteristics, potentially contribute significantly to water quality degradation; (2) those which, due to the chemical characteristics, potentially would result in minimal water quality degradation. 
(5)  An integrated pest management (IPM) plan shall be submitted in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(6)  Vegetative BMPs, such as vegetative filter strips, shall be designed in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(h)  Water quality controls (WQC). 
(1)  Water quality controls (WQC) are required for residential and nonresidential developments and redevelopments. Water quality controls shall be sized for the on-site contributing drainage area that contains development if the new development or re-development contains impervious cover. 
(2)  The volume of runoff (water quality volume) to be captured, isolated, and treated by each WQC shall be as required in subsection (b) of this section. Each WQC shall be sized for the contributing on-site drainage area only to that WQC. 
(3)  Vegetated filter strips shall be used to the maximum extent practicable for the treatment of stormwater runoff. 
(4)  Developed areas requiring treatment shall include the on-site contributing drainage area with: 
a.  Areas of impervious cover; 
b.  Lawns using pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; 
c.  Landscaping using pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; 
d.  Gardens using pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; 
e.  Golf courses and play fields using pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers; 
f.  Areas of on-site spray irrigation with wastewater effluent. 
(5)  The following areas shall not require water quality treatment: 
a.  The full area of existing natural areas or restored natural areas which are restricted from development and pesticides, herbicide, or fertilizer application through a plat note or restrictive covenant and the runoff from which is routed around the WQC. The runoff from natural areas which blend with the runoff from the developed areas shall be included in the water quality volume calculations. 
b.  The full area of the WQC structure. 
c.  Swimming pools which do not discharge its filter backwash into the stormwater drainage system or water in the state. 
d.  Impervious surface areas used for stormwater collection and on-site irrigation. 
e.  The full area of off-site drainage areas. 
(6)  Removal efficiencies for WQC's shall be as established in the NPS Technical Manual. 
(7)  The design of WQC's shall be in accordance with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(i)  Erosion control requirements. 
(1)  All temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control BMPs shall comply with the NPS Technical Manual. 
(2)  Peak runoff rate: The peak runoff rate for the 1-year, 3-hour storm event under developed conditions shall not exceed the peak runoff rate for the 1-year, 3-hour storm event under pre-development conditions, unless otherwise noted in the NPS Technical Manual. Peak runoff rate calculations shall comply with the criteria given in the NPS Technical Manual and the Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(3)  The site for which temporary or permanent erosion and sediment control BMPs may be required include any off-site burrow, spoil, and staging areas, as well as any other land disturbed related to the project. 
(j)  Isolation of roof runoff and irrigation: If roof runoff is isolated from the site stormwater collection system and is used for irrigation, the system shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The system shall comply with the pollutant removal requirements of subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  No reduction in the water quality volume will be allowed as a result of choosing this method of pollution reduction; 
(3)  Roof runoff shall be collected and routed to a separate storage area distinct from that which collects and treats other stormwater runoff; 
(4)  The roof runoff system shall provide for the collection of no less than the required water quality volume. Harvesting and storage of additional runoff in excess of the minimum required water quality volume for on-site irrigation is allowable; 
(5)  Roof runoff in excess of the minimum required water quality volume may be routed to detention facilities or discharged to a water quality control; 
(6)  The system shall be designed to accept the water quality volume within seventy-two (72) hours after the end of the rainfall event and to detain and treat the water quality volume in accordance with the water quality control requirements of this chapter. For the purpose of this requirement, individual storm events shall be separated by seventy-two (72) hours with no more than a trace of rainfall; and 
(7)  The collected water may be used to irrigate landscaped or natural areas on the site. Irrigation systems shall be designed in accordance with standard irrigation practices considering such factors as soil type slope, and vegetation and must be approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Secs. 28-64—28-66. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-67. - Water quality buffer zones. 
(a)  Water quality buffer zones (WQBZ) of fifteen (15) feet are required along natural creeks and swales with overall contributing drainage areas of twenty-five (25) acres or more within the corporate limits and ETJ of the city. A WQBZ of eighty-five (85) feet is established around all critical environmental features inside the corporate limits and ETJ of the city. 
(b)  All development activities, including temporary construction activities and landscaping activities, shall be restricted from the WQBZ, except the following development activities may be allowed if approved by the city: 
(1)  Roadway and driveway crossings (as close to perpendicular as practical); 
(2)  Hike and bike trails in accordance with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)  Maintenance and restoration of natural vegetation; 
(4)  Water quality control monitoring devices; 
(5)  Removal of trash, debris, pollutants; 
(6)  Utilities, as subject to the restrictions of subsection (3) of this section; 
(7)  Fences that do not obstruct flood flows; 
(8)  Public and private parks and open space, with development in the parks and open space limited to hiking, jogging, or walking trails, and excludes stables and corrals for animals; 
(9)  Private drives to allow access to property not otherwise accessible; 
(10)  Structural WQC's (only when unavoidable as deemed by the city). 
(c)  All utilities, other than wastewater utilities, shall be located outside the WQBZ except for crossings. Wastewater lift stations shall be located outside the WQBZ. On-site wastewater disposal system shall be located outside the WQBZ. Wastewater trunk lines and lateral lines shall be located outside the WQBZ to the maximum extent practical except for crossings. All wastewater trunk lines located in the WQBZ shall meet design standards and construction specifications of testing to a zero leakage allowable. 
(d)  All water quality control discharges and stormwater discharges onto a WQBZ shall have diffused sheet flow. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Secs. 28-68—28-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 28-101. - Charges and fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of implementing its non-point source pollution prevention management program and the cost of implementing this chapter, which costs may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Permit review fees. Fees for review or re-review of applications and submittals associated with the development or redevelopment of property; 
(2)  Permit issuance fees. Fees for inspections and re-inspections, general consultation with the applicant, review and re-reviews of submittals required as conditions for issuance of permits, and for review of maintenance plans; 
(3)  Operation and maintenance fee. Fee for issuance of the operations and maintenance permit needed every five (5) years, and consisting of monitoring, inspections, and surveillance including the cost of collecting and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by dischargers, and for review of maintenance plans and updates thereto; and 
(4)  [Other fees.] Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(b)  Fees and charges described above may be combined or separated and shall be billed as described in the Master Fee Schedule, Appendix C, of this Code, which may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2008-O-02H, § II, 3-10-08; Ord. No. 2017-O-02H, § II, 2-21-2017 )  
Sec. 28-102. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-103. - Variances. 
(a)  General. Where the planning and zoning commission recommends, and the city council finds, that undue hardships will result from strict compliance with a certain provision(s) of this chapter, or where the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve a variance from portions of these regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured, provided that the variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and the purpose of these regulations, and further provided that the city council shall not approve a variance unless is shall make finding based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1)  Granting the variance will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, and will not be injurious to other property or to the owners of other property, and the variance will not prevent the orderly development or use of other property in the vicinity; 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought, and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the property owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out; 
(4)  The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning, land use, or subdivision ordinances, or the comprehensive plan or any other adopted plans or ordinances of the city; 
(5)  An alternate design will generally achieve the same result or intent as the standards and regulations prescribed herein. 
Such findings of the city council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the city council at which a variance is considered. A variance from any provision of this chapter may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the property owner or developer, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(b)  Conditions. In approving a variance, the city council may require such conditions as will, in its judgments, secure substantially the purpose described in section 28-7. 
(c)  Procedures: 
(1)  A petition for a variance shall be submitted in writing by the applicant before the required application or submittal is submitted for the consideration of the city's planning and zoning commission (commission). The petition shall fully state the grounds for the application, and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(2)  Where a hardship is identified pursuant to this chapter which requires issuance of a variance from a provision in this chapter, the commission may recommend a conditional variance from the provision in this chapter in conjunction with approval by the city council. A conditional variance from this chapter shall receive final approval provided that no new information or reasonable alternative plan exists which, at the determination of the city council, voids the need for a variance. All variances shall have final approval or disapproval by the city council. Any variance recommended for denial by the planning and zoning commission shall require a three-fourths majority for approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-104. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-105. - Release reporting and cleanup. 
(a)  The person in charge of any facility, vehicle, or other source of any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping, leaching, dumping, disposing, or any other release of any of the following quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach, enter, or otherwise be introduced into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state, shall immediately telephone and notify the city concerning the incident: 
(1)  An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR Part 302; 
(2)  An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any extremely hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR Part 355; 
(3)  An amount of oil that leaves a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of the water or an adjoining shoreline, or causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline; or 
(4)  Any harmful quantity of any pollutant. 
(b)  The immediate notification required by this chapter shall include the following information: 
(1)  The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and whether the substance is an extremely hazardous substance; 
(2)  The exact location of the release, including any known name of the waters involved or threatened and any other environmental media affected; 
(3)  The time and duration (thus far) of the release; 
(4)  An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the substance released; 
(5)  The source of the release; 
(6)  Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release and, where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention that may be necessary for exposed individuals (Material Safety Data Sheet reports); 
(7)  Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release; 
(8)  Any steps that have been taken to contain and clean up the released material and minimize its impacts; and 
(9)  The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be contacted for further information. 
(c)  Within fifteen (15) days following such release, the responsible person in charge of the facility, vehicle, or other source of the release shall, unless waived by the city council, submit a written report containing each of the items of information specified above in this chapter, as well as the following additional information: 
(1)  The ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of the release; 
(2)  All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the released substances, and all precautions taken to minimize the impacts; 
(3)  Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated with the release; 
(4)  Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for exposed individuals; 
(5)  The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives responding to the release; and 
(6)  The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible person(s) to prevent similar future occurrences. 
(d)  The notifications required by this chapter shall not relieve the responsible person of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the release, including any liability for damage to the city, to natural resources, or to any other person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the responsible person of any fine, penalty, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or to state or federal law. 
(e)  Any person responsible for any release as described in this chapter shall comply with all state, federal, and any other local law requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the release. 
(f)  Any person responsible for a release described in this chapter shall reimburse the city for any cost incurred by the city in responding to the release. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-106. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-107. - Access for maintenance and monitoring. 
To provide necessary access for maintenance and monitoring, water quality controls must be contained within a water quality easement or restricted, platted lot. The easement documents shall note that water quality restrictions exist on the property or easement and that any alternative use or alteration must be approved by the city. Also, an access easement with suitable means of ingress and egress for construction equipment shall be provided to access the designated water quality easement. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-108. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-109. - Compliance monitoring—Right of entry and inspection. 
(a)  Right of entry during construction. Any owner who has filed a notice under section 28-53(b), an NPS pollution control authorization or operating permit application or has received an NPS pollution control authorization or operating permit under this chapter shall allow entry by the city on the site for the purposes of inspection and monitoring. Employees and agents of the city manager are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions related to water quality and administration of this chapter. They shall notify the owner or his designated agent prior to entering the site for inspection purposes. 
(1)  Predevelopment inspection. After the issuance of any authorization or permit required under this chapter, but before the installation of permanent erosion and sedimentation controls and before development commences, the applicant shall provide a written request to the city for an inspection of the temporary erosion controls and water quality controls. This predevelopment inspection will be attended by the city engineer who will determine whether the temporary erosion and sedimentation controls and water quality controls will be in compliance with the NPS pollution control authorization or operating permit. If the city does not conduct the predevelopment inspection within five (5) business days of receipt of the request for inspection, the applicant may proceed with development. 
(2)  Inspections during development. During development, the city will inspect the site to ensure that temporary and permanent erosion controls are being maintained and that the permanent NPS pollution controls and BMPs are being constructed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Final inspection. Upon completion of development, the city will conduct a final inspection of the NPS pollution controls and BMPs used. This final development inspection must be attended by the permittee, city engineer, the design engineer, contractor, and field engineer. The city engineer will determine whether the NPS pollution controls are in compliance with the NPS pollution control authorization or operating permit. 
(4)  Permittee shall confirm that water quality controls are constructed in conformance with the approved design by providing a concurrence letter certified by the permittee's design engineer. 
(5)  The permittee's fiscal security for construction of temporary and permanent NPS pollution controls and BMPs will be released in accordance with section 28-111. 
(b)  Right of entry and periodic inspection of completed projects. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any site discharging stormwater to the stormwater drainage system, to water quality controls, or to water in the state to determine if the permittee or discharger is complying with all requirements of this chapter, and with any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement. Permittees or dischargers shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties. Permittees or dischargers shall make available to the city, upon request, any SWPPPs, operating permits, site development permits, construction permits, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, NOIs, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this chapter and with any state or federal discharge permit. 
a.  Where the owner has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the permittee or discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities. 
b.  The city may require any owner whose property discharges into or adjacent to the stormwater drainage system or water in the state or any permittee to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring. 
c.  The city may require the owner or permittee to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the permittee or discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
d.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the permittee or discharger at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner. 
e.  Unreasonable delaying or denying access by the city to the permittee's discharger's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  City will inspect facilities authorized under this chapter from time to time to confirm that proper maintenance of the facilities and to ensure compliance with the authorization. City will inspect the facilities at least once every two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-110. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-111. - Fiscal security. 
(a)  This section applies to owners and developers of all developments, re-developments, and other construction that are required to obtain NPS pollution control authorization, as described in subsection 28-53(c), or an operating permit, as described in section 28-55. 
(b)  Fiscal security shall be provided by the owner or developer for the construction of temporary erosion and sedimentation controls and for water quality controls, under the following considerations: 
(1)  Fiscal security shall be provided if the development is single-family subdivision, or multi-family residential or nonresidential development regardless if a plat is required; and 
(2)  Fiscal security shall be provided for new construction of controls and for redevelopment modifications to existing controls; and 
(3)  Fiscal security shall be provided if the application to construct or modify the controls under a site development plan is submitted to the city after the development application is submitted to the city for the city's approval of the final plat. 
(c)  Fiscal security shall be provided to the city in order to obtain NPS pollution control authorization. 
(d)  The amount of the fiscal security shall be determined and certified by the developer's engineer's and shall be equal to the full construction cost of the temporary controls and one hundred (100) percent of the re-vegetation of the entire site of the proposed project. 
(e)  The city may require fiscal security for permanent erosion and sedimentation controls and for water quality controls in order to obtain an operating permit if the applicant has violated its NPS control approval, or if the permanent controls are in close proximity to a critical environmental feature. 
(f)  Fiscal security for the controls shall be in the form of cash escrow or a cashier's check or money order in the specified amount. If authorized by the city, a performance bond or a letter of credit may be considered by the city, as security for the construction of the controls. The issuer of any surety bond and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the city. 
(1)  Performance bond. If the city manager authorizes the developer to post a performance bond as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the performance bond shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  All performance bonds must be in the forms acceptable to the city manager and the city attorney; and 
b.  All performance bonds must be executed by such sureties as are named in the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies" as published in Circular 570 (amended) by Financial Management Service, Surety Bond Branch, U.S. Department of the Treasury; and 
c.  All performance bonds must be signed by an agent accompanied by a certified copy of the authority to act; and 
d.  All performance bonds shall be obtained from surety or insurance companies that are duly licensed or authorized in the State of Texas to issue performance bonds for the limits and coverage required. 
If the surety on any performance bond furnished by the owner is declared to be bankrupt or becomes insolvent or its right to do business is terminated in the State of Texas or the surety ceases to meet the requirements to be listed in Circular 570, the owner shall within twenty (20) calendar days thereafter substitute another performance bond and surety, both of which must be acceptable to the city. 
(2)  Letter of credit. If the city manager authorizes the developer to post a letter of credit as security, the letter of credit shall: 
a.  Be irrevocable; and 
b.  Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, and warranty periods, but in no event less than two (2) years; and 
c.  Required only that the city present the issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an authorized representative of the city certifying to the city's right to draw funds under the letter of credit. 
(g)  Upon acceptance by the city of all required construction of the controls, the city will authorize a reduction in the security to ten (10) percent of the original amount of the security if the property owner is not in violation of the permit requirements. The remaining security shall be security for the owner's covenant to maintain the required controls and to warrant that the improvements are free from defects for two (2) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 2019-O-01B , § II.E, 1-15-2019)  
Sec. 28-112. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-113. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The city may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of pollution discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this chapter, any order issued hereunder, or any required BMP. The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or any industrial activity at the site, or to assume occupancy, until such a performance bond has been filed. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The city may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to submit proof that it has obtained liability insurance, or other financial assurance, in an amount not to exceed a value determined by the city, that is sufficient to remediate, restore, and abate any damage to the stormwater drainage system, the water in the state, or any other aspect of the environment that is caused by the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-114. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-115. - Stop orders. 
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the city manager may order the work stopped by notice in writing (referred to as a "stop work order") served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done. The stop work order shall be posted on the property adjacent to the activity in question, and any such person shall forthwith stop work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-116. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-117. - Permit or authorization revocation. 
A violation of this chapter shall authorize the city manager to cancel any permit or authorization depending in whole or in part on any approval under this chapter. If a permit or authorization is canceled, no further work shall be done on the project made the subject of the permit or authorization until the violation has been cured and new submittals under this chapter, as required by the city manager, have been made and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and a new permit or authorization has been issued. Permanent stabilization of the site shall immediately be required, and the city may fund the establishment of permanent stabilization through the fiscal security provided in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 28-118. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-119. - Denial of approvals and permits. 
A violation of this chapter shall authorize the city manager to deny any other approvals or permits sought by the person violating this chapter under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-O-002, § 1, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 28-120. - Reserved.  
Sec. 28-121. - Penalties and injunctive relief. 
Any person violating this chapter, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-9 of this Code. Any person violating this chapter is subject to suit for injunctive relief, civil penalties, as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-O-6B, § IV, 7-9-2007)  
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the franchises of the city as originally adopted. Amendments have been inserted and are indicated by history notes in parentheses following the amended sections. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Any other additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance granting any right or franchise in establishing any rates therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; franchise operations on streets, sidewalks and other public places, § 22-41 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL TELEPHONE COMPANY OF THE SOUTHWEST 
ORDINANCE NO. 83-O-7C 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO GENERAL TELEPHONE COMPANY OF THE SOUTHWEST, GRANTEE, AND ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, TO CONSTRUCT, ERECT, BUILD, EQUIP, OWN, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE IN, ALONG, UNDER, OVER AND ACROSS THE STREETS, AVENUES, ALLEYS, BRIDGES, VIADUCTS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS, SUCH POSTS, POLES, WIRES, CABLES, CONDUITS AND OTHER APPLIANCES, STRUCTURES AND FIXTURES NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT FOR RENDITION OF TELEPHONE AND OTHER COMMUNICATION SERVICE AND FOR CONDUCTING A GENERAL LOCAL AND LONG DISTANCE TELEPHONE BUSINESS; PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION; FOR PERIOD OF GRANT; FOR ASSIGNMENT; FOR METHOD OF ACCEPTANCE; FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES AND FOR PARTIAL INVALIDITY. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS: 
 
Section I. - Grant Of Right, Privilege And Franchise For Construction And Maintenance Of Telephone Plant And Service. 
That the right, privilege and franchise be, and the same is hereby, granted to General Telephone Company of the Southwest, hereinafter referred to as the "Telephone Company," and its successors or assigns, subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth, to construct, erect, build, equip, own, maintain and operate in, along, under, over and across the streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, viaducts and public grounds of the City, such posts, poles, wires, cables, conduits and other appliances, structures and fixtures necessary or convenient for rendering telephone and other communication services and for conducting a general local/extended area and long-distance telephone business.  
Section II. - Supervision By City Of Location Of Poles And Conduit. 
That all poles to be placed shall be of sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be so set that they will not interfere with the flow of water to any gutter or drain, and so that the same will interfere as little as practicable with the ordinary travel on the street or sidewalk. The location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, conduits and cables to be placed and constructed by the Telephone Company in the construction and maintenance of its telephone system in the City, and the location of all conduits to be laid by the Telephone Company within the limits of the City under this Ordinance, shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction of the City Council or of any City official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated. 
That nothing in this Ordinance is intended to add to or detract from any authority granted by the Legislature of the State of Texas to the City.  
Section III. - Streets To Be Restored To Good Condition. 
That the surface of any street, alley, highway or public place within the City disturbed by the Telephone Company in building, constructing, renewing or maintaining its telephone plant and system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work and maintained to the satisfaction of the City Council, or of any City official to whom such duties have been or may be delegated, for one year from the date the surface of said street, alley, highway or public place is broken for such construction or maintenance work, after which time responsibility for the maintenance shall become the duty of the City. No such street, alley, highway, or public place shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work.  
Section IV. - Temporary Removal Of Wires. 
That the Telephone Company on the request of any person shall remove or raise or lower its wires within the City temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the benefited party or parties, and the Telephone Company may require such payment in advance. The Telephone Company shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. The clearance of wires aboveground or rails within the City and also underground work shall conform to the basic standards of the National Electrical Safety Code, National Bureau of Standards, United States Department of Commerce, as promulgated at the time of erection thereof.  
Section V. - Tree Trimming. 
That the right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to the Telephone Company, its successors and assigns, to trim trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires or cables of the Telephone Company, and when so ordered by the City, said trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the City Council or of any City official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated.  
Section VI. - Annual Cash Consideration To Be Paid By The Telephone Company. 
That to indemnify the City for any and all possible damages to its streets, alleys, and public grounds which may result from the placing therein of the Telephone Company's poles, conduits, or other equipment or apparatus, and to compensate the City for its superintendence of this agreement, and as the cash consideration for the same, the Telephone Company agrees to pay to the City annually during the continuance of this agreement a sum of money equal to Four percent (4%) of the annual gross receipts derived by the Telephone Company from exchange access rates, contained in Section 6 and 36 of its approved General Exchange Tariff, charged customers within the corporate limits of the City during the preceding year. The first payment hereunder shall be made March 31, 1984, and shall equal in amount to four percent (4%) of the gross receipts derived from exchange access rates from the date of acceptance of this Ordinance to December 31, 1983; and thereafter payment shall be made annually on March 31, as herein provided.  
Section VII. - Payment Of Cash Consideration To Be In Lieu Of Any Other Payments Except Usual General Or Special Ad Valorem Taxes. 
That the City agrees that the consideration set forth in the preceding section hereof shall be paid and received in lieu of any tax, license, charge, fee, street or alley rental or any other character of charge for use and occupancy of the streets, alleys, and public places of the City; in lieu of any pole tax or inspection fee tax; in lieu of any easement or franchise tax, whether levied as an ad valorem, special or other character of tax; and in lieu of any imposition other than the usual general or special ad valorem taxes now or hereafter levied. Should the City not have the legal power to agree that the payment of the foregoing cash consideration shall be in lieu of the taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals, and easements or franchise taxes aforesaid, then the City agrees that it will apply so much of said payment as may be necessary to the satisfaction of the Telephone Company's obligations, if any, to pay any such taxes, licenses, charges, fees, rentals, and easements or franchise taxes.  
Section VIII. - No Exclusive Privileges Conferred By This Ordinance. 
That nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving to the Telephone Company any exclusive privileges.  
Section IX. - Successors And Assigns. 
That the rights, powers, limitations, duties and restrictions herein provided for shall insure to and be binding upon the parties hereto and upon their respective successors and assigns.  
Section X. - Period Of Franchise. 
That this agreement shall be in full force and effect for the period beginning with the effective date hereof and ending Twenty-Five (25) years after such date. However, the City of Marble Falls expressly reserves the right to renegotiate any aspect of this Franchise agreement at any time after providing notice of intent Ninety (90) days before said negotiations are to begin. It is agreed that any change resulting from said negotiations would not become effective until the next full year term or anniversary date of this agreement begins.  
Section XI. - Partial Invalidity And Repeal Provisions. 
That if any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be illegal, ultra vires or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. All ordinances and agreements and parts of ordinances and agreements in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.  
Section XII. - Acceptance Of Agreement. 
That the Telephone Company shall have sixty (60) days from and after the passage and approval of this Ordinance to file its written acceptance thereof with the City Secretary, and upon such acceptance being filed, this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of its acceptance, and shall effectuate and make binding the agreement provided by the terms hereof. 
APPROVED this 26th day of July, A.D. 1983.  
ARTICLE II. - HIGHLANDS CABLE TELEVISION, INC.[2] 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A PERMIT TO MARBLE FALLS TELEVISION CABLE CO., FOR THE PURPOSE OF RECEIVING, AMPLIFYING, AND DISTRIBUTING TELEVISION SIGNALS AND TELEVISION TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 71-O-12, adopted Dec. 14, 1971, provided for the transfer of the television cable franchise as follows: 
  "The Highlands Cable Television, Inc. is hereby approved as the assignee of Wes-Tex Cable Corporation, and is hereby authorized to operate under such franchise agreement, subject to the terms and conditions of that agreement and for the same period of time set forth in that agreement." 
 
Section 1. - [Grant of Franchise to Westex Cable Corporation.] 
That there is hereby granted to Westex Cable Corporation, a Texas corporation doing business as Marble Falls Television Cable Co., its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the Grantee, the right, privilege and franchise to construct, maintain and operate in the present and future, in the streets, roads, alleys and public places of the City of Marble Falls, a television signal distribution system consisting of a tower, or towers, poles and cables, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances, including underground conduit for the purpose of supplying television signals to said city.  
Section 2. - [Entering streets, alleys and public places for purpose of making excavations, etc.] 
That said Grantee, its agents and employees, may enter in and upon said streets, alleys and public places at any time for the purpose of making excavations, installing, removing, repairing and maintaining such poles, wires, cables and all other structures necessary or convenient in supplying such television signal service. Any and all excavations shall be repaired and obstructions removed as quickly as it is reasonably possible under the circumstances.  
Section 3. - [Percentage of Gross Receipts to be Paid to City.] 
For and in consideration of the right, privilege and franchise herein granted, the Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall pay to the City of Marble Falls, Texas, during the term of this franchise, a sum of two percent (2%) of the Grantee's gross receipts derived from monthly service charges to customers within the corporate limits of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. Payment of said sum in accordance with the foregoing, shall be made on an annual, fiscal year basis. The above payments shall be in lieu of any other tax, or other imposition, assessment or charge, except ad valorem taxes.  
Section 4. - [Duration, Renewal of Franchise.] 
This franchise shall be in force and effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from acceptance and shall thereupon terminate and all licenses and privileges shall cease unless more than six (6) months before expiration date and not more than one (1) year prior to said expiration date, the Grantee shall tender to the said City of Marble Falls, notice of its intention to renew this franchise, in which event the same shall be renewed for a term of five (5) years, and in like manner this franchise may be renewed for successive terms of five (5) years thereafter, not to exceed five (5).  
Section 5. - [Grantee to File Written Acceptance, Cover Costs of Publication.] 
That the Grantee shall within thirty (30) days from the passage and approval of this Ordinance, file with the city secretary of the City of Marble Falls, a written acceptance of this Ordinance and at the same time pay to the said city secretary a sum of money sufficient to cover the cost of publication of this Ordinance.  
Section 6. - [Public liability insurance.] 
The Grantee shall furnish public liability insurance in a solvent surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, to be approved by the city secretary, to indemnify and save the City harmless from damages or injury to persons or property, and loss and expense caused by the negligence or default of the Grantee.  
Section 7. - [City not to engage in competitive business or operation.] 
That the City of Marble Falls, by and through its City Commission agrees that, for the life of this franchise, said City will not engage in a business or operation competitive with that of Grantee.  
Section 8. - [Rates established, approved by city commission.] 
Grantee shall set its rates to its customers in the City of Marble Falls, but the rates shall be subject to the approval of the City Commission. The initial rates for installation and for service by Grantee are as set out in the schedule attached to this ordinance and are hereby approved by the Commission. Any proposed change to increase such rates shall be submitted by Grantee in writing to the City Clerk not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the effective date of the proposed increase, after which period such change shall be effective unless the City Commission shall disapprove the proposed change prior to its effective date. 
Passed and approved this the 10 day of Aug., 1961.  
ARTICLE III. - NORTHLAND CABLE TELEVISION, INC.[3] 
ORDINANCE 2003-O-3D 
CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS 
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE ORDINANCE 
WHEREAS Northland Cable Television, Inc.'s legal, character, financial, technical, and other qualifications, and the adequacy and feasibility of its cable television service, and its plans for the future cable-related needs and interests of the City of Marble Falls, Texas have been approved as part of a full public proceeding affording due process; and 
WHEREAS the City of Marble Falls, Texas hereby desires to grant the application for franchise renewal to Northland Cable Television, Inc. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED as follows: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly Article III pertained to Northland Cable Properties Three Limited Partnership as derived from Ord. No. 92-O-8, adopted Aug. 28, 1992. Art. III was deleted as superceded by Ord. No. 2003-O-3D, adopted Apr. 28, 2003, which pertains to Northland Cable Television, Inc. and reads as herein set out. 
 
Section 1. - Short Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television Franchise Ordinance" or "this Ordinance".  
Section 2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  "City" is the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
(b)  "Cable System" means a system of coaxial cables, optical fiber or other transmission facilities, electrical conductors and such ancillary receiving and processing equipment, and any and all other equipment necessary or convenient for (i) the transmission of television, radio and any other lawful signals, and (ii) the delivery of video programming, other programming and related services not prohibited by federal law. 
(c)  "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(d)  "Grantee" is Northland Cable Television, Inc., a Washington corporation, or any Person who succeeds it, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(e)  "Franchise" shall mean and include any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, and license or otherwise to construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, upgrade and rebuild a Cable System within the City. 
(f)  "Gross Subscriber Receipts" shall include any and all receipts actually received by Grantee from recurring monthly service charges to its subscribers within the City for cable television programming services, but shall not include: (i) any refunds or credits made to subscribers or any taxes imposed on the services furnished by Grantee, or collected by Grantee on behalf of any governmental entity, including any franchise fee imposed on subscribers, (ii) receipts from ancillary or auxiliary services, which include but are not limited to: installations; equipment rentals; advertising; commissions from the sale of goods and services; leased access channels; video programming supplied on a per-program or per-channel charge basis; facsimile, voice or data transmissions; and "return" or subscriber response communications, or (iii) bad debt.  
Section 3. - Grant of Nonexclusive Authority. 
(a)  The City hereby grants to the Grantee the non-exclusive franchise, right, authority and privilege to construct, erect, operate, maintain, repair, replace, upgrade and rebuild in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way, public ways and all other public places now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, in the City, a Cable System with all of the necessary and desirable appliances and appurtenances pertaining thereto. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Franchise granted hereby shall and does hereby include the right in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements and public grounds and places in the City to install, operate, erect or in any way acquire the use of all lines and equipment necessary or convenient to the Cable System and the right to make connections to subscribers and the right to repair, replace, enlarge and extend said lines, equipment and connections. 
(b)  The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, easements, public ways and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive, and the City reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, easements, public ways and places, to any Person at any time during the period of this Franchise; provided, however, that no such grant shall be made on terms and conditions less restrictive or more favorable than those contained in this Ordinance and only in a public proceeding affording due process.  
Section 4. - Use of Existing Pole Line Facilities. 
There is hereby granted the further right, privilege, and authority to the Grantee to lease, rent, or in any other manner obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment, and facilities from the City and any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the limits of the City, and to use such towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities, subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the City. When and where practicable, the poles used for the Grantee's distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by the City or the public utilities serving the City; provided that mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be entered into by the Grantee with the City or said companies which, in any case, shall be no less favorable or more burdensome to Grantee than to any other user of such pole facility; otherwise, the Grantee may erect its own poles when and where required. The Grantee shall not be obligated to service areas to where it is unable to obtain pole line facilities located in a direct route to such areas and the Grantee is not required to erect or obtain the use of pole line facilities along an indirect or circuitous route, nor is the Grantee required to use underground conduits in areas where underground conduits are not in use, in order to supply service to such areas. In areas or locations where underground conduit is in use, or shall at some future date be used by public utility companies serving the City, the Grantee by negotiation with said companies when and where practicable, will join in the use of underground facilities, provided mutually satisfactory agreements can be entered into with said companies, which, in any event, shall be no less favorable or more burdensome to Grantee than to any other user of such facility, otherwise, the grantee may install its own underground conduit and facilities. Under no circumstances shall the Grantee be obligated to place its facilities underground except in accordance with Section 10(g) hereof.  
Section 5. - Duration. 
This Franchise shall continue in full force and effect for a period of ten (10) years commencing on the date this ordinance is signed and approved by the Mayor of the City, and upon the expiration thereof shall be renewed for a like period at the option of the Grantee.  
Section 6. - Territorial Area Involved. 
This Franchise relates to the present territorial limits of the City and to any area henceforth added or annexed thereto during the term of this Franchise.  
Section 7. - System Construction and Description. 
(a)  The Grantee's Cable System shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or unreasonably interfere with the lives of persons, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property. 
(b)  All installations of equipment shall be durable, and installed in accordance with good engineering practices, and of sufficient height to comply with all existing regulations, ordinances, and state laws so as not to interfere with the right of the public or individual property owners, and shall not unreasonably interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public and during the construction, repair, or removal thereof, shall not unreasonably obstruct or impede traffic. 
(c)  In the maintenance and operation of its Cable System in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, the Grantee shall use its reasonable best efforts to proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public. As to any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the Grantee in the course of its operations, Grantee shall use its reasonable best efforts to ensure that such opening or obstruction shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of barriers, fences, or boarding, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be designated by warning lights. 
(d)  The Grantee and the City shall grant to each other, free of additional expense or fee, joint use of any and all poles owned by either party for any proper purpose, insofar as the same may be done without interfering with the use and enjoyment of either party's own wires and other facilities and provided that all such joint use shall be in full compliance with all rules, regulations, requirements and conditions of the National Electrical Safety Code prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters affecting electrical installations which may be presently in effect or future changes thereto. 
(e)  In furtherance of the intent of Section 7(d), it is the stated intention of the City that the City and all public utilities and other holders of public licenses and franchises under the jurisdiction of the City shall cooperate with the Grantee to allow the Grantee's joint usage of poles and pole line facilities wherever possible or wherever such usage does not unreasonably interfere with the normal operation of said poles and pole lines so that the number of new or additional poles constructed by the Grantee within the City may be minimized. Such cooperation shall include the rights of joint usage at reasonable rates and on reasonable terms in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(f)  The Grantee shall not be required to extend its Cable System to serve any area within the franchised area unless or until (i) such area shall have a density of forty-five (45) dwelling units per cable mile, and (ii) such dwelling units are situated along public easements over which Grantee can, through reasonable means, gain access.  
Section 8. - Indemnification. 
Except for the negligence of, or the willful acts or omissions of the City, its officials, agents and employees, the Grantee shall, to the extent of the insurance coverage required pursuant to Section 9 hereof, indemnify, protect and save harmless the City from and against losses and physical damages to property, and bodily injury or death to persons which may arise out of or be caused by the improper or negligent erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of its Cable System or said attachments on poles within the City, or by any improper or negligent act of the Grantee, its agents or employees. The City shall notify the Grantee in writing, within ten (10) days after the presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the City on account of any aforesaid reasons. Where any such claim or demand made against the City is made by suit or other legal action, written notice shall be given by the City to the Grantee not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date upon which an answer to such legal action is due or within fifteen (15) days after the claim or demand is made upon the City, whichever notice yields the grantee the greater amount of time within which to prepare an answer. Failure by the City to properly notify the Grantee in accordance with the foregoing of any suit, claim or demand against the City shall release the Grantee from its obligations to indemnify the City as provided herein.  
Section 9. - Liability Insurance. 
The Grantee shall carry insurance to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage described in Section 8 above. The amounts of such insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall not be less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) as to any one accident and not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) aggregate in any single policy year; and against liability due to bodily injury or to death of persons not less than five hundred thousand ($500,000) as to any one person and not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) as to any one accident. The Grantee shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it from all claims under the workmen's compensation laws in effect that may be applicable to the Grantee. All insurance required by this ordinance shall be and remain in full force and effect for the term of this Franchise.  
Section 10. - Conditions on Street Occupancy. 
(a)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by the Grantee within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum material interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys, or other public ways and places. 
(b)  In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the Grantee shall at its own cost and expense, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in as reasonably good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. 
(c)  If at any time during the period of the Franchise the City shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, the Grantee upon reasonable notice by the City shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense; provided, however, that if the City pays for the relocation of the facilities of any utility, Grantee shall not be required to pay the cost. 
(d)  Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the Grantee shall be placed in such manner as not to unreasonably interfere with the usual travel on such public way, or to, unreasonably endanger users of such public way. 
(e)  The Grantee shall, on the request of any Person holding a building moving permit lawfully issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the Person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given not less than five (5) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)  The Grantee shall have the authority but not the obligation to trim trees upon the overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the facilities of the Grantee, after notification of the City of Marble Falls. 
(g)  In the areas of the City where all of the cables, wires, or other like facilities of all public utilities are placed underground, the Grantee shall place its cables, wires or other facilities underground, so long as Grantee can obtain reasonable access to such underground facilities.  
Section 11. - Complaint Procedure. 
The Grantee shall maintain a business office in the City for the purpose of receiving inquiries and complaints from its subscribers and the general public. Grantee shall endeavor to investigate all complaints within two (2) business days of their receipt and shall in good faith attempt to resolve them swiftly and equitably. A report of service issues shall be provided to the City on a quarterly basis.  
Section 12. - Operation and Maintenance of System. 
The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for cause and for the shortest time possible. Any planned service interruptions, insofar as possible, shall occur during periods of minimum use of the Cable System.  
Section 13. - Preferential or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. 
Grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, services, facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any Person, nor subject any Person to undue prejudice or disadvantage.  
Section 14. - Franchise Fee. 
During the term of this Franchise and the Grantee's active operation of its Cable System under the terms of this Franchise, the Grantee shall pay to the City a fee equal to five percent (5%) of the Gross Subscriber Receipts received by the Grantee from the Subscribers in the City. The franchise fee shall be paid annually, in arrears, within one hundred and twenty (120) days following the 1st day of January of each year and shall be computed on the basis of Gross Subscriber Receipts received by the Grantee during the immediately preceding calendar year ending on the 31st day of December. The fee payable to the City hereunder shall be in lieu of any other license, excise or privilege taxes or fees or similar charges that may be imposed by the City on Grantee.  
Section 15. - Free Installations and Service. 
(a)  Grantee shall, at no cost, make one installation each and provide its basic cable service at the following locations: 
(1)  All public and non-profit private schools, colleges and universities located in the City; 
(2)  The City Hall or the main municipal office used by the City or such other office designated by the City; 
(3)  All police, fire stations, public works offices, or any City emergency facility located in the City; 
(4)  All public and non-profit private hospitals located in the City; and 
(5)  All public libraries located in the City. 
Grantee's obligations hereunder shall be limited to making one standard installation at a single point on the premises reasonably convenient to use and shall not require the wiring of an entire building. Grantee shall not be obligated to extend its facilities to provide the services described in this Section unless the conditions specified in Section 7(f) have been met. 
(b)  In the event service calls or repairs are required for any location as to which installation or service is rendered without charge, Grantee shall be entitled to fair and reasonable compensation for any repairs.  
Section 16. - Emergency Use of Facilities. 
In the case of emergency or disaster, the Grantee shall, upon request of the City, broadcast such emergency information as may be requested by City.  
Section 17. - Transfers and Change of Control. 
(a)  All of the rights and privileges and all of the obligations, duties and liabilities created by the Franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the successors of the City and the successors and assigns of Grantee; and the same shall not be assigned or transferred without the written approval of the City, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, that transfers or assignments of the Franchise from the Grantee to Northland Communications Corporation ("NCC") or to an affiliate of NCC shall be permitted without the prior approval of the City. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the City hereby approves the encumbrance of the Franchise and the assets of the Cable System and the hypothecation and assignment of same, for security purposes in connection with the financing and refinancing, from time to time, of the Cable System, the Grantee's operations and the Franchise by the Grantee.  
Section 18. - Filings and Communications with Regulatory Agencies. 
Upon the written request of the City, Grantee shall, subject to redaction by Grantee for confidential or sensitive business information, provide the City with copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the Grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matters directly affecting cable television operations authorized pursuant to this Ordinance.  
Section 19. - Termination. 
If Grantee violates any of the material terms, conditions or provisions of this Ordinance and Grantee fails to comply with the City's request to correct such material non-compliance, or commence reasonably appropriate actions to cure such non-compliance within one hundred twenty (120) days after Grantee's receipt of written notice from the City (such notice stating the specific nature of such violation or failure to comply), then the City shall have the right to commence proceedings to terminate the Franchise granted by this Ordinance; provided that such termination shall be declared only by written decision of the City after appropriate proceedings affording grantee due process and full opportunity to be heard and respond to any such notice of violation or failure to comply; and provided further that the City may, in its discretion and upon a finding of violation or failure to comply, impose a lesser penalty than termination of the franchise or excuse the violation or failure to comply upon a showing by the grantee of mitigating circumstances. In the event that the City, after reasonable deliberation and based upon a preponderance of the evidence, terminates the Grantee's Franchise, Grantee shall be afforded a nine (9) month period within which to sell, transfer, or convey its cable system to a qualified purchaser at fair market value (the "sale period"). During the Sale Period (which shall commence on the effective date of a final, non-appealable order or decision of a court of competent jurisdiction imposing termination) the Grantee shall have the right to operate the system pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.  
Section 20. - Safety Requirements. 
(a)  The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use methods and devices commonly accepted in the cable television industry for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  The Grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in material compliance with the requirements of state and national electrical codes, and in such a manner that they will not unreasonably interfere with any installations of the City or of a public utility serving the City. 
(c)  All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the City, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair.  
Section 21. - Additional Regulations. 
After notice and a hearing, the City reserves the right to adopt, in addition to the provisions included in this Ordinance, such additional reasonable regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power; provided, however, that such regulations are not economically burdensome, are not in conflict with the privileges granted by this Ordinance, and provided, further that any such regulations shall not require the Grantee to redesign or reconstruct its plant and facilities.  
Section 22. - Inspection and Administration. 
The City or its authorized designee shall have the right, at its sole cost and expense, to inspect all pertinent books, records, maps, plans, financial statements, and other like materials of the Grantee relating to this Ordinance. Such materials will be made available by the Grantee in its office during normal business hours, upon receipt of reasonable notice from the City. City shall keep all such information confidential, showing such information only to its employees and contractors with a "need to know" for the limited purposes of the investigation which prompted City's request for inspection.  
Section 23. - Separability. 
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of this ordinance and any portions in conflict shall be repealed.  
Section 24. - Conflicting Ordinances. 
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.  
Section 25. - Level of service. 
Grantee currently uses and will endeavor in the future to use, current, state-of-the-art technology, as it becomes available and to the extent economically and technically feasible, that is best suited for the services provided by grantee. Grantee must provide emergency broadcast capability as mandated by the FCC. 
PASSED by an affirmative vote of the members of the City Council of the City of Marble Falls, Texas, this 28th day of April, 2003. 
This ordinance shall take effect on the 28th day of May, 2003 as outlined by the Marble Falls Home Rule Charter §8.02.  
ARTICLE IV. - TXU GAS COMPANY[4] 
ORDINANCE 2003-O-1C 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE EXISTING GAS FRANCHISE BETWEEN THE CITY AND TXU GAS COMPANY, TO PROVIDE FOR A DIFFERENT CONSIDERATION AND TO AUTHORIZE THE LEASE OF FACILITIES WITHIN THE CITY'S RIGHTS-OF-WAY; PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING FOR ACCEPTANCE BY TXU GAS COMPANY; FINDING AND DETERMINING THAT THE MEETING AT WHICH THIS ORDINANCE IS PASSED IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC AS REQUIRED BY LAW. 
WHEREAS, TXU Gas Company (hereinafter called "TXU Gas") is, through its TXU Gas Distribution division, engaged in the business of furnishing and supplying gas to the general public in the City, including the transportation, delivery, sale, and distribution of gas in, out of, and through the City for all purposes, and is using the public streets, alleys, grounds and rights-of-ways within the City for that purpose under the terms of a franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of the City and duly accepted by TXU Gas; and 
WHEREAS, the City and TXU Gas desire to amend said franchise ordinance to provide for a different consideration and to authorize the lease of facilities within the City's rights-of-way; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS: that 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly Article IV pertained to Lone Star Gas Company as derived from an ordinance adopted on May 9, 1949. Art. IV was deleted as superceded by Ord. No. 2003-O-1C, adopted Feb. 24, 2003, which pertains to TXU Gas Company and reads as herein set out. 
 
SECTION 1: - The Existing Gas Franchise Ordinance Between the City and Txu Gas Company is Amended as Follows: 
A.  Effective January 1, 2002, the consideration payable by TXU Gas for the rights and privileges granted to TXU Gas by the franchise ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of this City and duly accepted by TXU Gas shall be based on the Gross Revenues, as defined in Section 1.B. below, received by TXU Gas multiplied by the two percent (2%) factor provided for in the previously enacted and accepted franchise. 
B.  "Gross Revenues" shall mean all revenue derived or received, directly or indirectly, by the Company from or in connection with the operation of the System within the corporate limits of the City and including, without limitation: 
(1)  All revenues received by the Company from the sale of gas to all classes of customers within the City; 
(2)  All revenues received by the Company from the transportation of gas through the pipeline system of Company within the City to customers located within the City; 
(3)  The value of gas transported by Company for Transport Customers through the System of Company within the City ("Third Party Sales"), with the value of such gas to be reported by each Transport Customer to the Company, provided, however, that should a Transport Customer refuse to furnish Company its gas purchase price, Company shall estimate same by utilizing TXU Gas Distribution's monthly industrial Weighted Average Cost of Gas, as reasonably near the time as the transportation service is performed; and 
(4)  "Gross revenues" shall include: 
(a)  Other revenues derived from the following 'miscellaneous charges': 
i.  charges to connect, disconnect, or reconnect gas within the City; 
ii.  charges to handle returned checks from consumers within the City; 
iii.  such other service charges and charges as may, from time to time, be authorized in the rates and charges on file with the City; and 
iv.  contributions in aid of construction" ("CIAC"); 
(b)  Revenues billed but not ultimately collected or received by the Company; and, 
(c)  Gross receipts fees. 
(5)  "Gross revenues" shall not include: 
(a)  The revenue of any Person including, without limitation, an affiliate, to the extent that such revenue is also included in Gross Revenues of the Company; 
(b)  Sales taxes; and 
(c)  Any interest income earned by the Company; and 
(d)  All monies received from the lease or sale of real or personal property, provided, however, that this exclusion does not apply to the lease of facilities within the City's right of way. 
C.  Calculation and Payment of Franchise Fees Based on CIAC 
(1)  The franchise fee amounts based on "Contributions in aid of Construction" ("CIAC") shall be calculated on an annual calendar year basis, i.e., from January 1 through December 31 of each calendar year. 
(2)  The franchise fee amounts that are due based on CIAC shall be paid at least once annually on or before April 30 each year based on the total CIAC recorded during the preceding calendar year. 
D.  Effect of Other Municipal Franchise Ordinance Fees Accepted and Paid by TXU Gas 
(1)  If TXU Gas should at any time after the effective date of this Ordinance agree to a new municipal franchise ordinance, or renew an existing municipal franchise ordinance, with another municipality, which municipal franchise ordinance determines the franchise fee owed to that municipality for the use of its public rights-of-way in a manner that, if applied to the City, would result in a franchise fee greater than the amount otherwise due City under this Ordinance, then the franchise fee to be paid by TXU Gas to City pursuant to this Ordinance shall be increased so that the amount due and to be paid is equal to the amount that would be due and payable to City were the franchise fee provisions of that other franchise ordinance applied to City. 
(2)  The provisions of this Subsection D apply only to the amount of the franchise fee to be paid and do not apply to other franchise fee payment provisions, including without limitation the timing of such payments. 
E.  TXU Gas Franchise Fee Recovery Tariff 
(1)  TXU Gas may file with the City a tariff amendment(s) to provide for the recovery of the franchise fees under this amendment. 
(2)  City agrees that (i) as regulatory authority, it will adopt and approve the ordinance, rates or tariff which provide for 100% recovery of such franchise fees as part of TXU Gas' rates; (ii) if the City intervenes in any regulatory proceeding before a federal or state agency in which the recovery of TXU Gas' franchise fees is an issue, the City will take an affirmative position supporting 100% recovery of such franchise fees by TXU Gas and; (iii) in the event of an appeal of any such regulatory proceeding in which the City has intervened, the City will take an affirmative position in any such appeals in support of the 100% recovery of such franchise fees by TXU Gas. 
(3)  City agrees that it will take no action, nor cause any other person or entity to take any action, to prohibit the recovery of such franchise fees by TXU Gas. 
F.  Lease of Facilities Within City's Rights-of-Way. TXU Gas shall have the right to lease, license or otherwise grant to a party other than TXU Gas the use of its facilities within the City's public rights-of-way provided: (i) TXU Gas first notifies the City of the name of the lessee, licensee or user; the type of service(s) intended to be provided through the facilities; and the name and telephone number of a contact person associated with such lessee, licensee or user and (ii) TXU Gas makes the franchise fee payment due on the revenues from such lease pursuant to Sections I.A. and I.B. of this Ordinance. This authority to Lease Facilities Within City's Rights-of-Way shall not affect any such lessee, licensee or user's obligation, if any, to pay franchise fees.  
SECTION 2: - [Effective Franchise Ordinance.] 
In all respects, except as specifically and expressly amended by this Ordinance, the existing effective Franchise Ordinance heretofore duly passed by the governing body of the City and duly accepted by TXU Gas shall remain in full force and effect according to its terms until said Franchise Ordinance terminates as provided therein.  
SECTION 3: - [Effective Date.] 
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its final passage and TXU Gas' acceptance. TXU Gas shall, within thirty (30) days from the passage of this Ordinance, file its written acceptance of this Ordinance with the office of the City Secretary in substantially the following form: 
To the Honorable Mayor and City Council: 
TXU Gas Distribution, a division of TXU Gas Company, acting by and through the undersigned authorized officer, hereby accepts in all respects, on this the 24th day of February, 2003, Ordinance No. 2003-O-1C amending the current gas franchise between the City and TXU Gas and the same shall constitute and be a binding contractual obligation of TXU Gas and the City. 
TXU Gas Distribution 
A division of TXU Gas Company 
By ________________________________ 
Vice President  
SECTION 4. - [Ordinance Passed.] 
It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this Ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law and that public notice of the time, place and purpose of said meeting was given as required. 
PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS, this the 24th day of February, 2003, at which meeting a quorum was present and voting. 
This Ordinance shall take effect on the 24th day of April, 2003 as outlined by the Marble Falls Home Rule Charter § 8.02.  
ARTICLE V. - PEDERNALES ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INC.[5] 
Ordinance No. 2004-O-11A 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO PEDERNALES ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, AN ELECTRIC LIGHT, HEAT AND POWER FRANCHISE, AND REPEALING ALL PREVIOUS ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS, GRANTING A FRANCHISE FOR SUCH PURPOSE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARBLE FALLS, TEXAS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-O-11A, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 3, 2004, replaced the former franchise agreement with Pedernales Electric Cooperative, Inc. which derived from Ord. No. 2004-O-10G, § II, adopted Nov. 25, 2004. 
 
Section 1. - [Grant of Franchise; Term; Terminiation.] 
That there is hereby granted to Pedernales Electric Cooperative, Inc., its successors and assigns (herein called the "Grantee"), the right, privilege and franchise until December 31, 2024 to construct, maintain and operate in the present and future streets, alleys, and public places of the City of Marble Falls, Texas and its successors, electric light and power lines, with all necessary or desirable appurtenances (including underground conduits, poles, wires, transmission lines and other structures and telephone wires), for the purpose of supplying electricity to the said City, the inhabitants thereof, and persons and corporations beyond the limits thereof, for light, heat, power and other purposes.  
Section 2. - [Placement and Maintenance of Structures, Poles, Etc.] 
Poles, structures and other appurtenances shall be so erected and maintained as not to interfere unreasonably with traffic over streets and alleys.  
Section 3. - [Service.] 
In addition to the rates charged for electric service, Grantee may make and enforce reasonable charges, rules, and regulations for service rendered in the conduct of its business. The City of Marble Falls recognizes and acknowledges that the members of Grantee agree to abide by all rules and regulations of Grantee as members/customers and nothing in this ordinance should be construed to relieve any member of its obligations to Grantee or to abridge its rights of membership in Grantee. Grantee agrees to apply its policies, rules, regulations, and tariffs in a fair and uniform manner when providing electric service to its members who reside within the limits of the City of Marble Falls.  
Section 4. - [Indemnification of City.] 
In the event of injury to any person or damage to any property by reason of Grantee's construction, operation, maintenance, or replacement of Grantee's electric distribution system within public rights-of-way, Grantee shall indemnify and keep harmless the City of Marble Falls from liability in connection therewith, except to the extent such injury or damage is attributable to the City of Marble Falls' negligent act or omission or intentionally wrongful act or omission. Grantee has the sole right to control the defense and settlement of any claim or legal proceeding that gives rise to a right of indemnity under the immediately preceding sentence. In the event of injury to any person or damage to any property by reason of the City of Marble Falls' construction, operation, or maintenance of the public rights-of-way and facilities of the City of Marble Falls within the public rights-of-way, the City of Marble Falls shall indemnify and keep harmless Grantee from liability in connection therewith, to the extent permitted by law, except to the extent such injury or damage is attributable to Grantee's negligent act or omission or intentionally wrongful act or omission.  
Section 5. - [Abandonment of Public Rights-of-Way.] 
If the City of Marble Falls abandons any public rights-of-way in which Grantee has facilities, such abandonment shall be conditioned on Grantee's right to maintain its use of the former public rights-of-way and on the obligation of the party to whom the public rights-of-way are abandoned to reimburse Grantee for all removal and relocation expenses if Grantee agrees to the removal or relocation of its facilities following abandonment of the public rights-of-way.  
Section 6. - [Tree trimming.] 
Subject to the ordinances of the City of Marble Falls grantee shall have the right, license, privilege, and permission to trim trees and bushes upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and public places of the City of Marble Falls so as to prevent the branches thereof from coming in contact with the wires and cables of Grantee.  
Section 7. - [Third party prohibition.] 
This franchise is intended for the sole benefit of the City of Marble Falls and Grantee and shall not be construed to create any right, benefit, or cause of action in any third party.  
Section 8. - [Payment to City.] 
From and after the effective date of this agreement, the Grantee will pay quarterly to the City of Marble Falls for use of City streets, alleys, and public ways to deliver electricity to retail customers the following amount: 
Until Grantee implements customer choice, two percent of the gross receipts of theGrantee for the retail sale of electricity within the City of Marble Falls for the calendar year. 
On and after the date Grantee implements customer choice, $0.001239 for each kilowatt hour of electricity delivered within the City of Marble Falls for the calendar year.  
Section 9. - [Acceptance of Franchise.] 
The Grantee shall file its written acceptance of this franchise within sixty (60) days after its passage and approval.  
Section 10. - [Franchise Nonexclusive.] 
This franchise is not exclusive, and nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent the City of Marble Falls, Texas from granting other like or similar rights and privileges to any other person, firm or corporation consistent with applicable state law.  
Section 11. - [Affect of Franchise on City's Powers and Rights.] 
Nothing in this franchise agreement shall prevent the city from exercising any of its lawful rights and powers under the constitution and statutes of the State of Texas and/or the City Charter of the City of Marble Falls, Texas.  
Section 12. - [Separability.] 
If any section of this ordinance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the other sections of this ordinance will remain in full effect. Additionally, any provision of this ordinance held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid only in part or degree will remain in full effect to the extent not held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.  
Section 13. - [Effective.] 
When this franchise ordinance shall have become effective, all previous ordinances of the City of Marble Falls, Texas granting a franchise to the Grantee for electric light, heat and power purposes, shall be automatically canceled and annulled, and the same, together with any existing street rental agreement between the City of Marble Falls and the Grantee, shall be no further force and effect. 
This ordinance shall take effect on the 13th day of January, 2005, as outlined by the Marble Falls Home Rule Charter § 8.02.  
APPENDIX B - DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-O-10A , § II(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 23, 2018, repealed the former App. B, and enacted a new App. B as set out herein. The former App. B pertained to land use regulations. See the Code Comparative Table for a comprehensive history of the former land use regulations. 
The substantive provisions of Ord. No. 2018-O-10A have been included as enacted; however, the editor has added material in brackets in several instances for purposes of clarification and in order to facilitate indexing, reference and use. 
The absence of a history note following a section or subsection indicates that said section or subsection derives unchanged from Ord. No. 2018-O-10A ; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section or subsection indicates amendment by the ordinance or ordinances cited therein. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; utilities, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Subdivisions and platting, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Att. 974a; zoning powers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1011a. 
 
ARTICLE 1 - ENACTMENT AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 1.1 - ENACTMENT 
 
Section 1.1.1 - Title 
A.  Generally. This document shall be officially known as the Development Code of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
B.  Short Title. The Marble Falls Development Code may hereinafter be called "these regulations."  
Section 1.1.2 - Purpose 
A.  Generally. These regulations have been created in order to achieve the general purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents, business owners, employees, property owners, and visitors of the City and by preserving places and areas of historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance. Furthermore, these regulations are intended to be consistent with and implement City-adopted master plans and promote policies of the City. 
B.  Purposes. In addition to the general purposes identified in Subsection 1.1.2.A, above, these regulations are intended to lessen congestion in the streets, secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, promote the health and general welfare, provide adequate light and air, prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentration of population and facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer, schools, parks and other public requirements.  
Section 1.1.3 - Authority 
A.  Generally. These regulations are adopted and enforced in accordance with the authorities contained in the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including Chapters 211 and 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, the City's Home Rule Charter and other applicable statutes and law. 
B.  Comprehensive Plan. These regulations are enacted to be consistent with and implement the policies, objectives, and other strategic actions of the City's Comprehensive Plan.  
Section 1.1.4 - Jurisdiction 
A.  Generally. These regulations apply to all land, development, and the use of all land, buildings, and structures, unless specifically exempted herein or preempted by state or federal law. 
B.  City Limits. These regulations apply to all areas within the City limits of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
C.  Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). In order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, and healthful development of the City, it is the intent of the City to exercise full authority in all or portions of the ETJ as allowed by state law, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The City will exercise full authority in the entire designated ETJ or portions of the ETJ (as applicable) as follows: 
a.  Plats, Development Plats and subdivision approvals. 
b.  Access to public roads. 
c.  Regulation of ground water. 
d.  The definition and prohibition of nuisances, including the power to summarily abate and remove nuisances, in the ETJ within 5,000 feet of the City limits. 
e.  The regulation of nonpoint source pollution. 
2.  In addition to the matters listed in Subsection 1.1.4.C.1, the City will apply the following provisions related to the use and development of property in the entire designated ETJ, generally through the requirement of a subdivision plat or Development Plat and/or Site Development Plan: 
a.  Any and all portions of the City's Code of Ordinances that specifically state their application to the ETJ; 
b.  All standards of the following regulations: 
i.  All standards of Article 5, Environmental Protection. 
ii.  All standards of Article 6, Subdivision Design and Land Development. 
iii.  All standards of Article 7, Access, Driveways, and Circulation.  
DIVISION 1.2 - LEGAL STATUS 
 
Section 1.2.1 - Relationship to Existing Applications and Development 
A.  Pending Applications for Development Approvals. Any application for a development approval or permit submitted to the City prior to the adoption date of these regulations shall be processed and considered for approval in accordance with the regulations in effect on the date the application was submitted. 
B.  Existing Development Agreements. Executed development agreements shall be subject to the regulations described in the Development Agreement. 
C.  Prior Conditions of Approval. Conditions on development approvals granted prior to the effective date of these regulations remain in effect. However, conditions on development approvals granted prior to the effective date may be modified or eliminated for new applications that meet the procedures and standards of these regulations. 
D.  Private Restrictions/Deed and Covenant Restrictions. These regulations do not affect private restrictions, nor do private restrictions affect these regulations. The City has no duty to search for the existence of private restrictions that may affect the use, development, or maintenance of a property. The City will only enforce the provisions of these regulations and other applicable City ordinances. Enforcement of private restrictions is at the sole discretion and responsibility of the parties of the private restrictions, unless such restrictions are created to provide compliance with a requirement of these regulations.  
Section 1.2.2 - Conflicting Provisions 
A.  Generally. In the event that one or more of these regulations are in conflict with each other or other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standard shall govern. 
B.  State and Federal Law. No part of these regulations relieves any applicant or recipient of any permit, certificate, or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other applicable requirements of any other county, state, or federal agency having jurisdiction over the structures or land uses for which the permit, certificate, or approval was issued. Likewise, compliance with state or federal law does not relieve the applicant or recipient of any permit, certificate, or approval from the responsibility of complying with these regulations, unless the application of these regulations is legally preempted.  
ARTICLE 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 2.1 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Section 2.1.1 - Zoning Districts Established 
A.  Generally. The establishment of zoning districts in the City of Marble Falls, Texas, are intended to promote compatible patterns of land use and site development consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Districts Established. The City of Marble Falls is hereby divided into 13 zoning districts that are established by Table 2.1.1.A, Zoning Districts Established. Additionally, the Existing Neighborhood Zone (ENZ) district is further divided into five sub-districts as set out in Table. 2.1.1.B, ENZ Sub-Districts Established. All land within the City limits shall be classified into one of the following zoning districts: 
Table 2.1.1.A 
Zoning Districts Established 
District Type 	Name 	Symbol 	Purpose 
Agricultural 	Farm and 
Ranch 
District 	FR 	The Farm and Ranch District is intended to protect the urban fringe from incompatible development and unplanned development by allowing the continuation of farming and ranching activities and remaining rural in character through a large minimum lot size and rural roadway cross-section. A cluster development option allows for smaller lot sizes with larger amounts of open space. As the City grows over time, this land is intended to transition in accordance with the community vision set out in the Future Land Use Plan of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
Residential 	Rural Estate 
District 	RE 	The Rural Estate District is intended to provide the opportunity to develop a large lot subdivision prior to public utilities being available. It is intended to remain rural in character, suited for larger lot, higher end housing. To remain rural in character, the lot width and setbacks are large, a minimum subdivision area is established, and roads are designed with a rural roadway cross-section. A cluster development option allows for smaller lot sizes with larger amounts of open space. 
	Neighborhood 
Residential 
District 	NR 	The Neighborhood Residential District is intended to be the default single-family detached district and suburban in character. It includes various flexible lot size configurations, but is tied to an overall development density. Although it will be comprised of predominantly single-family detached housing, different development options (developed as a Master Planned Community) could allow a small percentage of new development to be denser, attached housing types. These areas are developed with an urban roadway cross-section. 
	Transitional 
Residential 
District 	TR 	The Transitional Residential District is intended to provide areas of higher density and different housing types than in the Neighborhood Residential District. It is tied to an overall development density and is intended to provide an area of transition between the lower density Neighborhood Residential District and higher density districts (e.g., multifamily, commercial, etc.). These areas are developed with an urban roadway cross-section. 
	Downtown 
Residential 
District 	DR 	The Downtown Residential District is intended to promote infill development and redevelopment while also preserving the older, and sometimes historic, pattern and character of Old Town Marble Falls. The intent of this district is to provide areas of housing adjacent to downtown as a transitional area between the nonresidential areas of the Downtown District and the residential areas more typical of the Marble Falls area. This area would be similar to the Transitional Residential District in that it would provide for higher density and different housing types than in the Neighborhood Residential District; however, it is intended that the Downtown Residential District would respect and even enhance the residential culture of the overall Downtown area and urban center of Marble Falls. In this regard, it is intended that this area will redevelop with an urban character and an urban roadway cross-section. 
	Multifamily 
Residential 
District 	MR 	The Multifamily Residential District is intended to provide areas of even higher density than in the Transitional Residential District. It is tied to an overall development density and is intended to provide an area of transition between the lower density Transitional Residential District and higher density districts (e.g., commercial). These areas will be developed with an urban roadway cross-section. 
	Existing 
Neighborhood 
Zone District 	ENZ 	The Existing Neighborhood Zone District is intended to protect the established development pattern and character of existing neighborhoods while also providing opportunities for infill development and improvements to existing homes. Generally, existing neighborhoods are divided into sub-districts based on their existing and intended development character (see also Section 4.2.7, Special Design Standards for Existing Neighborhood Zone District. 
Nonresidential 	Neighborhood 
Commercial 
District 	NC 	The Neighborhood Commercial District is intended for nonresidential development that is of an appropriate use, scale, and design that is compatible with abutting or nearby residential development. Accordingly, these areas are intended to take on the semi-residential appearance of their abutting residential areas. These developments typically occupy smaller footprints, have lower levels of signage, and de-emphasized parking. 
	General 
Commercial 
District 	GC 	The General Commercial District is primarily intended for nonresidential development along the City's major thoroughfares in accordance with the vision set out in the Future Land Use Plan of the City's Comprehensive Plan. These areas are intended to be developed with an auto-oriented character, which means that the view of the automobile is the predominant view from the street right-of-way. Additional design considerations, such as building orientation, form, architecture, and materials; front- and street-side landscaping; parking lot landscaping; and access management are used to improve the quality of development consistent with the vision set out in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
	Downtown 
District 	DN 	The Downtown District is intended to serve the central core of the general area identified as Downtown on the Future Land Use Plan of the City's Comprehensive Plan. It is envisioned that this area will be developed with a higher intensity urban character, which means high lot coverages, build-to lines and limited setbacks, low to no landscaping, and a focus on on-street parking (when applicable). It is also intended to include a mix of both residential (e.g., apartments, lofts, etc.) and nonresidential uses. 
	Downtown 
Transition 
District 	DT 	The Downtown Transition District is intended to serve the area surrounding the Downtown District and within the outer edges of the general area identified as Downtown on the Future Land Use Plan of the City's Comprehensive Plan. It is envisioned that this area will also be developed with a higher intensity urban character, but not as intense as the Downtown District, and will include higher lot coverages, build-to lines and limited setbacks, limited landscaping, and an intent to hide parking behind the building or locate on-street (when applicable). It is also intended to include a mix of both residential and nonresidential uses. 
	Business/ 
Industrial 
Park District 	BP 	The Business/Industrial Park District is intended to support various employment opportunities predominantly related to light manufacturing, light industry, or warehousing. It is intended that these uses will be undertaken entirely within an enclosed building. Additional landscaping and screening requirements will help to protect areas of outdoor storage from public rights-of-way and abutting properties. 
	General 
Industrial 
District 	IN 	The General Industrial District is intended for areas of greater intensity than the Business/Industrial Park District. These areas are to provide a range of development opportunities including such uses as manufacturing, fabrication, and/or warehousing. These areas have the potential to involve heavy truck traffic, as such they require direct access to a principal arterial. Additionally, since the operations of these uses could occur both indoors and outdoors, these areas require larger buffers against abutting development. 
Mixed 	Planned 
Development 
District 	PD 	A Planned Development District is intended for developments with a well-planned mix of integrated land uses and densities. The district is provided to facilitate new and innovative development concepts that cannot be accommodated as a master-planned community or by other zoning districts. 
 
C.  ENZ Sub-Districts Established. The ENZ district is further divided into five sub-districts which are established in Table 2.1.1.B, ENZ Sub-Districts Established. Any overall reference in these regulations to the "ENZ district" also includes references to each ENZ subdistrict. 
Table 2.1.1.B 
ENZ Sub-Districts Established 
District Type 	Symbol 	Purpose 
Existing Neighborhood Zone District 	ENZ.1 	The ENZ.1 sub-district primarily consists of single-family estate homes on larger lots using the previous RE-1 zoning district which pre-dated the effective date of these regulations. 
	ENZ.2 	The ENZ.2 sub-district primarily consists of single-family detached homes using the previous R-1 zoning district which pre-dated the effective date of these regulations. 
	ENZ.3 	The ENZ.3 sub-district primarily consists of single-family detached, single-family attached, duplex, and townhouse homes using the previous R-2, RA-1, and RT-3 zoning districts which pre-dated the effective date of these regulations. 
	ENZ.4 	The ENZ.4 sub-district primarily consists of duplexes, townhouses and apartments using the previous R-3 and R-4 zoning districts which pre-dated the effective date of these regulations. 
	ENZ.5 	The ENZ.5 sub-district primarily consists of manufactured housing using the previous MH-1 and MH-2 zoning districts which pre-dated the effective date of these regulations. 
  
Section 2.1.2 - Official Zoning Map 
A.  Generally. The boundaries of all zoning districts are shown on the map entitled the "Official Zoning Map of Marble Falls, Texas," which may be referenced herein as the "Official Zoning Map." The Official Zoning Map and a record of all amendments thereto shall be kept on file by the City and shall constitute the original record. A copy of the currently effective Official Zoning Map may also be distributed to other City departments to facilitate inspection during regular business hours. 
B.  Force and Effect. The Official Zoning Map, together with all legends, symbols, references, notations, boundaries, and other information, is adopted as a part of these zoning regulations, and has the full force and effect of these zoning regulations. The Official Zoning Map, with a record of all amendments that are on file with the City Secretary shall be the controlling document in the event of a conflict between the map that is on file and any other reproduction of the Official Zoning Map. 
C.  Effective Date. The Official Zoning Map shall show the "Effective Date" and the "Last Revision Date." Any changed, amended, replaced, or otherwise new Official Zoning Map shall supersede the prior zoning map. However, the effective date of a rezoning ordinance shall be the date specified in the ordinance itself, and not the date when the revision was made to the Official Zoning Map. 
D.  Maintenance. 
1.  Responsibility for Maintenance. The Official Zoning Map shall be maintained by the City, which shall use all reasonable means to protect the Official Zoning Map and ensure its accuracy. 
2.  Distribution. The City is authorized to distribute paper and digital copies of the Official Zoning Map, provided that they include the title Official Zoning Map and the Effective Date and Last Revision Date. 
3.  Notification. The City is not required to provide individual notification of changes to the Official Zoning Map except for what is required by public notice as set out in Section 11.2.3, Public Notice, and as otherwise required by law. 
4.  Damaged or Destroyed Official Zoning Map. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged or destroyed, the City Council may adopt a new Official Zoning Map by ordinance. However, such adoption shall not amend or otherwise change district boundaries or classifications from the prior Official Zoning Map. 
E.  Interpreting Boundaries. 
1.  Generally. The boundaries of zoning districts are shown on the Official Zoning Map and shall adhere to the provisions of this subsection for the purposes of the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of these regulations. 
2.  City Limits. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the boundaries of the City limits, the district boundary shall be construed to follow such City limit boundaries. 
3.  Property Lines or Platted Lot Lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or platted lot lines, the district boundary shall be construed to follow such property lines or platted lot lines. 
4.  Rights-of-Way or Easements. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following streets, roads, highways, alleys, railroads, utility lines, or similar rights-of-way or easements, the district boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline of the right-of-way or easement. 
a.  Where the location of these rights-of-way or easements differ from that shown on the Official Zoning Map, the features on the ground shall control. 
b.  Where a public right-of-way or easement is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the abutting property shall apply equally to each half of such vacated or abandoned right-of-way or easement unless a specific conveyance specifically states otherwise. 
5.  Waterbodies, Watercourses, and Similar Geographic Features. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of waterbodies (e.g., ponds, lakes), watercourses (e.g., drainageways, streams, creeks, rivers), or other similar geographical features, the centerline of such geographical feature shall be construed to be the district boundary. 
6.  Undetermined Features. Where a parcel proposed for development is divided by a zoning district boundary not otherwise following a feature described in this Section, the regulatory provisions applicable within each district shall apply to each portion of the parcel proposed for development. In the absence of any identifiable boundaries, the district boundaries shall be clearly defined by an official survey. 
7.  Interpretation Responsibility. Should any uncertainty remain regarding the exact location of the boundaries of a zoning district as displayed on the Official Zoning Map, the Director shall make a determination based on the criteria established in this subsection. 
a.  The determination of such district boundary shall be included on the Official Zoning Map pursuant to Section 11.3.2, Zoning Map Amendment. 
b.  Any such administrative determination is subject to appeal in accordance to Division 11.8, Appeals. 
F.  Amendments. The Official Zoning Map may be amended, which shall supersede the prior zoning map. 
1.  Generally. Any changes or amendments to the zoning district boundaries or zoning classification of a property shall be made by ordinance pursuant to Section 11.3.2, Zoning Map Amendment. Amendments shall be incorporated into the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council. 
2.  Recordkeeping. A descriptive record of all amendments shall be maintained and kept with the Official Zoning Map filed with the City. 
3.  Effect. Any changes or amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall not have the effect of amending these regulations or any subsequent amendment. 
G.  Corrections and Errors. The Director may determine that the identification of zoning of property or other characteristics of the Zoning Map are in error and shall have the authority to make corrections accordingly. 
H.  Un-Zoned Land. All land within the City limits shall have a zoning designation. If it is determined that land has not been zoned, that land shall be zoned Farm and Ranch (FR) until affirmatively rezoned to another district.  
Section 2.1.3 - Zoning of Annexed Land 
A.  Generally. It is intended that when land is annexed into the City limits, it will ultimately be zoned using the guidance of the Future Land Use Plan set out in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Annexation and Zoning. Upon completion of the annexation of land into the City limits, land annexed into the City shall automatically be zoned Farm and Ranch (FR) until proceedings to establish zoning may be commenced. If the land is designated on the Future Land Use Plan in a manner that is consistent with the Farm and Ranch District, the zoning shall remain FR and additional zoning actions are not needed unless otherwise required by these regulations. If the Future Land Use Plan designates the land to be for uses other than those allowed in the FR District, the City may commence the zoning process upon its own initiative at any time, including at time of annexation, or property owners may submit an application for a zoning designation. Zoning designation of newly annexed land shall follow the procedures set out in Article 11, Administration.  
ARTICLE 3 - LAND USE  
DIVISION 3.1 - LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT 
 
Section 3.1.1 - General Parameters for Determining Permitted Land Uses 
A.  Generally. This Division identifies the land uses that may be allowed within each of the specified zoning districts established in Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established, and sets out supplemental use regulations. Uses shall not be permitted, and buildings and structures associated with such use shall not be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged on a property, unless said use is permitted within the zoning district applicable to the property located within the City limits of Marble Falls, and in accordance to the provisions of these regulations. 
B.  List of Permitted Land Use Tables. Permitted land uses are set out in the following sections: 
1.  Section 3.1.2, Agricultural and Ranch Uses; 
2.  Section 3.1.3, Residential and Neighborhood Uses; 
3.  Section 3.1.4, Civic Uses; 
4.  Section 3.1.5, Commercial Uses; 
5.  Section 3.1.6, Industrial Uses; and 
6.  Section 3.1.7, Home Enterprise Uses. 
C.  Interpretation. Land uses are classified for each zoning district as either permitted by-right (P), permitted subject to restrictions (R), allowed if existing on the effective date of these regulations (E), permitted as a conditional use (C), permitted within a Master Planned Community (MP), or prohibited (—), as set out in this subsection and as shown in the land use tables in Section 3.1.2, Agricultural and Ranch Uses, through Section 3.1.7, Home Enterprise Uses. 
1.  Permitted Uses (P). The use is permitted by-right in the specified zoning district, subject to the standards for permitted uses that are established by these regulations and any applicable City ordinance. Permitted uses do not require additional approval to be authorized within the applicable district. 
2.  Restricted Uses (R). The use is allowed in the specified zoning district, subject to the standards for permitted uses that are established by these regulations and any applicable City ordinance, and any use-specific requirements set out in Section 3.2.1, Restricted and Conditional Uses. Restricted Uses may be administratively approved by the Director provided all requirements are met. 
3.  Existing Uses (E). The use is only allowed in the specified zoning district if it existed at that location on the effective date of these regulations. 
4.  Conditional Uses (C). The use requires approval by the City Council to be allowed within the specified zoning district, in addition to the standards for permitted uses that are established by these regulations and any applicable City ordinance, and any use-specific requirements which are set out in Section 3.2.1, Restricted and Conditional Uses. Conditional uses must be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission after a public hearing and then approved by the City Council after a public hearing as set out in Section 11.3.4, Conditional Use Permit, and other applicable sections of these regulations. 
5.  Master Planned Community Uses (MP). The use is allowed in the specified zoning district only with approval of a Master Planned Community as set out in Section 4.4.2, Master Planned Communities, and any applicable City ordinance. A Master Planned Community must be a minimum of 25 acres and allows administrative approval of a Concept Plan providing for a mix of new residential and nonresidential uses within the specified zoning district (cannot include existing residential or other development). 
6.  Prohibited Uses (—). The use is prohibited in the specified zoning district. 
D.  Principal and Accessory Uses. The City recognizes that multiple uses may occasionally occupy a property. These uses can be classified as Principal or Accessory, as follows: 
1.  Principal Uses. The primary activity on a parcel of property is considered the Principal Use. Land uses listed in the land use tables of Section 3.1.2, Agricultural and Ranch Uses, through Section 3.1.6, Industrial Uses, shall be inferred to be a "principal use" as defined by these regulations. At times, however, a principal use identified in Section 3.1.2 through Section 3.1.6 may be secondary to another principal use (e.g., a drive-in or drive-through to a food and drink establishment) and may be subject to further use restrictions in Section 3.2.1, Restricted and Conditional Uses. When more than one principal use exists or is proposed on a parcel proposed for development, each shall be permitted in the zoning district and subject to any subsequent use restrictions and development standards. 
2.  Accessory Uses. Uses that are typically incidental to and subordinate to but customarily associated with a specific principal use located on the same parcel of property are considered an Accessory Use. For example, a storage facility for light industrial services, a cafeteria within a hospital, or a car wash at a vehicle fueling station. The relationship among principal and accessory uses shall be determined either by definition of the principal use in these regulations or by customary association with the principal use, as determined by the Director. Accessory uses shall not be allowed without a principal use. Accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations that apply to the principal uses in each district, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. 
E.  Unlisted Uses. It is recognized that new types of land uses may emerge and forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate to the City. The Director shall make a determination as to whether a particular unlisted use may be reasonably classified as adhering to a listed use as set out in this Division. 
1.  Consideration of an unlisted use. The Director shall consider an unlisted use on a case-by-case basis and either determine that the proposed unlisted use is materially similar to an existing listed use as defined in these regulations (see Division 13.2, Definitions), or determine that the unlisted use is not materially similar. 
a.  If the Director determines an unlisted use is materially similar to an existing listed use, such use will be authorized similar to the listed use and is subject to all of the same standards and requirements as set out in these regulations. 
b.  If the Director determines that an unlisted use is not materially similar to an existing listed use, the unlisted land use shall be considered incompatible and a prohibited use from being located within the City. If desired, a text amendment to consider the land use can be subsequently initiated by the City Council, as set out in Section 11.3.9, Text Amendment. 
c.  The Director may elect not to make a determination and request that the Planning and Zoning Commission interpret the unlisted use at their next regularly scheduled meeting. If the Planning and Zoning Commission renders an interpretation upon request of the Director, the Director shall adhere to and enforce the determination provided. 
2.  Unlisted Use Determination Criteria. In considering an unlisted use, the Director, or in the event of referral, the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall take into consideration all the land development impacts the unlisted use may have including, but not limited to, parking demand, trip generation, impervious surface, regulated air or water emissions, noise, lighting, dust, odors, solid waste generation, potentially hazardous conditions, use and storage of materials, character of building and structures, nature and impacts of operation, hours of operation, volume and frequency of deliveries, utility impact, and compatibility with surrounding land uses.  
Section 3.1.2 - Agricultural and Ranch Uses 
The agricultural and ranch uses allowed in each zoning district are set out in Table 3.1.2, Agricultural and Ranch Uses by Zoning District. 
Table 3.1.2 
Agricultural and Ranch Uses by Zoning District 
Land Use 	ZONING DISTRICTS 
P=Permitted R=Restricted E=Existing C=Conditional 
MP=Master Planned Community —=Prohibited 	Reference to Supplemental Use Standards 
	Ag 	Residential 	ENZ Subdistrict 	Nonresidential 	
	FR 	RE 	NR 	TR 	DR 	MR 	ENZ.1 	ENZ.2 	ENZ.3 	ENZ.4 	ENZ.5 	NC 	GC 	DN 	DT 	BP 	IN 	
Animal Raising or Production 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Commercial Stables 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Crop Production and Sales 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	Table 3.2.1.A 
Game Ranch 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
  
Section 3.1.3 - Residential and Neighborhood Uses 
The residential and neighborhood uses allowed in each zoning district are set out in Table 3.1.3, Residential and Neighborhood Uses by Zoning District. 
Table 3.1.3 
Residential and Neighborhood Uses by Zoning District 
Land Use 	ZONING DISTRICTS 
P=Permitted R=Restricted E=Existing C=Conditional 
MP=Master Planned Community —=Prohibited 	Reference to Supplemental Use Standards 
	Ag 	Residential 	ENZ Subdistrict 	Nonresidential 	
	FR 	RE 	NR 	TR 	DR 	MR 	ENZ.1 	ENZ.2 	ENZ.3 	ENZ.4 	ENZ.5 	NC 	GC 	DN 	DT 	BP 	IN 	
Cottage 	— 	— 	MP 	P 	P 	MP 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Single-Family Detached 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	MP 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Single-Family Attached 	— 	— 	MP 	P 	P 	MP 	— 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 	— 	— 	R 	R 	R 	MP 	— 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Industrialized Housing 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	MP 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Manufactured Home 	R 	— 	C 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Manufactured Home Park 	C 	— 	C 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Tiny House Development 	C 	— 	C 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Duplex 	— 	— 	MP 	P 	P 	MP 	— 	C 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Townhouse 	— 	— 	MP 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	R 	R 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Triplex 	— 	— 	MP 	P 	C 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Quadplex 	— 	— 	MP 	P 	C 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Apartment 	— 	— 	— 	MP 	C 	P 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	C 	— 	R 	R 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Live-Work Unit 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	R 	R 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Loft Apartment 	— 	— 	MP 	MP 	— 	MP 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.B 
Group Home 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	C 	C 	— 	C 	— 	— 	N/A 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.A.1, 5-21-2019)  
Section 3.1.4 - Civic Uses 
The civic uses allowed in each zoning district are set out in Table 3.1.4, Civic Uses by Zoning District. 
Table 3.1.4 
Civic Uses by Zoning District 
Land Use 	ZONING DISTRICTS 
P=Permitted R=Restricted E=Existing C=Conditional 
MP=Master Planned Community —=Prohibited 	Reference to Supplemental Use Standards 
	Ag 	Residential 	ENZ Subdistrict 	Nonresidential 	
	FR 	RE 	NR 	TR 	DR 	MR 	ENZ.1 	ENZ.2 	ENZ.3 	ENZ.4 	ENZ.5 	NC 	GC 	DN 	DT 	BP 	IN 	
Aviation Uses, 
Fixed Wing 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.C 
Aviation Uses, 
Rotary Wing 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Cemetery 	P 	R 	C 	— 	— 	— 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Child-care Facility, Day-Care Center 	R 	— 	MP 	MP 	C 	R 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	R 	R 	C 	C 	C 	— 	
Child-care Facility, Residential 	— 	— 	R 	R 	R 	C 	R 	R 	R 	— 	R 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
College/University 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	N/A 
Community Assembly/Amenity 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	R 	P 	P 	P 	C 	— 	Table 3.2.1.C 
Education 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	
Government 	P 	P 	R 	R 	R 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Housing & Services for the Aging 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	E 	E 	E 	C 	C 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Hospital 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Neighborhood Amenity 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.C 
Passive Outdoor Recreation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N/A 
Provisional Housing 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Religious Assembly 	P 	P 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	P 	P 	R 	R 	P 	P 	Table 3.2.1.C 
Social Service Institution 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Table 3.2.1.C 
Transportation Facilities 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	Table 3.2.1.C 
Utilities, Local/Neighborhood 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N/A 
Utilities, Major 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	N/A 
Wireless Transmission Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	Table 3.2.1.C 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.A.2, 5-21-2019)  
Section 3.1.5 - Commercial Uses 
The commercial uses allowed in each zoning district are set out in Table 3.1.5, Commercial Uses by Zoning District. 
Table 3.1.5 
Commercial Uses by Zoning District 
Land Use 	ZONING DISTRICTS 
P=Permitted R=Restricted E=Existing C=Conditional 
MP=Master Planned Community —=Prohibited 	Reference to Supplemental Use Standards 
	Ag 	Residential 	ENZ Subdistrict 	Nonresidential 	
	FR 	RE 	NR 	TR 	DR 	MR 	ENZ.1 	ENZ.2 	ENZ.3 	ENZ.4 	ENZ.5 	NC 	GC 	DN 	DT 	BP 	IN 	
Animal Clinic or Services 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	R 	— 	— 	— 	R 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Bar or Night Club 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	R 	P 	R 	— 	— 	
Brewery/Distillery/Winery 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Business/Trade School 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N/A 
Campground 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Commercial Recreation/Entertainment 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	R 	P 	C 	C 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Food and Drink Establishment (general) 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	P 	R 	R 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Food and Drink Establishment (neighborhood) 	— 	— 	MP 	MP 	— 	MP 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	R 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Hotel/Lodging, Full Service 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	C 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Hotel/Lodging, Limited Service 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	P 	C 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Hotel/Lodging, Resort 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	N/A 
Medical Clinic 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	N/A 
Office 	— 	— 	MP 	C/MP 	C 	C/MP 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Office, Medical 	— 	— 	MP 	C/MP 	C 	C/MP 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Office, Showroom 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	C 	— 	R 	P 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Parking, Commercial 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Pawn Shop 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	— 	— 	— 	R 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Personal Services 	— 	— 	MP 	MP 	— 	MP 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	P 	P 	P 	P 	R 	— 	
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Retail Sales, General 	— 	— 	MP 	MP 	— 	MP 	E 	E 	E 	E 	E 	P 	P 	P 	P 	R 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Retail Sales and Services, Heavy Equipment 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	— 	— 	R 	P 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Retail Sales and Services, Large Scale 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	N/A 
Shopping Center 	— 	— 	MP 	MP 	— 	MP 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Special Event Venue 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	R 	C 	C 	— 	— 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Vehicle Gas or Fueling Station 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	— 	— 	R 	P 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Vehicle Sales and Rentals 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	R 	— 	— 	P 	Table 3.2.1.D 
Vehicle Services 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	— 	— 	R 	P 	Table 3.2.1.D 
  
Section 3.1.6 - Industrial Uses 
The industrial uses allowed in each zoning district are set out in Table 3.1.6, Industrial Uses by Zoning District. 
Table 3.1.6 
Industrial Uses by Zoning District 
Land Use 	ZONING DISTRICTS 
P=Permitted R=Restricted E=Existing C=Conditional 
MP=Master Planned Community —=Prohibited 	Reference to Supplemental Use Standards 
	Ag 	Residential 	ENZ Subdistrict 	Nonresidential 	
	FR 	RE 	NR 	TR 	DR 	MR 	ENZ.1 	ENZ.2 	ENZ.3 	ENZ.4 	ENZ.5 	NC 	GC 	DN 	DT 	BP 	IN 	
Contractor Services 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	— 	— 	R 	P 	Table 3.2.1.E 
Industrial Services, Heavy 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	N/A 
Industrial Services, Light 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	— 	— 	R 	P 	Table 3.2.1.E 
Research & Development 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P 	N/A 
Resource Extraction 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	Table 3.2.1.E 
Scrap and Salvage Yard 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	Table 3.2.1.E 
Storage, Self 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	— 	— 	— 	R 	Table 3.2.1.E 
Storage Yard 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	R 	Table 3.2.1.E 
Warehouse 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	R 	P 	Table 3.2.1.E 
Waste Related Services 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	R 	Table 3.2.1.E 
  
Section 3.1.7 - Home Enterprise Uses 
Home enterprise uses are considered accessory uses to the principal residential use of the residential structure. The home enterprise uses allowed in each zoning district are set out in Table 3.1.7, Home Enterprise Uses by Zoning District. 
Table 3.1.7 
Home Enterprise Uses by Zoning District 
Land Use 	ZONING DISTRICTS 
P=Permitted R=Restricted E=Existing C=Conditional 
MP=Master Planned Community —=Prohibited 	Reference to Supplemental Use Standards 
	Ag 	Residential 	ENZ Subdistrict 	Nonresidential 	
	FR 	RE 	NR 	TR 	DR 	MR 	ENZ.1 	ENZ.2 	ENZ.3 	ENZ.4 	ENZ.5 	NC 	GC 	DN 	DT 	BP 	IN 	
Bed and Breakfast Lodging 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	— 	R 	— 	R 	R 	— 	— 	Sec. 3.2.1.F 
Child-care, Family Home 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	C 	C 	C 	C 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Home Enterprise 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
  
Section 3.1.8 - Prohibited Uses in All Districts 
A.  Generally. The following uses are prohibited in all areas of the City. 
B.  Prohibited Uses. 
1.  Hazardous waste management facilities; 
2.  Mobile Homes; 
3.  Rendering plants; and 
4.  All uses that are prohibited by local ordinance, state, or federal law, or involve the sale of materials prohibited by local ordinance, state, or federal law.  
DIVISION 3.2 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS 
 
Section 3.2.1 - Restricted and Conditional Uses 
A.  Generally. Pursuant to the land use tables of Section 3.1.2, Agricultural and Ranch Uses through Section 3.1.7, Home Enterprise Uses, certain uses may be permitted in certain zoning districts as a permitted use with restrictions (R) or as a conditional use (C) subject to use-specific supplemental regulations. 
B.  Intent. The intent of permitting uses with restrictions or as a conditional use is to allow development to occur provided that certain compatibility considerations are met. In this regard, additional compatibility standards are integrated as part of the approval process. 
C.  Applicability. This Section applies to all new development, and redevelopment when there is a proposed change of use. 
1.  Restricted Uses (R). A Restricted Use may be administratively approved provided that it meets the standards for all permitted uses as set out in these regulations, other applicable City ordinances and regulations, and the standards set out in Subsection 3.2.1.D, Standards for Specific Restricted and Conditional Uses, of this Section. 
2.  Conditional Uses (C). A Conditional Use may be approved after a public hearing and favorable decision by the City Council provided that it meets the standards for all permitted uses as set out in these regulations, other applicable City ordinances and regulations, and the standards set out in Subsection 3.2.1.D, Standards for Specific Restricted and Conditional Uses, of this Section. 
D.  Standards for Specific Restricted and Conditional Uses. The following additional development and operational standards shall apply to Restricted Uses and Conditional Uses as identified in Division 3.1, Land Uses by Zoning District, of this Article. 
Table 3.2.1.A 
Agricultural and Ranch Restricted and Conditional Use Standards 
Land Use 	District 	Development Standards 	Operational/Other Standards 
Crop Production and Sales 	IN 	Crop production shall be entirely within an enclosed building. 	N/A 
Table Notes: N/A means Not Applicable. 
 
Table 3.2.1.B 
Residential and Neighborhood Restricted and Conditional Use Standards 
Land Use 	District 	Development Standards 	Operational/Other Standards 
Single-Family Detached 	NC 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Single-Family Attached 	ENZ.2 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirements. 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 	NR 
TR 
DR 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	Single-Family Zero Lot Line development shall only be allowed when included in a plat designating the lots for Zero Lot Line development. All Single-Family Zero Lot Line development standards specified in Subsection 4.2.10, Single-Family Zero Lot Line Development. 	N/A 
Industrialized Housing 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	All single-family detached or duplex industrial housing units shall be required to have similar exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, fenestration, and a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family detached dwelling unit located within 500 feet of the parcel proposed for development on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county. 	A complete set of designs, plans, and specifications shall be submitted to the Director with the Building Permit bearing a stamp of approval from the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council and confirmation that each module or modular component bears an approved decal or insignia by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation signifying that each module or modular component has received a post-construction inspection in conformance with state-mandated building codes. This requirement is in addition to general Building Permit requirements for all housing. 
Manufactured Home 	FR 
NR 
MR 	Manufactured Homes not otherwise located within a Manufactured Home Park shall be located within a Manufactured Home Subdivision as set out in Subsection 4.2.3.C, Manufactured Home Subdivisions. Manufactured Homes in the NR and MR districts also require approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 	Manufactured homes shall comply with minimum building standards as set out in Subsection 4.2.3.B, Manufactured Home Building Unit Standards. 
Manufactured Home Park 	FR 
NR 
MR 	Manufactured Home Parks in the FR, NR, and MR districts are subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit and the requirements of Subsection 4.2.3.D, Manufactured Home Parks. 	Manufactured homes shall comply with minimum building standards as set out in Subsection 4.2.3.B, Manufactured Home Building Unit Standards. 
	ENZ.5 	Manufactured Home Parks in the ENZ.5 district shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection 4.2.3.D, Manufactured Home Parks. 	
Tiny House Development 	FR 
NR 
MR 
ENZ.5 	Tiny House Developments are subject to the requirements of Section 4.2.4, Tiny House Development. Tiny House Developments in the FR, NR, and MR districts are also subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 	All tiny houses shall be connected to utilities as set out in Subsection 4.2.4.C.6, Utilities and Subsection 4.2.4.C.7, Solid Waste Disposal, and shall comply with minimum building standards as set out in Subsection 4.2.4.B, Tiny House Building Unit Standards. 
Townhouse 	DN 
DT 	Buildings must be designed to create an urban character with pedestrian interface. Entrances are required to face the street and must include a porch or stoop. Required parking must be accessed via an alley. 	N/A 
Duplex 	ENZ.2 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirements. 
Triplex 	DR 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Quadplex 	DR 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Apartment 	DR 
NC 	Limited to a maximum of 20 units per acre. 	N/A 
	DN 
DT 	Limited to a maximum of 44 units per acre. Buildings must be designed to create an urban character, required parking is accessed via an alley and accommodated in a parking structure or a parking lot which uses the building to screen it from the public right-of-way. In the DN district, the first floor of the building shall be dedicated to nonresidential uses permitted within the district - no apartment units shall be located on the first floor in the DN district. 	N/A 
Live-work unit 	DN 
DT 	Live-work units must be designed with a residential external appearance in the form of a townhouse. Customer parking must be provided on street, in a parking structure, or via alley access. The area devoted to work cannot exceed 50 percent of the total floor area. 	N/A 
Loft Apartment 	NC 	Limited to maximum of 14 units per acre. 	N/A 
Group Home 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.5 	Must be licensed by the State of Texas. Limited to a maximum of six residents and two supervisors. In addition to the group or community homes described in this code it is the intent of the City to authorize any other group or community home use in residential districts if required by federal or state fair housing requirements. 	N/A 
	MR 
ENZ.4 	Must be licensed by the State of Texas. In addition to the group or community homes described in this code it is the intent of the City to authorize any other group or community home use in residential districts if required by federal or state fair housing requirements. 	N/A 
	NC 
GC 
DT 	In addition to the requirement for approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the facility must be licensed by the State of Texas and set up to house seven or more residents. 	N/A 
Table Notes: 
N/A means Not Applicable. 
 
Table 3.2.1.C 
Civic Restricted and Conditional Use Standards 
Land Use 	District 	Development Standards 	Operational/Other Standards 
Aviation Uses, 
Fixed-Wing 	FR 	Development of a new airport shall comply with Chapter 241, Municipal and County Zoning Authority Around Airports, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code. 	Approval of an aviation-related use may not be granted until the applicant obtains an airport use operating agreement for the subject facility. 
Aviation Uses, 
Rotary Wing 	FR 
GC 
DN 
DT 
BP 
IN 	Development of heli-facility or heliport uses shall be designed according to the applicable design standards set out in the U.S. Department of Transportation Advisory Circular NO. 150/5390-2C, dated April 24, 2012, as may be amended. 	Application for construction of a heli-facility, heliport, or helistop shall demonstrate compliance with 14 CFR § 157.7, FAA Determination. 
Cemetery 	RE 
NR 
NC 
GC 	New cemeteries shall take access from an arterial or collector street, be setback from any residentially used or zoned property by 100 feet, and enclosed by a wall or fence. 	N/A 
Child-Care Facility, Day-Care Center 	FR 
DR 
MR 
NC 
GC 
DN 
DT 
BP 	Approval of a Conditional Use Permit is required for operation within the DR, DN, DT, or BP districts. The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. Access to the site shall be designed in a manner to facilitate safe and expedient pick-up and drop-off circulation without otherwise interfering with the parking lot. Outdoor activities shall be setback from any residentially used or zoned property by 100 feet and enclosed by a wall or fence. 	The owner/operator shall maintain all certification and licensing requirements by the state. 
Child-Care Facility, Residential 	NR 
TR 
DR 	N/A 	Limited to no more than six unrelated children. 
	MR 
NC 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Community Assembly/Amenity 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
MR 
ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	In addition to the requirement for approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. 	Parking shall be accommodated on-site. Alternately, off-site parking can be established through a shared parking agreement provided the off-site parking lot is within 250 feet of the parcel proposed for development and connected via a sidewalk. 
	NC 	The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. 	
	BP 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Education 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
MR 
NC 
GC 
DN 
DT 	Parking shall be accommodated on site. Access to the site shall be designed to facilitate safe and expedient pick-up and drop-off circulation without otherwise interfering with the parking lot. Access to secondary schools shall be located on a collector or arterial level roadway. Outdoor activities shall be setback from any residentially used or zoned property by 25 feet and enclosed by a wall or fence. 	The queuing of vehicles shall comply with Section 8.3, Off-Street Stacking. 
Government Facilities 	NR 
TR 
DR 	The parcel proposed for development shall be screened by a landscaped Type C Bufferyard from any residentially used or zoned property. 	N/A 
	ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Housing & Services for the Aging 	RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
MR 
NC 
GC 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	In addition to the requirement for approval of a Conditional Use Permit, facilities designed to accommodate more than 10 residents shall take access from an arterial or collector street. No facilities shall be permitted at the intersection of two arterial streets. 	The owner/operator shall maintain all certification and licensing requirements by the state. 
Neighborhood Amenity 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
MR 
ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	N/A 	The property shall be owned and managed by a property owner's association and required parking shall be accommodated on-site. 
Provisional Housing 	MR 
NC 
GC 	In addition to the requirement for approval of a Conditional Use Permit, a provisional housing facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of a residentially zoned property, a primary or secondary school, a public park, or a religious assembly facility. 	N/A 
Religious Assembly 	NR 
TR 
DR 
MR 	Facilities over 20,000 square feet shall take access from an arterial or collector street. 	Parking shall be accommodated on-site. 
	ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. 	
	DN 
DT 	Facilities in the DN and DT districts must provide an on-site parking garage for parking requirements. 	N/A 
Transportation Facilities 	GC 
DN 
DT 
BP 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Wireless Transmission Facility 	All 
Districts 	Wireless Transmission Facility subject to Section 4.6.6 of these regulations. Height is limited to 80' in residential zoning districts and limited to 160' in the nonresidential zoning districts. 
Table Notes: 
N/A means Not Applicable. 
 
Table 3.2.1.D 
Commercial Restricted and Conditional Use Standards 
Land Use 	District 	Development Standards 	Operational/Other Standards 
Animal Clinic or Services 	NC 	N/A 	The use will be conducted entirely within an enclosed building and no livestock or large animals (e.g., a horse) will be boarded, treated, or otherwise kept on the premises. 
	GC 
IN 	Outdoor dog runs and animal exercise areas will be set back at least 100 feet from any residentially used or zoned property and be screened by a wall or fence. 	No livestock or large animals (e.g., a horse) will be boarded, treated, or otherwise kept on the premises. 
Bar or Nightclub 	NC 	The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. Outdoor seating areas, if present, and parking shall be set back at least 100 feet and physically separated from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	No outdoor live music or entertainment is allowed. 
	GC 
DT 	Outdoor seating areas, if present, and parking shall be set back at least 100 feet and physically separated from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	Outdoor live music and entertainment is allowed provided that it is setback at least 100 feet from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 
Brewery/Distillery/Winery 	NC 	Maximum building size is 10,000 square feet. The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. Outdoor seating areas, if present, and parking shall be set back at least 100 feet and physically separated from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	Facility must provide a customer component which may include a retail storefront, a tasting room, or a food or beverage servicing area. No outdoor live music or entertainment is allowed. 
	GC 	Any outdoor seating, live music, and/or entertainment areas shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. Facilities over 40,000 gross square feet shall provide truck loading areas located to the rear of the building with direct access to an arterial or collector level street. 	N/A 
	DN 
DT 	Any outdoor seating, live music, and/or entertainment areas shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	Facility must provide a customer component which may include a retail storefront, a tasting room, or a food or beverage servicing area. 
	BP 
IN 	A maximum of 25% of the establishment area may be dedicated for customer components. Any outdoor seating, live music, and/or entertainment areas shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	N/A 
Campground 	FR 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Commercial Recreation/Entertainment 	FR 	In addition to the requirement for approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the facility must be located a minimum of 600 feet from any residentially zoned or used property; access to any service and parking areas for over 50 vehicles must be taken from a collector or higher classification street; and after hours lighting shall be limited to that necessary only for security purposes. 	N/A 
	NC 	The facility must be located a minimum of 600 feet from any residentially zoned or used property; access to any service and parking areas for over 50 vehicles must be taken from a collector or higher classification street; and after hours lighting shall be limited to that necessary only for security purposes. 	N/A 
	DN 
DT 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Food or Drink Establishment (general) 	NC 	Restaurant shall not include drive-through or drive-up or similar services. The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. Outdoor seating areas, if present, shall be set back at least 100 feet and physically separated from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	No outdoor live music or entertainment is allowed. 
	DN 
DT 	Restaurant shall not include drive-through or drive-up or similar services. 	N/A 
Food or Drink Establishment (neighborhood) 	NC 	The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. Outdoor seating areas, if present, shall be set back at least 100 feet and physically separated from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	No outdoor live music or entertainment is allowed. 
Hotel/Lodging, Full Service 	DT 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Hotel/Lodging, Limited Service 	NC 	In addition to the requirement for approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the building may be no more than two stories in height, and direct access to all rooms shall be interior. In addition, all hotel operations, including parking, shall be setback at least 100 feet and physically separated from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. 	N/A 
	DT 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Office 	TR 
DR 
MR 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Office, Medical 	TR 
DR 
MR 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Office, Showroom 	GC 	Product warehousing shall be incidental and not exceed 50% of the total floor area. Outdoor storage shall be limited to 25% of the square footage of the indoor use area and shall be completely screened by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. All loading spaces and docks shall be screened from public right-of-way. 	N/A 
	DN 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
	BP 	Incidental retail sales of products associated with the primary products and/or services is permitted but shall not exceed 25% of the total floor area. Outdoor storage shall be limited to 125% of the square footage of the indoor use area and shall be completely screened by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. All loading spaces and docks shall be screened from public right-of-way. 	N/A 
Parking, 
Commercial 	NC 
GC 
DN 
DT 	The parcel proposed for development shall be limited to two acres in size and consist of a surface, structured, or combination parking lot. In the DN and DT districts, a surface parking facility shall have a maximum of 95 percent of impervious surface coverage. 	The use may be used as part of shared parking requirements. 
Pawn Shop 	GC 
IN 	The parcel proposed for development shall be located no closer than 200 feet from any residentially used or zoned property. 	The owner/operator shall maintain compliance with Chapter 371, Pawnshops, of the Tex. Finance Code. 
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park 	FR 
MR 
ENZ.5 	Recreational vehicles shall only be located within an RV Park subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit and in accordance with the following: 	N/A 
		• An RV park shall be planned cohesively through a Site Development Plan. 	
		• All RV parks shall take access from an arterial or collector street with a driveway width of at least 32 feet. 	
		• A single recreational vehicle is allowed per space. 	
		• RVs shall be placed on a permanent parking pad at least 10 feet in width and 24 feet in depth constructed of concrete, asphalt, or similar material approved by the City Engineer. 	
		• Each RV space shall have adequate frontage width on an access drive to allow for loading/unloading maneuvering space. 	
		• RV parks may include sanitary facilities, storage buildings, or management offices. 	
		• Common area amenities shall be required based on the number of units allotted per the Site Development Plan. 	
		• All spaces shall provide connections to potable water, sanitary sewer, and electrical power. 	
		• The RV park shall provide a centralized solid waste collection facility. 	
		• A permanent marker identifying the space number is required to be clearly visible day and night for emergency vehicles. 	
Retail Sales and Services, General 	BP 	N/A 	The proposed use is an accessory use to an otherwise permitted principal use. Any retail sales or services shall be materially related to something that is manufactured on site or primarily intended to serve employees on the site (e.g., cafeteria). 
Retail Sales and Services, Heavy Equipment 	FR 	In addition to approval of a Conditional Use Permit, any storage of equipment shall be set back at least 150 feet from the right-of-way and shown on the Site Development Plan. A Fire Lane shall be shown within the storage area. 	The use shall be limited to sales and services of heavy equipment for Agricultural uses. 
	GC 
BP 	Any storage of equipment shall be set back at least 150 feet from the right-of-way and shown on the Site Development Plan. A Fire Lane shall be shown within the storage area. 	N/A 
Special Event Venue 	FR 
NC 
GC 
DN 
DT 	Any outdoor seating, live music, and/or entertainment areas shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residentially used or zoned property and screened by a wall or fence. For large event venues, the City Engineer may approve an alternative parking material for overflow parking in addition to the minimum required by these regulations if the parking area is screened from view from the street and adjacent properties. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit is also required in the FR, NC, DN, and DT districts. 	N/A 
Vehicle Gas or Fueling Station 	NC 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
	BP 	N/A 	Vehicle fueling stations shall only be allowed in the BP district as an accessory use for the fueling of vehicles associated with the primary use. 
Vehicle Sales and Rentals 	DN 	Sales or rental offices only are allowed with one vehicle display example located inside the building. No other display or storage of vehicles shall be permitted on the premises or parking areas. 	N/A 
Vehicle Services 	BP 	All vehicle and outdoor storage areas shall be screened and located to the side and/or rear of the principal building. 	N/A 
Table Notes: 
N/A means Not Applicable. 
 
Table 3.2.1.E 
Industrial Restricted and Conditional Use Standards 
Land Use 	District 	Development Standards 	Operational/Other Standards 
Contractor Services 	GC 	When located adjacent to a major arterial level street, the facility shall be set back at least 150 feet from the right-of-way. Additionally, unit doors shall not be visible from public rights-of-way nor residentially zoned or used properties. Outdoor storage shall be limited to 25% of the square footage of the indoor use area and shall be completely screened from view from the street and adjacent properties by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. All loading spaces and docks shall be screened from public right-of-way. 	The use shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
	BP 	Outdoor storage shall be completely screened from view from the street by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. 	
Industrial Services, Light 	GC 	When located adjacent to a major arterial level street, the facility shall be set back at least 150 feet from the right-of-way. Additionally, unit doors shall not be visible from public rights-of-way nor residentially zoned or used properties. Outdoor storage shall be limited to 25% of the square footage of the indoor use area, shall be located to the rear or side of the primary building and shall be completely screened from view from the street and adjacent properties by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. All loading spaces and docks shall be screened from public right-of-way. 	The use shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
	BP 	Outdoor storage shall be completely screened from view from the street by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. 	
Resource Extraction 	IN 	There are no specific restrictions applicable to the Conditional Use Permit requirement. 
Scrap and Salvage Yard 	IN 	The parcel proposed for development shall be located no closer than 600 feet from any residentially used or zoned property and take access from an arterial or collector street. All outdoor areas used for scrap and salvage storage shall be completely screened by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a 15-foot landscape buffer. 	Wrecked cars, junk, salvage, scrap, or other materials shall not be visible from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way above the required wall or fence. 
Self-Storage 	GC 	When located adjacent to a major arterial level street, the facility shall be set back at least 150 feet from the right-of-way. Additionally, unit doors shall not be visible from public rights-of-way nor residentially zoned or used properties. Outdoor storage areas shall be completely screened from view from the street by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height. 	The use will be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. All units shall be accessed from an interior hallway and not contain an interior electrical outlet. Self-storage units shall be used solely for the purpose of storage and shall not be used for conducting or operating a business. 
	IN 		Outdoor storage areas shall comply with Section 4.6.5, Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise. 
Storage Yard 	BP 	In addition to the requirement for approval of a Conditional Use Permit, outdoor storage shall be completely screened from view from the street by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. 	N/A 
	IN 	When located adjacent to a major arterial level street, the facility shall be set back at least 150 feet from the right-of-way. The use shall be completely screened by a wall or fence at least eight feet in height and a Type B landscape buffer. 	Outdoor storage areas shall comply with Section 4.6.5, Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise. 
Warehouse 	BP 	The parcel proposed for development shall take access from an arterial or collector street. 	The use will be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
Waste Related 
Services 	BP 
IN 	The facility shall be set back at least 100 feet from residentially zoned or used properties. Any outdoor recycling storage (bins) or activities shall be visually screened from any adjacent roadways, residentially zoned or used properties, and any other nonindustrial uses by an eight-foot perimeter fence constructed of brick, stone or similar masonry product. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit is also required within the BP district. 	All solid, liquid or sanitary waste collected shall be stored and all manufacturing or production of goods or energy from solid, liquid or sanitary waste or recycled materials shall be conducted in an enclosed building. 
Table Notes: 
N/A means Not Applicable. 
 
Table 3.2.1.F 
Home Enterprise Restricted and Conditional Use Standards 
Land Use 	District 	Development Standards 	Operational/Other Standards 
Bed and Breakfast Lodging 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 	In addition to approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the owner/operator of the bed and breakfast shall be a full-time resident of the main dwelling on the property in which the use is located. No more than four guestrooms per property shall be allowed. On-site parking (except driveways) shall not be located in the front yard and shall be screened by a wall or fence at least six feet in height and a five-foot landscape buffer. 	No food preparation, except beverages, is allowed within individual guestrooms and preparation and service of food shall conform to all applicable regulations of the State of Texas and Burnet County. Guestroom rentals shall not be allowed for more than 21 consecutive days. 
	NC 
DN 
DT 	No more than six guestrooms per property shall be allowed. On-site parking (except driveways) shall not be located in the front yard and shall be screened by a wall or fence at least six feet in height and a five-foot landscape buffer. 	
Child-care, Family Home 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
MR 
ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 	There shall be at least 100 square feet of outdoor open space per child, which is entirely enclosed by a building, fence, or wall with a height of at least six feet. Approval of a Conditional Use Permit is also required within the ENZ.1, ENZ.2, ENZ.3, and ENZ.4 districts. 	The owner/operator for the use meets all certification, licensing, and/or monitoring requirements of the state, and no more than one person, other than members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit, shall be employed to operate the facility. 
Home Enterprise 	FR 
RE 
NR 
TR 
DR 
MR 
ENZ.1 
ENZ.2 
ENZ.3 
ENZ.4 
ENZ.5 	The home enterprise shall be clearly incidental and secondary to its principal use as a dwelling unit by its occupants. The property must remain residential in appearance; this includes no external alterations to the dwelling unit; no outdoor storage; no visible display of goods, products, services; and no signage. In addition, home enterprises may be located within the principal structure or a permitted accessory structure in accordance with the following: 
1. Principal Structure. The area dedicated to the use shall not be greater than 20 percent of the livable floor area of the first floor of the principal structure, or 500 square feet, whichever is less. 
2. Accessory Structure. The area dedicated to the use shall not exceed the maximum square footage allowed for all accessory buildings or structures as set out in Section 4.6.1, Accessory Buildings and Structures, and any other applicable standards of these regulations. 	A home enterprise shall not generate sound, smell, vibration, light, or dust that is offensive or that creates a nuisance; nor generate traffic between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. In addition, no hazardous materials may be manufactured, stored, processed, or disposed of on the premises. 
All vehicle parking related to the home enterprise shall occur on the residential driveway or permitted on-street parking, provided that on-street parking is allowed. 
If the home enterprise includes on-site instructional services (e.g., music, dance, or educational tutoring), no more than five students shall be allowed at one time. 
The following home enterprises are not allowed: child-care facilities with greater than 10 children, retail sales, vehicle sales and services, including the painting of vehicles. 
Table Notes: 
N/A means Not Applicable. 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.A.3—5, 5-21-2019)  
ARTICLE 4 - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 4.1 - GENERAL USE PROVISIONS 
 
Section 4.1.1 - Use of Land and Water, Generally 
A.  Generally. 
1.  This Article establishes development regulations appropriate to the purpose of each district and to the uses allowed therein. 
2.  The use of all land or water, and any buildings or structures located upon the land or water, and the construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or relocation of any building or structure upon the land or water, shall conform to all regulations applicable to the district in which it is located. No land, water, building, or structure shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is permitted in the district in which such land, water, building, or structure is located, and in accordance to the provisions of these regulations 
3.  All parcels proposed for development must be approved for demonstrating compliance with the density, open space, and applicable setback requirements of this Article; the subdivision requirements of Article 6, Subdivision Design and Land Development; and any other applicable standards of these regulations. 
B.  Applicability. This Article applies to all land, water, building, and structure within the City limits of the City of Marble Falls or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.  
Section 4.1.2 - Lot of Record 
A.  Generally. No building or structure shall be erected, or use established, unless upon a lot of record. 
B.  Exemption. Lots of record that exist on the effective date of these regulations that do not conform to the lot standards required in this Article shall comply with the provisions set out in Division 12.4, Nonconforming Lots.  
Section 4.1.3 - One Single-Family Detached Dwelling per Lot of Record 
A.  Generally. Only one principal single-family detached dwelling unit shall be permitted on a lot of record. 
B.  Exemption. This Section shall not be construed to prevent the location of more than one single-family detached dwelling under a condominium or alternate form of ownership, provided that the parcel proposed for development is in conformance with Section 4.1.4, Condominiums and Alternative Forms of Ownership.  
Section 4.1.4 - Condominiums and Alternative Forms of Ownership 
A.  Generally. The standards of this Article apply to the new development, redevelopment, or substantial improvement of residential, nonresidential, and mixed-use lots and buildings and set out a framework as if all development occurred on conventional lots owned in a fee-simple ownership arrangement. However, the standards are not intended to preclude other ownership types including condominiums (i.e., in which the land is owned in common by the owners of the condominium units) or common maintenance communities (i.e., in which fee simple ownership is predominantly limited to the land under the building). The standards set out in this Section are intended to allow such alternative forms of ownership, provided that the parcel proposed for development could be approved pursuant to these regulations using conventional fee-simple ownership arrangements. 
B.  Demonstration of Compliance. Alternate forms of ownership will be allowed if it is demonstrated that the proposed pattern of development complies with the density or intensity, lot area, lot width, open space, and setback requirements of these regulations as if it were platted with lots that meet the minimum requirements of this Article and other applicable standards of these regulations. Once demonstration of compliance is determined, the owner/operator may proceed with the applicable provisions of these regulations and the development process which best fits the intended alternative final ownership arrangement of the parcel proposed for development (e.g., condominium plat for condominiums).  
Section 4.1.5 - Property Owners' Associations, Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions 
A.  Generally. A property owners' association (POA) and a recorded declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) are required for any new development for which compliance with the standards of these regulations necessitate a continuing obligation to operate, improve, or otherwise maintain common open space, streets or drives, utilities, drainage infrastructure, or some other commonly held land or structure. 
B.  Required POA and CC&Rs. 
1.  Property Owners' Association. If a POA is required as set out in Subsection 4.1.5.A, above, then the developer, subdivider, or owner/operator shall establish and incorporate the POA which shall bear responsibility of ensuring continual compliance with these regulations. 
2.  Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions. A plat, plat notation, and written CC&Rs are required for any POA for which the compliance of these regulations is required. The CC&Rs shall clearly define the boundary of the property subject to the CC&Rs, restrictions as to what may or may not be done on the property and specify on-going maintenance responsibilities and inspections rights. The CC&Rs shall also specify mandatory and automatic membership of all lot/unit owners; establish required dues to fund operations, insurance, taxes, or maintenance (as may be applicable); and require that all responsibilities are ongoing and perpetual even to successors in title. 
3.  Limited Exception. Developments may be approved without the establishment of a POA or CC&Rs provided that common property or on-going maintenance responsibilities are kept under unified ownership and control by a single property owner, developer, or owner/operator. If ownership is transferred to another single authority, such on-going maintenance responsibilities shall also be transferred. Development which is approved using this exception may not be transferred to multiple entities/owners without the establishment of CC&Rs (e.g., transferring maintenance responsibilities for common open space to individual lot owners) without coming into compliance with Subsection 4.1.5.B.1 and Subsection 4.1.5.B.2, above. 
C.  Timing and Notation. The POA and CC&Rs shall be established prior to the approval of the first Final Plat for the development. A note shall be added to the plat and any subsequent plats indicating that all lots/units are part of the POA and subject to compliance in accordance with the established CC&Rs. 
D.  Perpetual. POAs and CC&Rs established under these regulations shall not be dissolved without the consent of the City Council. 
E.  City Review. The City Attorney shall review the POA incorporation documents and CC&Rs as part of the development approval process. The City may withhold approval of a Final Plat until the POA incorporation documents and CC&Rs include the following: 
1.  Compliance with the provisions of these regulations or specific conditions of approval; 
2.  Details on the POA's roles and responsibilities; 
3.  Mandatory and automatic membership; 
4.  A mechanism for the payment of dues to the POA; 
5.  POA authority to place liens on member properties for unpaid dues or violations; and 
6.  Declaration of on-going and perpetual existence. 
F.  Enforcement. The City's right of enforcement shall only extend to those matters which are violations of these regulations and the City's other ordinances and regulations. The City is not responsible for intervening between private disputes between the POA and lot/unit owners or between individual lot/unit owners.  
DIVISION 4.2 - NEW RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DESIGN 
 
Section 4.2.1 - New Residential Development Options and Yield 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Division is to establish minimum standards for new residential neighborhoods. As such, the minimum area of development (see Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development, below) shall be the minimum acreage required for the zoning district to provide adequate size for the development of a new neighborhood accounting for a minimum number of residential lots or units while still being able to meet the gross density and open space requirements. 
B.  Generally. These standards apply to all subdivision, resubdivisions or any development of new residential lots or units. 
C.  Development Yield. New residential developments or subdivisions shall demonstrate compliance with this Section using the entire parcel proposed for development regarding the calculation of gross density and minimum open space area. Multi-phased projects seeking to distribute density or open space on areas outside of the proposed subdivision shall demonstrate compliance by submitting a Concept Plan set out in Section 11.3.5, Concept Plan. 
D.  New Residential Development Options. 
1.  Development Options. The development options and yield for new residential development are set out in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development. 
2.  Lot and Building Standards. The development options per district set out in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development, are intended to be used in conjunction with the corresponding lot and building standards set out in Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development, to determine the appropriate density yield and required standards. 
Table 4.2.1 
Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development 
Development Option 	Min. Area of Development 	Min. Lot Size/Area Per Dwelling Unit 	Max. Gross Density per Acre 	Min. Open Space Area 	Min. Dwelling Unit Size 
Farm and Ranch (FR) District 
Farm and Ranch (Single-Family Detached) 	5.0 ac. 	5.0 ac. 	0.20 	0% 	N/A 
Farm and Ranch Cluster (Single-Family Detached) 	16.0 ac. 	2.5 ac. 	0.35 	13% 	900 sf 
Conservation (Single-Family Detached) 	12.0 ac. 	1.5 ac. 	0.45 	30% 	900 sf 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 1 	12.0 ac. 	1.5 ac. 	0.45 	30% 	900 sf 
Manufactured Home Park 1,4 	10.0 ac. 	6,000 sf 	2.80 	60% 	900 sf 
Tiny House Development 2,4 	10.0 ac. 	5,000 sf 	3.00 	60% 	140 sf 7 
Rural Estate (RE) District 
Estate (Single-Family Detached) 	6.0 ac. 	32,670 sf 	1.10 	15% 	1,400 sf 
Estate Cluster (Single-Family Detached) 	5.0 ac. 	21,780 sf 	1.50 	25% 	1,400 sf 
Neighborhood Residential (NR) District 
Suburban (Single-Family Detached) 	10.0 ac. 	12,000 sf 	3.00 	10% 	900 sf 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 8 	5.0 ac. 	5,000 sf 	6.25 	11% 	900 sf 
Neighborhood (Single-Family Detached) 	5.0 ac. 	5,000 sf 	6.25 	11% 	900 sf 
Neighborhood (Rear-Loaded) (Single-Family Detached) 	6.0 ac. 	4,200 sf 	6.30 	18% 	800 sf 
Cottage 3 	3.0 ac. 	3,600 sf 	7.25 	20% 	600 sf 5 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 1,4 	5.0 ac. 	4,600 sf 	7.25 	25% 	900 sf 
Manufactured Home Park 1,4 	5.0 ac. 	3,600 sf 	5.25 	40% 	900 sf 
Tiny House Development 2,4 	5.0 ac. 	3,600 sf 	5.25 	40% 	140 sf 7 
Transitional Residential (TR) District 
Neighborhood (Single-family Detached) 	5.0 ac. 	5,000 sf 	6.25 	11% 	900 sf 
Neighborhood (Rear-Loaded) (Single-family Detached) 	6.0 ac. 	4,200 sf 	6.30 	18% 	800 sf 
Single-Family Attached 	5.0 ac. 	5,000 sf 	6.25 	11% 	900 sf 
Single-Family Attached (Rear-Loaded) 	6.0 ac. 	4,200 sf 	6.30 	18% 	800 sf 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 8 	5.0 ac. 	5,000 sf 	6.25 	11% 	900 sf 
Duplex 	5.0 ac. 	6,000 sf 	10.00 	14% 	800 sf 
Townhouse (Front-Loaded Single-Entry) 	2.0 ac. 	2,000 sf 	11.00 	25% 	N/A 
Townhouse (Rear-Loaded) 	2.0 ac. 	2,000 sf 	11.30 	15% 	N/A 
Triplex 4 	10,500 sf 	10,500 sf 	12.00 	25% 	N/A 
Quadplex 4 	14,500 sf 	14,500 sf 	12.00 	25% 	N/A 
Apartment 4,6 	5.0 ac. 	N/A 	14.00 	25% 	N/A 
Cottage 	3.0 ac. 	3,600 sf 	7.25 	20% 	600 sf 5 
Multifamily Residential (MR) District 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 1,4 	5.0 ac. 	4,600 sf 	7.25 	25% 	900 sf 
Manufactured Home Park 1,4 	5.0 ac. 	3,600 sf 	5.25 	40% 	900 sf 
Tiny House Development 2,4 	5.0 ac. 	3,600 sf 	5.25 	40% 	140 sf 7 
Townhouse (Front-Loaded Single-Entry) 	2.0 ac. 	2,000 sf 	11.00 	25% 	N/A 
Townhouse (Rear-Loaded) 	2.0 ac. 	2,000 sf 	11.30 	15% 	N/A 
Triplex 	10,500 sf 	10,500 sf 	12.00 	25% 	N/A 
Quadplex 	14,500 sf 	14,500 sf 	12.00 	25% 	N/A 
Apartment 6 	7.5 ac. 	N/A 	24.00 	30% 	N/A 
Downtown Residential (DR) District 
Cottage 5 	Residential development in the Downtown Residential (DR) district is subject to the standards set out in Section 4.2.6, Special Design Standards for Downtown Residential (DR) District. 
Single-Family Detached 	
Single-Family Attached 	
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 8 	
Duplex 	
Townhouse 	
Triplex 4 	
Quadplex 4 	
Apartment 4,6 	
Tiny House Development 2,4 					
Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts 
Apartment 6 	N/A 	N/A 	40.00 	N/A 	N/A 
Loft Apartment 6 	N/A 	N/A 	40.00 	N/A 	N/A 
Table Notes: 
1 Manufactured Home Subdivisions and Parks must also comply with Section 4.2.3, Manufactured Homes. 
2 Tiny House Developments must also comply with the standards of Section 4.2.4, Tiny House Development. 
3 Allowed only in conjunction with a Master Planned Community as set out in Section 4.4.2, Master Planned Communities. 
4 Allowed only with approval of a Conditional Use Permit as set out in Section 3.2.1, Restricted and Conditional Uses, and 11.3.4, Conditional Use Permits. 
5 Maximum Cottage unit size is 899 square feet. 
6 Apartments and lofts are subject to the standards set out in Section 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards, Section 4.3.2, Nonresidential, Mixed-Use and Apartment Design Standards, and Section 4.3.4, Special Design Standards for Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts, as may be applicable. 
7 Maximum Tiny House size is 599 square feet. 
8 Single-Family Zero Lot Line developments must also comply with the standards of Subsection 4.2.10, Single-Family Zero Lot Line Development. 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.1, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.2.2 - New Residential Lot and Building Standards 
A.  Generally. Once maximum gross density, minimum open space requirements, and allowable development options are determined for the parcel proposed for development, the individual lot and building standards can be determined using this Section. 
B.  New Residential Lot and Building Standards. The lot and building standards of this Section are intended to be used in conjunction with the development options and yield for new residential development as set out in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development. 
Table 4.2.2 
Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development 
Development Option 	Min. Lot Size/Area Per Unit 	Min. Lot Width 	Min. Lot Frontage 	Min. Setbacks 	Max. Height Building/Structure 	Max. Lot Coverage 
				Front 	Interior Side 	Street Side 	Rear 	Garage 		
Farm and Ranch (FR) District 
Farm and Ranch (Single-Family Detached) 	5 ac. 	275' 	200' 	90' 	50' 	75' 	150' 	N/A 	35' 	10% 
Farm and Ranch Cluster (Single-Family Detached) 	2.5 ac. 	200' 	175' 	90' 	45' 	55' 	125' 	N/A 	35' 	15% 
Conservation (Single-Family Detached) 	1.5 ac. 	160' 	120' 	75' 	35' 	35' 	90' 	N/A 	35' 	20% 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 5 	1.5 ac. 	160' 	120' 	75' 	35' 	35' 	90' 	N/A 	35' 	20% 
Manufactured Home Park 5,8 	6,000 sf 	50' 	20' 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	40% 
Tiny House Development 6,8 	5,000 sf 	50' 	20' 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	40% 
Rural Estate (RE) District 
Estate (Single-Family Detached) 	32,670 sf 	110' 	75' 	50' 	25' 	35' 	75' 	N/A 	35' 	30% 
Estate Cluster (Single-Family Detached) 	21,780 sf 	90' 	45' 	45' 	20' 	30' 	50' 	N/A 	35' 	35% 
Neighborhood Residential (NR) District 
Suburban (Single-Family Detached) 	12,000 sf 	65' 	25' 	30' 	10' 	20' 	20' 	25'/7.5' 2 	35' 	45% 
Neighborhood (Single-Family Detached) 	5,000 sf 	50'/60' 1 	20' 	25' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	25'/7.5' 2 	35' 	50% 
Neighborhood (Rear-Loaded) (Single-Family Detached) 3 	4,200 sf 	42'/52' 1 	20' 	15' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	7.5' 2 	35' 	60% 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 10 	5,000 sf 	50'/ 65' 1 	20' 	25' 	0'/10' 11 	15' 	15' 	25'/7.5' 2 	35' 	50% 
Cottage 7 	3,600 sf 	30'/40' 1 	20' 	10' 	5' 	10' 	10' 	25'/7.5' 2 	25' 	60% 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 5,8 	4,600 sf 	46'/56' 1 	20' 	15' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	50% 
Manufactured Home Park 5,8 	3,600 sf 	40' 	20' 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	50% 
Tiny House Development 6,8 	3,600 sf 	40' 	20' 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	50% 
Transitional Residential (TR) District 
Neighborhood (Single-family Detached) 	5,000 sf 	50'/60' 1 	20' 	25' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	25'/7.5' 2 	35' 	50% 
Neighborhood (Rear-Loaded) (Single-family Detached) 3 	4,200 sf 	42'/52' 1 	20' 	15' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	7.5' 2 	35' 	60% 
Single-Family Attached 	5,000 sf 	50'/60' 1 	20' 	25' 	5'/0' 4 	15' 	15' 	25'/7.5' 2 	35' 	50% 
Single-Family Attached (Rear-Loaded) 3 	4,200 sf 	42'/52' 1 	20' 	15' 	5'/0' 4 	15' 	15' 	7.5' 2 	35' 	60% 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 10 	5,000 sf 	50'/ 65' 1 	20' 	25' 	0'/10' 11 	15' 	15' 	25'/7.5' 2 	35' 	50% 
Duplex 	6,000 sf 	50'/60' 1 	20' 	25' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	25' 	35' 	50% 
Townhouse (Front-Loaded Single-Entry) 	2,000 sf 	24'/34' 1 	20' 	20' 	5'/0' 4 	10' 	15' 	25' 	40' 	65% 
Townhouse (Rear-Loaded) 3 	2,000 sf 	24'/34' 1 	20' 	10' 	5'/0' 4 	10' 	15' 	7.5' 2 	40' 	70% 
Triplex 8 	12,000 sf 	50' 	50' 	25' 	10' 	15' 	15' 	25' 	40' 	70% 
Quadplex 8 	14,500 sf 	50' 	50' 	25' 	10' 	15' 	15' 	25' 	40' 	70% 
Apartment 8 	N/A 	60' 	60' 	25' 	15' 	20' 	15' 	N/A 	40' 	70% 
Cottage 	3,600 sf 	30'/ 40' 1 	20' 	10' 	5' 	10' 	10' 	25'/7.5' 2 	25' 	60% 
Multifamily Residential (MR) District 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 5,8 	4,600 sf 	46'/56' 1 	20' 	15' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	50% 
Manufactured Home Park 5,8 	3,600 sf 	40' 	20' 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	50% 
Tiny House Development 6,8 	3,600 sf 	40' 	20' 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	N/A 	25' 	50% 
Townhouse (Front-Loaded Single-Entry) 	2,000 sf 	24'/34' 1 	20' 	20' 	5'/0' 4 	10' 	15' 	25' 	40' 	65% 
Townhouse (Rear-Loaded) 3 	2,000 sf 	24'/34' 1 	20' 	10' 	5'/0' 4 	10' 	15' 	7.5' 2 	40' 	70% 
Triplex 	12,000 sf 	50' 	50' 	25' 	10' 	15' 	15' 	25' 	40' 	70% 
Quadplex 	14,500 sf 	50' 	50' 	25' 	10' 	15' 	15' 	25' 	40' 	70% 
Apartment (5-14 units/ac.) 	N/A 	60' 	60' 	25' 	15' 	20' 	15' 	N/A 	40' 	70% 
Apartment (15-24 units/ac.) 	N/A 	60' 	60' 	25' 	15' 	25' 	25' 	N/A 	45' 	70% 
Downtown Residential (DR) District 
Cottage 	Residential development in the Downtown Residential (DR) district is subject to the standards set out in Section 4.2.6, Special Design Standards for Downtown Residential (DR) District. 
Single-Family Detached 	
Single-Family Attached 	
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 10 	
Duplex 	
Townhouse 	
Triplex 8 	
Quadplex 8 	
Apartment 8,9 	
Tiny House Development 6,8 	
Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition Districts 
Apartment 9 	Apartments and lofts are subject to the standards set out in Section 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards, Section 4.3.2, Nonresidential, Mixed-Use and Apartment Design Standards, and Section 4.3.4, Special Design Standards for Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts, as may be applicable. 
Loft Apartment 9 	
Table Notes: 
1 The second number is the lot width for corner lots. 
2 The second number is the garage setback for lots taking direct access from a rear alley. 
3 Rear-loaded means that parking must be located at the rear of the site and access must be taken from an alleyway at the rear of the property. Does not require an enclosed or covered garage. 
4 The second number is the side setback for the side attached to an adjacent unit. 
5 Manufactured Home Subdivisions and Parks must also comply with Section 4.2.3, Manufactured Homes. 
6 Tiny House Developments must also comply with the standards of Section 4.2.4, Tiny House Development. 
7 Allowed only in conjunction with a Master Planned Community. 
8 Allowed only with approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
9 Apartments and lofts are subject to the standards set out in Section 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards, Section 4.3.2, Nonresidential, Mixed-Use and Apartment Design Standards, and Section 4.3.4, Special Design Standards for Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts, as may be applicable. 
10 Single-Family Zero Lot Line developments must also comply with the standards of Subsection 4.2.10, Single-Family Zero Lot Line Development. 
 
C.  Lot Balancing. Lot balancing is a design technique that provides predictable variation in the design of lots which allows a developer greater flexibility in offering multiple house plan options without decreasing overall gross density. 
1.  Applicability. Lot balancing is allowed in the Neighborhood Residential (NR) district for any single-family detached development option. 
2.  Standards. 
a.  The lot area and lot width shall be calculated and documented for each lot, and the average shall be equal or greater than the minimum lot area or lot width as required per the total number of residential lots. 
b.  The lot area or lot width of any individual lot may not be less than 90 percent of the minimum lot area or lot width as set out in Section 4.2.2, New Residential Lot and Building Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.2, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.2.3 - Manufactured Homes 
A.  Generally. This Section provides minimum design standards for more affordable housing options while ensuring compatibility with surrounding districts. Manufactured Homes shall comply with the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Code of the Texas Administrative Code, the standards of this Section, as well as any other applicable standard in these regulations or other City ordinance. 
B.  Manufactured Home Building Unit Standards. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Use and occupancy of manufactured home units is limited to single-family residential. 
b.  All new manufactured homes shall be located in a manufactured home park or subdivision as set out herein, except as otherwise allowed in the ENZ.5 district. 
c.  All manufactured home installations shall be reported by the owner or installer to the Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs as provided by Texas Administrative Code, Title 10, Chapter 80, Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Code, and to the Building Official. 
d.  The Building Official shall inspect the installations and shall cooperate with the Texas Department of Labor and Standards in the enforcement of this Section and of said state statute and rules. 
2.  Manufactured Home Specifications. All manufactured homes shall meet the following specifications: 
a.  Maximum Elevation. The average elevation of a manufactured home frame above ground level shall not exceed four feet, as measured at 90 degrees from the top of the foundation pad to the frame, except when deemed necessary by the Floodplain Administrator. 
b.  Skirting. Skirting is required on all manufactured homes installed above grade: 
i.  Skirting shall be installed on a concrete footing so there is no visible gap between the finished floor and the ground. 
ii.  Skirting shall be constructed of stone, brick, decorative concrete masonry units and shall be compatible in appearance with the manufactured home. 
iii.  Skirting shall be installed on all sides of a manufactured home and be a continuous, complete, opaque, and rigid surface that lends permanency to the appearance of the unit and totally screens the crawl space under the unit. 
iv.  Skirting shall provide for adequate drainage and ventilation. 
v.  Skirting shall not be required for homes which are installed at-grade. 
c.  Transportation Apparatus. The wheels, axels, tongue, towing apparatus, and transportation lights shall be removed prior to occupancy of the manufactured home unit. 
C.  Manufactured Home Subdivisions. 
1.  Use and Occupancy. Only manufactured homes, as permitted by HUD, and related accessory buildings to the manufactured home, in accordance with Subsection 4.2.3.E, Accessory Buildings in Conjunction with a Manufactured Home Unit, shall be allowed to be located on a manufactured home lot. 
2.  Conformance Required. The design of a new manufactured home subdivision shall comply with Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development and all other zoning, subdivision, and other development-related regulations which apply to all new development or redevelopment. 
3.  Permanent Foundation Required. All manufactured homes shall be placed on a permanent concrete foundation which provides anchors and tie-downs that secure and stabilize the unit according to the manufacturer's specifications. Such tie-downs shall be installed and maintained in conformance with the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Code of Title 10, Chapter 80 of the Texas Administrative Code. 
4.  Lot Composition. Each lot shall be comprised of not more than one manufactured home. 
5.  Utilities. All Manufactured Home Lots and Homes shall be served with sanitary sewer, potable water, and electrical power, which shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 6.2.8, Utility Services; Section 6.2.9, Water and Wastewater Facility Design; and any other City ordinance or technical manual. 
6.  Driveways. Driveways shall be constructed of concrete or hot mix asphaltic concrete or similar material approved by the City Engineer and in conformance with the City's TCSS. 
7.  Landscaping. Landscaping of manufactured home lots shall be provided based on the zoning district regulations as established in Division 9.2, Landscaping. 
D.  Manufactured Home Parks. 
1.  Generally. It is intended these manufactured home parks only serve end users with dwellings suitable for permanent living. This means that each dwelling unit is comprised of suitable facilities for living, eating, sleeping, and sanitation. Since each lot/space is connected to public utilities, the overall development will not include separate bathroom and washroom facilities. 
2.  Maximum Area of Development. The maximum area for development is 20 acres. 
3.  Site Development Plan. A manufactured home park shall be planned cohesively through a Site Development Plan to apportion spaces, vehicle circulation, common amenities, open space, and supporting facilities. 
4.  Conformance Required. Spaces in the manufactured home park can be individually owned in a condominium form of ownership as set out in Section 4.1.4, Condominiums and Alternative Forms of Ownership, or rented as spaces under single ownership. Irrespective of ownership, the development and each space shall comply with the specifications set out in Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development, this Section, and all other zoning, subdivision, and other development-related regulations which apply to all new development or redevelopment. 
5.  Space Composition. A single manufactured home is allowed per space. No unit shall be located closer than 10 feet to another unit. 
6.  Foundations and Tie-Downs. All manufactured homes shall be placed on a permanent concrete pad which provides anchors and tie-downs that secure and stabilize the unit according to the manufacturer's specifications. Such tie-downs shall be installed and maintained in conformance with the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Code of Title 10, Chapter 80 of the Texas Administrative Code. 
7.  Site Access. All manufactured home parks shall take access from an arterial or collector street with a driveway width of at least 32 feet wide, back-of-curb to back-of-curb. Driveways shall be constructed of concrete or hot mix asphaltic concrete or similar material approved by the City Engineer. 
8.  Each space shall have adequate frontage width on a private street or access drive to allow for loading/unloading maneuvering space. 
9.  Community Service Buildings. Manufactured home parks may provide community service buildings that provide direct servicing of its management and to provide for community maintenance. These facilities may include sanitary facilities, storage buildings, or management offices. Such community facilities and service buildings shall be represented on the Site Development Plan and obtain the proper Building Permits pursuant to Article 11, Administration. 
10.  Common Area Amenities. Common area amenities for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents shall be required based on the number of dwelling units allotted per the Site Development Plan. The type and number of amenities are established in Section 4.2.8, Common Area Amenities. 
11.  Utilities. All spaces/units shall be served with potable water, sanitary sewer, and electrical power, which shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 6.2.8, Utility Services; and Section 6.2.9, Water and Wastewater Facility Design; and any other City ordinance or technical manual. 
12.  Solid Waste Disposal. The manufactured home park shall provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste in the form of either individual or centralized solid waste collection. Solid waste disposal shall conform to the requirements established by the City. 
13.  Space Marker. A permanent marker identifying the space number is required to be clearly visible day and night for emergency vehicles. 
14.  Landscaping. Landscaping of manufactured home sites shall be provided based on the zoning district regulations as established in Division 9.2, Landscaping. 
E.  Accessory Buildings in Conjunction with a Manufactured Home Unit. Accessory buildings may be constructed or placed in conjunction with a manufactured home in accordance with Section 4.6.1, Accessory Buildings and Structures. Additional requirements shall include the following: 
1.  Accessory buildings in conjunction with a manufactured home shall require a Building Permit. 
2.  Accessory buildings shall not be used as a dwelling unit. 
3.  Accessory buildings shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the manufactured home park or subdivision. 
4.  Accessory buildings shall not obstruct emergency or firefighter access. 
5.  Accessory buildings shall not be located outside the building lines. 
6.  Accessory buildings may be supplied with electrical utility. Such electrical utility shall be independent of the circuit supplying the manufactured home unit and shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 6.2.8, Utility Services, and any other City ordinance or technical manual.  
Section 4.2.4 - Tiny House Development 
A.  Generally. This Section provides minimum design standards for more affordable housing options while ensuring compatibility with surrounding districts. Tiny Houses shall comply with the standards of this Section and the following: 
1.  All of the minimum standards for fitness for human habitation; 
2.  The adopted International Residential Code (IRC); 
3.  The adopted International Energy Conservation Code (IECC); and 
4.  The adopted National Electric Code (NEC). 
B.  Tiny House Building Unit Standards. 
1.  Building Unit Size. The Tiny House shall not be less than 140 square feet or greater than 599 square feet in size. 
2.  Minimum Facilities. The Tiny House shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, an adequate supply of both cold and hot water, and the capability of heating and cooling the unit. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to an approved water supply. 
3.  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened, or other such device which allows ventilation of the room. At least one window in every habitable room shall meet the minimum egress standards in compliance with the adopted IRC. 
4.  Foundation. The Tiny House shall be constructed on a permanent foundation. 
5.  Inspections. The Tiny House shall require Building Permits and inspections for compliance with these regulations and the City's adopted codes. 
C.  Tiny House Development Design. 
1.  Maximum Area of Development. The maximum area for development is 20 acres. 
2.  Site Development Plan. A Tiny House Development shall be planned cohesively through a Site Development Plan to apportion lots/units, vehicle circulation, common amenities, open space, and supporting facilities. 
3.  Conformance Required. Lots/units in the Tiny House Development can be individually owned in a condominium form of ownership as set out in Section 4.1.4, Condominiums and Alternative Forms of Ownership or rented as spaces under single ownership. Irrespective of ownership, the development and each lot/unit shall comply with the specifications set out in Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development, this Section, and all other zoning, subdivision, and other development-related regulations which apply to all new development or redevelopment. 
4.  Community Service Buildings. Tiny House Developments may provide community service buildings that provide direct servicing of its management and to provide for community maintenance. These facilities may include sanitary facilities, storage buildings, or management offices. Such community facilities and service buildings shall be represented on the Site Development Plan. 
5.  Common Area Amenities. Common area amenities for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents shall be required based on the number of dwelling units allotted per the Site Development Plan. The type and number of amenities are established in Section 4.2.8, Common Area Amenities. 
6.  Utilities. All units shall be served with potable water, sanitary sewer, and electrical power, which shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 6.2.8, Utility Services, and Section 6.2.9, Water and Wastewater Facility Design, and any other City ordinance or technical manual. 
7.  Solid Waste Disposal. The Tiny House Development shall provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste in the form of either individual or centralized solid waste collection. Solid waste disposal shall conform to the requirements established by the City.  
Section 4.2.5 - Industrialized Housing Building Unit Standards 
A.  Applicability. This Section applies to single-family and duplex industrialized housing, as defined by and regulated by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f and 5221f-1, V.A.C.S.) and the Texas Occupations Code Chapter 1202, Industrialized Housing and Buildings. 
B.  Generally. Industrialized homes in the City limits are regulated the same as a traditional site-built home. Industrialized homes must meet or exceed all applicable local building codes, zoning and development regulations, and licensing and permitting requirements that pertain to construction of traditional site-built single-family or duplex dwelling units. Industrialized housing is often commonly referred to as modular housing. 
C.  Industrialized Housing Design Standards. Per the Texas Occupations Code §1202.253, single-family and duplex industrialized housing shall: 
1.  Have a value, after installation of the housing unit as determined by the appraisal district, equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family detached dwelling unit located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county; 
2.  Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located; 
3.  Comply with the design standards, building setbacks, side and rear building setbacks, subdivision requirements, landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and 
4.  Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation. 
D.  Additional Application Materials. In addition to application materials required for all new residential development, the Building Official shall require the following: 
1.  A confirmation that the proposed industrialized housing unit complies with the design standards set out in this Section; and 
2.  A complete set of designs, plans, and specifications bearing a stamp of approval Texas Industrialized Building Code Council. 
E.  Additional On-Site Inspections. To ensure compliance with design, plans, and specifications, the following on-site inspections are required by the Building Official: 
1.  Confirmation that each module or modular component bears an approved decal or insignia by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation signifying that each module or modular component has received a post-construction inspection ensuring conformance with state-mandated building codes; 
2.  The construction of the foundation system; and 
3.  The erection and installation of the modules or modular components on the foundation.  
Section 4.2.6 - Special Design Standards for Downtown Residential (DR) District 
A.  Generally. The Downtown Residential district design standards provide a voluntary market incentive to replat and construct single-family attached residences and townhouses to create a more semi-urban residential character of development in walkable proximity to the Downtown district. The district standards still allow new duplex, cottage and single-family detached development. 
B.  General Development Standards. Set out in Table 4.2.6.A, Downtown Residential Lot and Building Standards, are the lot and building standards for new residential development in the Downtown Residential District. 
Table 4.2.6.A 
Downtown Residential Lot and Building Standards 
Land Use 	Min. Lot Width 	Min. Lot Size/Area per Unit 	Max. Lot Coverage 	Min. Setbacks 	Max. Building/Structure Height 	Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 
				Front 	Interior Side 	Street Side 	Rear 	Garage Access 		
Cottage 	30' 	4,200 sf 	60% 	10' 	5' 	7.5' 	15' 	7.5' 5 	25' 	600 sf 8 
	40' 11 	5,600 sf 	60% 	10' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	15' 12 	25' 	600 sf 8 
	50' 	7,000 sf 	60% 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	600 sf 8 
Single-Family Detached 	30' 1 	4,200 sf 	60% 	15' 	5' 	7.5' 	15' 	7.5' 5 	35' 	900 sf 
	40' 11 	5,600 sf 	60% 	15' 	5' 	7.5' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	900 sf 
	50' 	7,000 sf 	60% 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	900 sf 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line 9 	30' 1 	4,200 sf 	60% 	15' 	0'/10' 10 	7.5' 	15' 	7.5' 5 	35' 	900 sf 
	40' 11 	5,600 sf 	60% 	15' 	0'/10' 10 	7.5' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	900 sf 
	50' 	7,000 sf 	60% 	15' 	0'/10' 10 	10' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	900 sf 
Single-Family Attached 	30' 1 	4,200 sf 	60% 	15' 	0' 4 /5' 	7.5' 	15' 	7.5' 5 	35' 	800 sf 
	40' 11 	5,600 sf 	60% 	15' 	5' 	7.5' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	900 sf 
	50' 	7,000 sf 	60% 	15' 	0' 4 / 5' 	10' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	900 sf 
Duplex 	50' 	7,000 sf 	60% 	15' 	5' 	10' 	15' 	15' 12 	35' 	800 sf 
Townhouse 	22' 2 /32' 3 	2,400 sf 	60% 	5' 	0' 4 / 5' 	10' 	15' 	7.5' 5 	35' 	N/A 
Triplex 6 	50' 	7,000 sf 	60% 	15' 	10' 	10' 	15' 	7.5' 13 	40' 	N/A 
Quadplex 6 	50' 	7,000 sf 	60% 	15' 	10' 	10' 	15' 	7.5' 13 	40' 	N/A 
Apartment 6,7 	100' 	14,000 sf 	70% 	25' 	10' 	15' 	15' 	7.5' 12 	40' 	N/A 
Table Notes: 
1 Single-family detached, single-family zero lot line or single-family attached development on 30-foot lots is only allowed on 30-foot lots that existed on the effective date of these regulations. 
2 New townhouse development on a minimum of 22 foot lots is only allowed as rear-loaded units as set out in Table 4.3.6.C, Downtown Residential Illustrative Lot Configurations. 
3 The second number is the lot width for corner lots. 
4 The first number is the side setback for the side attached to an adjacent unit. 
5 Garage access must be taken from a rear alley. 
6 Allowed only with approval of a Conditional Use Permit as set out in Section 11.3.4, Conditional Use Permits. 
7 Apartments are subject to the standards set out in Section 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards, and Section 4.3.2, Nonresidential, Mixed-Use and Apartment Design Standards, as may be applicable. 
8 Maximum Cottage unit size is 899 square feet. 
9 Single-Family Zero Lot Line developments must also comply with the standards of Subsection 4.2.10, Single-Family Zero Lot Line Development. 
10 For Single-Family Zero Lot Line development, one interior side lot line minimum setback may be 0' and the opposite interior side lot line must be a minimum of 10' in conformance with the approved subdivision plat for the development. 
11 Corner lots must be at least 50' wide. 
12 Garage access may be reduced to 7.5' when accessed from an alley. 
13 Triplex, Quadplex, and apartment parking, including garages, must be direct accessed from within the site, not the street, except that when an alley is present, direct access may be taken from the alley. 
 
C.  Market Incentive Development Option. Set out in Table 4.2.6.B, Downtown Residential Market Incentive Development, are the required minimum number of existing 50-foot residential lots needed for aggregation and the proposed development yield after replatting. Alternately, this could be accomplished by aggregating a sufficient number of 30-foot lots which equal the same overall lot width as the aggregated 50-foot lot widths. The minimum lot width standards of Table 4.3.6.A, Downtown Residential Lot and Building Standards, must still be met. 
Table 4.2.6.B 
Downtown Residential Market Incentive Development 
Allowable Housing Types 	Minimum Number of Existing 50' Contiguous Lots Needed 	Total Dwelling Units Allowed After Replatting 	Number of Additional Dwelling Units Gained from Replatting 
Townhouse (1 three-unit townhouse) 	2 	3 	1 
Townhouse (2 two-unit townhouses) 	3 	4 	1 
Townhouse (2 three-unit townhouses) 	4 	6 	2 
Townhouse (2 four-unit townhouses) 	5 	8 	3 
Townhouse (2 five-unit townhouses) 	6 (1 Block) 	10 	4 
 
D.  Downtown Residential Illustrative Lot Configurations. Set out in Table 4.2.6.C, Downtown Residential Illustrative Lot Configurations, are illustrative lot configurations depicting the various forms of new development and redevelopment in the Downtown Residential district. 
Table 4.2.6.C 
Downtown Residential Illustrative Lot Configurations 
Cottage 	Single-Family Detached 
 
 
2 Lot Aggregation/Replatting 	3 Lot Aggregation/Replatting 
 
 
4 Lot Aggregation/Replatting 	5 Lot Aggregation/Replatting 
 
 
6 Lot Aggregation/Replatting 
 
 
E.  Design Standards. All new development and redevelopment in the Downtown Residential District shall comply with the following minimum design standards: 
1.  Front Porches. Front porches are required with all new development and redevelopment. The porch may be enclosed with a screened enclosure but shall not be fully enclosed with walls and windows. 
2.  Parking. Set out in Table 4.2.6.D, Downtown Residential Illustrative Parking Configurations, are illustrative parking configurations depicting the various means of parking in the Downtown Residential district. New parking spaces are required as part of new development and redevelopment as set out in this subsection and Article 8, Parking, Loading, Stacking, and Lighting. Parking spaces shall be set out as follows: 
a.  Cottages. Parking for new cottages may be accommodated in the street if the existing street pavement width can accommodate on-street parallel parking or if the existing right-of-way width can accommodate the applicant constructing paved parallel parking spaces adjacent the existing street. The Director shall determine the adequacy of existing street pavement or right-of-way widths. If on-street parallel parking cannot be accommodated, the standard on-site parking and associated driveway shall be required in accordance with Article 8, Parking, Loading, Stacking, and Lighting, and Article 7, Access, Driveways and Circulation. 
b.  Single-Family Detached, Single-Family Zero Lot Line, Single-Family Attached or Duplex Units. Parking for new single-family detached, single-family zero lot line, single-family attached or duplex units must be set back at least 25 feet from the public sidewalk and meet the pavement and dimensional standards of Article 8, Parking, Loading, Stacking, and Lighting. 
c.  Townhouse Units. Parking for new townhouse units shall be provided in the rear-yard in accordance with Article 8, Parking, Loading, Stacking, and Lighting, with paved alley access. 
d.  Triplex, Quadplex, and Apartment Development. Parking for new triplex, quadplex, or apartment development may be located in the front yard provided that the parking area is set back at least 25 feet from the public sidewalk and meets pavement and dimensional standards of Article 8, Parking, Loading, Stacking, and Lighting. Parking may be in the side or rear yard with access taken from a side street or paved alley. 
Table 4.2.6.D 
Downtown Residential Illustrative Parking Configurations 
Cottage—On-Street Parking 	Single-Family Detached—Front Access Driveway/Garage 
 
 
Townhouse—Rear Access Parking Spaces 	Townhouse—Rear Access Garage 
 
 
 
3.  Sidewalks. All new development and redevelopment in the Downtown Residential district shall install a five-foot sidewalk in the public right-of-way along all local streets. 
4.  Trees. One street tree shall be provided per lot for new development and redevelopment. The tree shall be located in the front yard and irrigated. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.4, 5, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.2.7 - Special Design Standards for Existing Neighborhood Zone (ENZ) District 
A.  Generally. 
1.  Applicability. These development design standards apply to all new development, redevelopment, substantial improvements, and expansion of development in the Existing Neighborhood Zone (ENZ) district and the associated sub-districts set out in this Section. 
2.  Conformity. All existing residential lots and buildings are "conforming" provided that they were "conforming" on the effective date of these regulations with respect to: 
a.  Buildings. Height and setbacks; or 
b.  Lots. Lot width and lot area. 
3.  Nonconformity. This Section does not imply conformity in the following situations: 
a.  Buildings. Buildings which were constructed without, or in violation of, a required permit; or 
b.  Lots. Lots which were originally platted as conforming, but later subdivided into nonconforming lots by a metes and bounds description. 
4.  Nonresidential Uses. 
a.  All lawfully permitted nonresidential uses shall be considered legal nonconforming and may be continued provided that they were constructed and are operated in conformance with their original development approval and permit. 
b.  Expansions, substantial improvement, and redevelopment of existing nonresidential uses shall be in conformance with Table 4.2.7.A and all applicable provisions of these regulations. 
c.  New nonresidential development on a parcel proposed for development with an ENZ District shall be required to be rezoned, as set out in Section 11.3.2, Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning). 
B.  Existing Neighborhood Zone Framework. The individual sub-districts are based on the standards which were in effect at their time of development. Applications for development approval in these sub-districts shall be reviewed against the general development standards prior to consideration of the alternative development standards as set out below: 
1.  General Development Standards. Expansions, substantial improvement, and redevelopment of existing residential lots and buildings; subdivisions; and new development shall first be subject to the general development standards set out in Table 4.2.7.A, Existing Neighborhood Zones General Lot and Building Standards, in Subsection 4.2.7.C, below. 
2.  Alternative Development Standards. Modifications to existing buildings which involve an encroachment into a required setback, as set out in Table 4.2.7.A, Existing Neighborhood Zones General Lot and Building Standards, shall next be evaluated using the alternate development standards set out in Subsection 4.2.7.D, below. 
C.  General Development Standards. The general development standards for each sub-district are set out in Table 4.2.7.A, Existing Neighborhood Zones General Lot and Building Standards. 
Table 4.2.7.A 
Existing Neighborhood Zones General Lot and Building Standards 
ENZ Sub-district 	Development Type 	Min. Lot Width 	Lot Area & Coverage 	Min. Setbacks 	Max. Building/Structure Height 	Min. Dwelling Unit Size 
			Minimum Area per Lot/Unit 	Max. Lot Coverage 	Front 	Interior Side 	Street Side 	Rear 		
ENZ.1 	N/A 	100' 	1 ac. 	30% 	50' 	15' 	25' 	25' 	35' 	1,500 sf 
ENZ.2 	Single-Family Detached, Single-Family Zero Lot Line 6 , Single-Family Attached 2 , Duplex 5 	50' 	6,000 sf 	50% 	25' 	5' 7 	15' 	10' 	35' 	900 sf 
ENZ.3 	Single-Family Detached, Single-Family Zero Lot Line 6 , Single-Family Attached, Duplex 	50' 	6,000 sf 	75% 	25' 	5' 2,7 	15' 	10' 	35' 	900 sf 
	Townhouse 	20' 	2,400 sf 	75% 	20'/ 15' 1 	5' 2 /0' 	15' 	5' 	35' 	800 sf 
	Tri-plex, Quadplex 	50' 	6,000 sf 	75% 	25' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	35' 	600 sf 
ENZ.4 	Single-Family Detached, Single-Family Zero Lot Line 6 , Single-Family Attached, Duplex 	50' 	6,000 sf 	75% 	25' 	5' 2,7 	15' 	15' 	35' 	800 sf 
	Townhouse 	20' 	2,600 sf 	75% 	25'/ 20' 1 	10' 2 / 0' 	15' 	5' 	35' 	800 sf 
	Tri-plex, Quadplex, Apartment 4 	100' 	12,000 sf 	75% 	25' 	10' 	15' 	15' 	50'/ 35' 3 	600 sf 
ENZ.5 	Manufactured Home, Single-Family Detached, Single-Family Attached, Duplex 	50' 	5,000 sf 	60% 	25' 	5' 	15' 	15' 	25' 	600 sf 
Table Notes: 
1 When the garage faces onto the street, the setback for the garage and the second story shall increase to 25 feet. 
2 For single-family attached units and townhouses, there is a zero-foot interior setback between attached units, but minimum 10-foot separation between buildings. 
3 Maximum height shall be limited to 35 feet on any portion of a site within 100 feet of property zoned ENZ.2, Downtown Residential (DR), or Neighborhood Residential (NR). 
4 Apartments are subject to the standards set out in Section 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards and Section 4.3.2, Nonresidential, Mixed-Use and Apartment Design Standards, as may be applicable. 
5 Allowed only with approval of a Conditional Use Permit as set out in Section 3.2.1, Restricted and Conditional Uses, and 11.3.4, Conditional Use Permits. 
6 Single-Family Zero Lot Line developments must also comply with the standards of Subsection 4.2.10, Single-Family Zero Lot Line Development. 
7 For Single-Family Zero Lot Line development, one interior side lot line minimum setback may be 0' and the opposite interior side lot line must be a minimum of 10' in conformance with the approved subdivision plat for the development. 
 
D.  Alternate Development Standards. The alternate development standards for each sub-district are set out in Table 4.2.7.B, Existing Neighborhood Zones Alternate Lot and Building Standards. 
Table 4.2.7.B 
Existing Neighborhood Zones Alternate Lot and Building Standards 
Front Setback Averaging 	The front setback may be reduced to the lesser of: 
The average front building setback of homes along the same side of the street within the same sub-district; or 
The average front building setback of homes within 500 feet, on either side, of the parcel proposed for development. 
Front Porches 	The front setback for a front porch may be reduced by up to six feet so that the front porch is located no closer than 14 feet from the front property line and is only enclosed with screens (not walls and windows). 
Street Side Setback 
Averaging 	The street side setback on any given lot may be reduced to no less than the average street side setback of lots within the same sub-district. 
Side-Loaded Garages 	The front setback may be reduced by 10 feet to establish a side loaded garage provided that: 
	1) There is more than one side-loaded garage within the same sub-district; 
	2) The lot is at least 75 feet wide; 
	3) The reduction only applies to the garage; 
	4) The garage has at least one street-facing window; and 
	5) The garage is constructed of the same design features and exterior materials as the principal building. 
Rear-Loaded Garages 	The rear setback for a rear-loaded garage taking access from an alley may be reduced to 7.5 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.6, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.2.8 - Common Area Amenities 
A.  Generally. Common area amenities shall be provided by the developer for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of apartments, manufactured home parks, RV parks and tiny house developments. This amenity area(s) is required independently of any other requirements of these regulations. Common area amenities, dependent on the type and design of the amenity, may count towards the minimum open space requirement, as set out in Table 4.2.1, New Residential Development Options and Yield. Timing for phased construction of amenities shall be determined at the time of Site Development Plan. 
B.  Amenities Standards. 
1.  Required Amenities. The developer shall provide the number of common area amenities as identified in Table 4.2.8.A, Common Area Amenities Required per Dwelling Unit, and as selected from those listed in Table 4.2.8.B, Common Area Amenity Types. 
Table 4.2.8.A 
Common Area Amenities Required per Dwelling Unit 
Number of Dwelling Units 	Number of Amenities (minimum) 
0—12 	0 
13—49 	1 
50—99 	2 
100—149 	3 
150—199 	4 
200 or more 	5 
 
Table 4.2.8.B 
Common Area Amenity Types 
Common Area Amenity Type 	Requirements 
After School Center 	After School Center must be operated by licensed childcare operator (e.g., Extend-A-Care for Kids). 
Clubhouse 	Clubhouse shall include a kitchen area and social room for resident use. 
Community Garden 	Minimum of 200 square feet. 
Direct access to a City park or the City-wide trail system 	The development abuts a City park or the City-wide trail system or is within 600 feet of such facility and provides pedestrian access via a continuous and connected sidewalk or trail meeting City specifications. 
Fenced Dog Park 	Minimum size of 2,500 square feet, with a minimum depth of 25 feet. 
Landscaped Sitting Area 	May be organized in a central area or dispersed throughout development, generally 200 square feet. 
Laundry facility 	Minimum 200 square feet. 
Off-street Walking Paths 	Linear distance of off-street multi-use path must be equal to or greater than half the linear dimension of the perimeter of the site. 
Picnic Areas 	Minimum of two picnic tables and two grills, minimum 200 square feet. 
Playground Equipment 	Playground equipment must be certified that it meets all commercial recreational safety standards. 
Private business center 	Minimum 200 square feet. 
Private fitness facility 	Minimum 200 square feet. 
Sport court 	Half or full-court, minimum 2,000 square feet. 
Swimming pool 	Shall be built to the standards for public pools as established by Texas state law. 
	From the Health and Safety Code: 
• Section 341.064, Swimming Pools and Bathhouses; 
• Section 341.0645, Pool Safety; 
• Section 341.0695, Interactive Water Features and Fountains; 
• Chapter 757 - Pool Yard Enclosures. 
	From the Texas Administrative Code. 
• Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Standards for Public Pools and Spas; 
• Chapter 265, Subchapter M, Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains. 
 
2.  Location and Design. 
a.  The common area amenity shall be located and designed to serve the dwellings within the development. All playground equipment and related recreational improvements must be of commercial quality and approved by City. 
b.  Amenities located in the 100-year floodplain shall be replaced on site if damaged during a flood event. 
3.  Construction, Operation and Maintenance. The amenity area shall be privately constructed by the developer and maintained and operated by a property owners' association as set out in Section 4.1.5, Property Owners' Associations, Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, or the management company, as applicable.  
Section 4.2.9 - Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) 
A.  Generally. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) are permitted as set out in this Section. 
B.  Types of ADUs. For the purposes of these regulations, there are three types of ADUs: 
1.  Attached ADU. Attached ADUs are units that are created within or attached to a principal building such that they appear to be an integrated part of it. 
2.  One-Story Detached ADU. One-story detached ADUs are detached accessory buildings that contain an accessory dwelling unit. They may or may not also include a garage or storage area. 
3.  Second Story Detached ADU. Second story detached ADUs are an accessory dwelling unit which is located on the second floor of an accessory building. A typical example is a dwelling unit located above a detached garage. 
C.  Where Permitted. Accessory dwelling units are allowed in zoning districts as provided in Table 4.2.9, Accessory Dwelling Unit Types by Zoning District. ADUs are not allowed in zoning districts that are not listed in the table. ADUs are only allowed as an accessory dwelling unit where the principal building is a detached single-family building and occupied as a residence. 
Table 4.2.9 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Types by Zoning District 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Type 	ZONING DISTRICTS 
R=Permitted with Restrictions / —=Prohibited 	Reference to Supplemental Standards 
	Ag 	Residential 	ENZ Sub-districts 	Nonresidential 	
	AG 	RE 	NR 	TR 	DR 	MR 	ENZ.1 	ENZ.2 	ENZ.3 	ENZ.4 	ENZ.5 	NC 	GC 	DN 	DT 	BP 	IN 	
Attached ADU 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 4.2.9.D; 
Section 4.2.9.E 
One-Story Detached ADU 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 4.2.9.D; 
Section 4.2.9.F 
Second Story Detached ADU 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Section 4.2.9.D; 
Section 4.2.9.G 
 
D.  General Design Standards for All Accessory Dwelling Units. 
1.  Building Permit and Inspection Required. Construction and occupancy of ADUs shall adhere to the requirements and process of developing any new building or structure as established in Article 11, Administration, including obtaining a Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy. 
2.  Lot Standards. The development of an ADU shall conform to the applicable zoning district standards established in Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development, unless otherwise stated in this Section. 
3.  Number of Accessory Dwelling Units. No lot shall contain more than one ADU. 
4.  Parking for ADUs. 
a.  In addition to the parking requirements for the principal building, one off-street parking space shall be provided for the ADU. 
b.  Use of tandem parking to meet this requirement is allowed; however, only one tandem space is allowed per lot. 
5.  Required Usable Outdoor Area. Lots that are developed with ADUs shall include a useable outdoor area of at least 1,100 square feet. 
6.  Utilities. ADUs shall remain on the same electric and water meters as the principal building. 
7.  Prohibited ADUs. The use of a manufactured home, recreational vehicle, or tiny house as an accessory dwelling unit is prohibited. 
E.  Supplemental Standards for Attached ADUs. 
1.  Area. Attached ADUs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the total square footage of the principal building. 
2.  Setbacks Requirements for Attached ADUs. Setbacks for attached ADUs shall be the same as the principal building. 
3.  Additional Design Standards of Attached ADUs. 
a.  Attached ADUs which include an addition to the principal building shall match the appearance of the principal building, including design, color, exterior cladding, and roofing materials, and shall not be readily apparent as a separate dwelling unit. 
b.  Exterior doors which provide direct access to the attached ADU shall be located and designed in a manner that is typical for secondary access to a single-family detached building. 
F.  Supplemental Standards for One-Story Detached ADUs. 
1.  Area. The floor area of a one-story detached ADU shall not exceed the lesser of the following: 
a.  Twenty-five percent of the gross floor area of the principal building; or 
b.  Seven and one-half percent of the lot area; 
c.  The maximum accessory structure size allowed per Section 4.6.1, Accessory Buildings and Structures. 
d.  Exception. In the FR and RE District, a one-story detached ADU shall not exceed 33 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building, or 1,200 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
2.  Setback Requirements for One-Story Detached ADUs. One-story detached ADUs shall be set back from the property line as follows: 
a.  Front, Street Side, Interior Side. Same as principal building. 
b.  Rear. Same as principal building; or five feet where an alley abuts the rear lot line. 
3.  Height. The height of a one-story detached ADU shall not exceed: 
a.  Nine feet to the wall plate; and 
b.  Twenty feet to the ridge. 
4.  Additional Design Standards for One-Story Detached ADUs. 
a.  The one-story detached ADU shall match the appearance of the principal building, including design, color, exterior cladding, and roofing materials. 
b.  One-story detached ADUs shall be spaced at least 10 feet from the principal building. 
G.  Supplemental Standards for Second Story Detached ADUs. 
1.  Area. Same as Subsection 4.2.9.F.1, Area, of this Section. 
2.  Setbacks Requirements for Second Story Detached ADUs. Same as principal building. 
3.  Height. Same as principal building. 
4.  Additional Design Standards for Second Story Detached ADUs. 
a.  The first floor of a second story detached ADU shall not include any living space of the ADU. 
b.  The second story detached ADU shall match the appearance of the principal building, including design, color, exterior cladding, and roofing material. In the event that the second story ADU is an addition to an existing accessory building not matching the principal building, the entire building shall be brought into compliance. 
c.  Second story detached ADUs shall be spaced at least 10 feet from the principal building.  
Section 4.2.10 - Single-Family Zero Lot Line Development 
A.  Generally. 
1.  This Section provides design standards for Single-Family Zero Lot Line developments in addition to the minimum standards of the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  Single-Family Zero Lot Line development must be included in a plat designating the lots for Zero Lot Line development. 
B.  Single-Family Zero Lot Line Development Additional Design Standards. 
1.  The lot line with the zero-setback requirement shall not be a lot line adjacent to a lot not within the platted development or not otherwise containing or planned for zero-lot line dwellings. 
2.  At time of subdivision platting, a perpetual easement, a minimum of five feet in width, is required to be established on any lot line in which the adjacent lot is allowed a zero-setback for the purposes of structural overhang and to allow the adjacent property owner access for maintenance of the structure. 
3.  There shall be a minimum separation of ten feet between dwellings. 
4.  A masonry wall at least six feet in height shall be constructed on the zero-setback side from the front building line to a point within six feet of the rear property line. Said wall shall be required for any structure which has a setback of less than five feet on the designated zero setback side. This wall may include the main structural wall of the building. 
5.  The side of the structure located at or within 3 feet of the property line shall contain no windows or other openings. 
6.  The roof eaves on the side of the house with no side setback may project no more than 18 inches over the adjacent property line. The roof eaves on the side of the house with the ten-foot side setback may extend into the required ten-foot side setback on the opposite side of the house a maximum of two feet. 
7.  A gutter and down spout shall be required along the zero-setback side to ensure drainage is handled on the owner's property. Rain gutters must be positioned to drain only onto the lot of the house to which they are attached. The gutter system is not included in the calculation of the eave encroachment. 
8.  A fireplace, windowsill, box or bay window, or other architectural features not more than ten feet in width may extend a maximum of two feet into the required ten-foot side setback. 
9.  No setback shall be required from an interior side lot line for air conditioning or swimming pool equipment or for an uncovered porch or patio. 
10.  No structure may extend into a public easement. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.3, 5-21-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.3, adopted May 21, 2019, set out provisions intended for use as App. B, § 4.2.3. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as App. B, § 4.2.10.  
DIVISION 4.3 - NONRESIDENTIAL, MIXED-USE, AND APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT DESIGN 
 
Section 4.3.1 - Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards 
A.  Generally. The development, lot, and building standards set out in Table 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Lot and Building Standards, apply to all new development, redevelopment, substantial improvements, and expansion of all civic, commercial, industrial, and any other nonresidential or mixed-use buildings in all zoning districts. 
B.  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Lot and Building Standards. 
Table 4.3.1.B 
Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Lot and Building Standards 
Zoning District 	Minimum Area of Development 	Minimum Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Width 	Maximum Lot Coverage 	Build-to Line 	Minimum Setbacks 	Maximum Building Height 
						Front 	Interior Side 	Street Side 	Rear 	
Nonresidential Districts 
NC 3 	N/A 	6,000 sf 	50' 	70% 	N/A 	25' 	5'/10' 1 	25' 	15'/10' 1 	35' 
GC 	N/A 	N/A 	50' 	75% 	N/A 	25' 	5'/10' 1 	25' 	15'/10' 1 	45' 
DN 2 	N/A 	N/A 	25' 	N/A 	0' 2 	0' 5 	0'/10' 1 	0' 	0'/10' 1 	60' 4 
DT 2 	N/A 	N/A 	25' 	N/A 	10' 2 	0' 6 	0'/10' 1 	10' 	10' 1 	60' 4 
BP 	2.5 ac. 	21,780 sf 	150' 	80% 	N/A 	35' 	15' 	25' 	30' 	60' 
IN 	5 ac. 	1 ac. 	250' 	85% 	N/A 	35' 	20' 	25' 	40' 	60' 
Nonresidential Development in other Districts 
FR, RE 	N/A 	32,670 sf 	125' 	25% 	N/A 	55' 	35' 	35' 	60' 	35' 
NR, TR, 
DR, MR 	N/A 	32,670 sf 	80' 	70% 7 	N/A 	30' 	15' 	25' 	20' 	35' 
Table Notes: 
1 All properties in the NC, GC, DN, and DT districts adjacent to Lake Marble Falls shall provide a minimum 10-foot boardwalk and public access easement along the water's edge. Side and rear setbacks adjacent to the lake shall be increased to 10 feet (or the edge of the boardwalk) in the DN and DT districts to accommodate the boardwalk and public access easement. Side and rear setbacks adjacent to the lake may/must be decreased/increased to 10 feet (or the edge of the boardwalk) in the NC and GC districts to allow construction up to the boardwalk and public access easement. 
2 See Section 4.3.4, Special Design Standards for Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. 
3 See Section 4.3.3, Special Design Standards for Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District. 
4 Rooftop amenities are not counted towards the maximum building height provided the amenity does not occupy more than 50% of the roof area and is set back from the parapet edge or building façade on at least three sides. 
5 Buildings in the DN district are required to be built to front and side property lines abutting a street, except as provided in Subsection 4.3.4.B, Special Setbacks in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. 
6 Buildings in the DT district are required to be built within 10 feet of the front property line, except as provided in Subsection 4.3.4.B, Special Setbacks in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. The setback line may be averaged along the entire block. 
7 Maximum lot coverage may be increased by 10% if additional landscaping is provided on the adjacent right-of-way(s). 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.7, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.3.2 - Nonresidential, Mixed-Use, and Apartment Design Standards 
A.  Generally. 
1.  Applicability. These development design standards apply to all new development, redevelopment, substantial improvements, and expansion of all civic, commercial, industrial, apartments and any other nonresidential or mixed-use buildings in all zoning districts. 
2.  Consistent Façade Standard. The development design standards described herein shall be expressed on all four sides of a building, unless expressly exempt (or modified). Each façade shall be similar in character and design to the other façades. 
B.  Building Entrances. Each principal building shall include significant architectural elements to identify the main building entrances. These main entrances must be clearly defined and highly visible. 
1.  Entrance Elements. The main entrance of the principal building shall include a sheltered entry which may be comprised of a canopy, portico, arcade, overhangs, or other comparable architectural element. 
2.  Supplemental Elements. The area around the main entrance shall also include at least two additional architectural elements. These elements include: 
a.  Recesses or projections; 
b.  Over-the-door peaked roof forms; 
c.  Arches; 
d.  Outdoor patios or plazas; 
e.  Display windows; 
f.  Obviously differentiating architectural detail such as moldings that are integrated in to the building structure and design; or 
g.  Planters or wing walls that are integrated into the building and incorporate landscaped areas or places for sitting. 
3.  Exemption. Buildings located in the General Industrial (IN) district are not required to meet this standard. 
C.  Building Articulation. The design of new buildings shall be subject to the following vertical and horizontal building articulation standards to promote a more interesting and human-scaled façade appearance. 
1.  Required Articulation. As set out in Table 4.3.2.A, Horizontal and Vertical Articulation Offset Requirements, the design of all buildings shall include a three-part vertical articulation composition (i.e., a top (or cap), body, and base) and horizontal articulation composition for: 
a.  All front and side building facades; and 
b.  Rear building façades which face a public right-of-way, a shared drive aisle or parking lot in a multi-lot unified development or shopping center, a park, or residentially zoned property or use. 
Table 4.3.2.A 
Horizontal and Vertical Articulation Offset Requirements 
	Articulation Offset 	Articulation Distance 
Horizontal Articulation 
The required building façade shall not extend for a distance greater than three times the building's average height without a perpendicular offset. 	The depth of the perpendicular offset shall equal a minimum of 10% of the average building height. 	Offsets shall extend laterally for a distance equal to at least 7.5% of the length of the entire façade. 
Vertical Articulation 
The required building façade shall not extend horizontally for a distance greater than three times the building's average height without a change in elevation. 	The elevation change shall equal a minimum of 10% of the average building height. 	Elevation changes shall continue to extend laterally for a distance equal to at least 7.5% of the length of the entire façade. 
 
2.  Supplemental Articulation. In addition to Subsection 4.3.2.C.1, Required Articulation, above, the required building façade shall include at least one recognizable change of texture or materials. 
3.  Exemption. 
a.  Articulation is not required on buildings in the IN district, except where a building façade faces an arterial-level street and is located within 200 feet of the street. 
b.  In the BP district, articulation requirements only apply to the front street facing façade of the principal building. 
c.  Articulation is not required in the DN district on side building façades built to the property line where another building does or will abut. Articulation is required when the side building façade faces a public street, residential property, or public park, plaza, or open space. 
d.  In all other districts, where there are multiple buildings on one lot, a building façade that is screened from view from the property lines by other buildings may be exempt from providing articulation. 
D.  Architectural Elements. All front and side building façades and all rear facades which face a public right-of-way, a shared drive aisle or parking lot in a multi-lot unified development or shopping center, a park, or a residentially zoned property or use shall incorporate architectural elements that visually divide the façade plane. Long, uninterrupted vertical or horizontal wall sections are prohibited. In addition to the building articulation standards set out in this Section, building façades shall not include a blank wall area larger than generally 14 feet tall by 24 feet wide or 300 square feet in area. 
1.  Complying with this requirement can be accomplished through the use of: 
a.  Repeating distinctive window patterns at intervals less than the articulation interval; 
b.  Window(s); 
c.  Door(s); 
d.  Balconies; 
e.  A porch, patio, deck, or covered entry; 
f.  A change in the roofline by alternating parapet heights; 
g.  A change in building materials that corresponds to a change in building plane; 
h.  Lighting fixtures, trellises, trees, or other landscape features; 
i.  An awning or canopy; or 
j.  Vines or other plantings on wall trellises that cover at least 60 percent of the façade elevation. 
2.  Exemption. 
a.  This Section does not apply to buildings in the IN district, except where a building façade faces an arterial-level street and is located within 200 feet of the street. 
b.  In the BP district, architectural element requirements only apply to street facing façades. 
c.  Architectural elements are not required in the DN district on side building façades built to the property line where another building does or will abut. Architectural elements are required when the side building façade faces a public street, residential property, or public park, plaza, or open space. 
E.  Building Materials. The exterior façades of all buildings, excluding doors and windows, shall be finished in one or more of the following exterior finish materials, in accordance with Table 4.3.2.B, Building Material Standards. 
1.  Types of Exterior Finish Materials: 
a.  Class 1 Materials. Exterior finish materials considered Class 1 are comprised of the following: 
i.  Brick; 
ii.  Natural stone; 
iii.  Granite; 
iv.  Marble; and 
v.  Masonry Veneer (thin brick and engineered stone) placed a minimum of 4 feet above finished grade of the building and above another Class 1 Masonry product. 
b.  Class 2 Materials. Exterior finish materials considered Class 2 are comprised of the following: 
i.  Architectural concrete masonry units in the following styles: 
a)  Split face; 
b)  Weathered face; 
c)  Sandblasted face; or 
d)  Ground face; and 
ii.  Portland cement stucco, installed with a weather barrier and wall drainage system. 
c.  Class 3 Materials. Exterior finish materials considered Class 3 are comprised of the following: 
i.  Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems ("EIFS"), installed with a weather barrier, wall drainage system, and prohibited for the first 10 feet above finished grade of the building; 
ii.  Smooth-faced, finished concrete masonry units; 
iii.  Fiber cement siding ("Hardie Board"), installed as horizontal lapped siding, in a board-and-batten style vertical installation, or as shingles; 
iv.  Synthetic wood material that has the architectural appearance of real wood; and 
v.  Embossed or prefinished architectural metal panel (26+ gauge), which has an appearance of masonry or stucco. (applicable only to buildings with a gross floor area greater than 16,000 square feet). 
d.  Glass. Windows and doors are excluded from the percentage of materials required. However, a maximum of 60 percent of the ground floor façades and a maximum of 40 percent of the upper floor façades shall be glass, whether window, glass curtain wall, or glass block. Glass shall have a maximum reflectivity of less than 20%. 
e.  Tilt-wall. Tilt-wall construction is not restricted as a construction method; however, an exterior finish shall be required in the form of a Class 1, Class 2, or Class 3 material. 
f.  Other Materials. Other materials such as wood, prefab metal panels, metal siding, etc. may be used for the remainder of the building façade that is not subject to the material standards, according to Table 4.3.2.B, Building Material Standards. 
2.  Building Material Standards. As set out in Table 4.3.2.B, Building Material Standards, each zoning district includes a minimum percentage of the overall building that shall be finished with a masonry product and the amount of the overall building that shall meet the criteria of a Class 1 material. Additionally, the table specifies the limitation of the amount of Class 2 and Class 3 materials that can be used on the building for each zoning district. Each façade subject to the building material requirements shall independently meet the minimum requirements unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
Table 4.3.2.B 
Building Material Standards 
Zoning District 	Minimum Percentage Required 	Maximum Percentage Allowed 
	Overall Approved Building Material Requirement 	Class 1 Materials 	Class 2 Materials 	Class 3 Materials 
NC 	All floors 	75% 	30% 	70% 	10% 
GC 	1 st - 3 rd floors 	95% 	50% 	40% 	20% 
	4 th floor and up 		20% 	80% 	20% 
DN 	All floors 	95% 	75% 	25% 	10% 
DT 	1 st - 3 rd floors 	95% 	75% 	25% 	10% 
	4 th floor and up 		30% 	70% 	10% 
BP 1 	1 st - 3 rd floors 	75% 	30% 	70% 	50% 
	4 th floor and up 		10% 	90% 	50% 
IN 1 	1 st - 3 rd floors 	50% 	10% 	90% 	75% 
	4 th floor and up 		10% 	90% 	75% 
Nonresidential Development in all other districts 	75% 	30% 	70% 	10% 
Apartment in all districts 	1 st floor 	75% 	30% 	70% 	10% 
	Other floors 		- 	100% 	60% 
Table Notes: 
1 In the IN and BP districts, rear building façades not facing a public street, residential district or use, or public park are exempt from the building material requirement. Side building façades in the IN and BP districts are required to address the material requirements on the first 50-feet or first 50% of the façade, whichever is less, provided an opaque wall or fence is installed that screens the remaining façade from street view and provided the property is not adjacent an arterial level street. 
 
3.  Prohibited Exterior Finish Materials: The use of the following materials for exterior walls, siding, or cladding is prohibited for all uses: 
a.  Plywood; 
b.  Plastic; and 
c.  Corrugated Metal. 
4.  Approval of Other Exterior Finish Materials. 
a.  Generally. Other building materials may be considered as exterior finish materials if it is demonstrated that they have comparable durability, impact resistance, and aesthetic quality as the materials provided by this Section. 
b.  Approval Required. The Planning and Zoning Commission must approve other exterior finish materials. 
c.  Consistent with Original Building Materials. For existing nonresidential buildings undergoing expansion, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve materials that are used on the original building, provided that such materials are an integral part of the character of the existing building. 
d.  Materials That Support Energy Efficiency and Sustainability. 
i.  For buildings designed to achieve a U.S. Green Building Council Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (USGBC LEED®) certification, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve materials that qualify for LEED points under both the "energy and atmosphere criteria" and the "materials and resources criteria" of the LEED checklists. 
ii.  For buildings designed to achieve the EPA ENERGY STAR certification, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve materials that substantially improve the energy efficiency of a building compared to materials that are permitted above. 
F.  Building Façade Color. Nonresidential or apartment building façades should consist of colors that are consistent with the Texas Hill Country heritage of Marble Falls while also allowing for differentiation of buildings and artistic expression. Class I Masonry shall not be colored with paint, stain, or other coloring application method. Other building façade materials shall predominantly consist of muted, earth tone colors. Primary wall planes facing public streets or parks shall not consist of iridescent, glossy, fluorescent, bright, or "hot" shades of pink, yellow, red, purple, orange or green. Accent colors in limited quantity are not restricted by this Section and shall only be applied to architectural elements. Architectural elements may include but are not limited to, doors, shutters, awnings, window trims, door frames, window sills, cornices, and banding. 
G.  Roof Design. 
1.  Generally. All buildings shall be constructed with a pitched roof, flat roof, true mansard roof, or any combination thereof. 
2.  Flat Roofs. 
a.  When using a flat roof, parapet walls are required at a minimum of 30 inches in height and constructed with materials listed in Subsection 4.3.1.E, Building Materials, in a similar style of the building architecture. Buildings in the General Industrial (IN) District are exempt from this requirement, except when facing a Principal Arterial. 
b.  Faux mansard roofs are not permitted. 
c.  Green roof systems are permitted. 
d.  Any material that is permitted by the City's adopted building code is allowed on a flat roof. 
3.  Pitched Roof. 
a.  Roofing materials used on pitched roofs shall be proven, high-quality, durable materials, and may include: 
i.  Architectural shingles; 
ii.  Concrete tile; 
iii.  Clay tile; 
iv.  Slate; 
v.  Architectural standing seam metal; 
vi.  Building-integrated solar tiles (solar panels that double as roofing material); 
vii.  Green roof systems; and 
viii.  Other, as approved by the Director. 
b.  Overhanging eaves extending a minimum of 18 inches shall be provided on pitched roofs. 
4.  Prohibited Roofing and Material. Corrugated or ribbed metal and other roofing materials that are not listed in Subsection 4.3.2.G.3.a, above, are prohibited. 
H.  Awnings and Canopies. Awnings and canopies, if constructed, shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Placement. 
a.  A minimum clearance of eight feet from finished grade to bottom of the awning or canopy is required. Finished height may not exceed 16 feet above finished grade. 
b.  Awnings and canopies shall not encroach into a public right-of-way unless otherwise allowed by these regulations. 
2.  Materials. Awnings and canopies may be constructed as the same permitted materials as pitched roofs (see Subsection 4.3.2.G.3.a, above), or canvas. 
3.  Lighting. Backlighting or internal illumination is prohibited. 
4.  Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. See Section 4.3.4.G for awnings and canopies in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § III.B.8—12, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.3.3 - Special Design Standards for Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District 
A.  Generally. These development design standards apply to all new development, redevelopment, substantial improvements, and expansion of civic, commercial, and industrial developments and any other nonresidential or mixed-use buildings in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) district. These standards apply in addition to the standards set out in other applicable sections of this Division. 
B.  Building Scale in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District. Buildings in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) district shall be limited to a maximum floor to area ratio (FAR) of 0.30. Additionally, buildings within the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) district are limited to one (1) story in height within fifty (50) feet of a residential property. 
C.  Parking in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District. Required parking spaces shall be placed in the side or rear yard and not between the principal building and the street, except that up to two rows of parking may be placed between the building and the street when located on a collector or arterial level street. The Director may approve parking between the principal building and the street when the property is adjacent to Lake Marble Falls or when properties on both sides are developed commercially with parking between the building and street. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § III.B.13, 14, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.3.4 - Special Design Standards for Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts 
A.  Generally. These development design standards apply to all new development, redevelopment, substantial improvements, and expansion of civic, commercial, and apartment developments and any other nonresidential or mixed-use buildings in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) districts. The DN and DT Districts have specified differences in site and design characteristics, as set out in this Section. These standards apply in addition to the standards set out in Section 4.3.2, Nonresidential, Mixed Use and Apartment Design Standards and other applicable sections of this Division. Buildings must be designed with an urban character at the front property line and front façade. 
B.  Special Setbacks in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. 
1.  Downtown District (DN). A minimum of 80% of any building façade facing a public street shall be built to that property line abutting the street, except as provided in Subsection 4.3.4.B.3, below. 
2.  Downtown Transition District (DT). A minimum of 80% of the front building façade shall be built within 10 feet of the front property line, except as provided in Subsection 4.3.4.B.3, below. The setback line may be averaged along the entire block. 
3.  Setback Exceptions in either district. 
a.  Narrow or Non-Existent Sidewalk. Where there is no sidewalk or an existing public sidewalk that is less than six feet wide, the building must be set back in order to provide the additional space to expand the sidewalk onto the private lot to achieve a minimum of six feet. In such an instance, the build-to line will be located at the edge of the expanded sidewalk on the private lot. 
b.  Public Plaza or Outdoor Service Area. Buildings may be set back up to a distance of 20 feet from the build-to line in order to provide a designated public plaza or similar outdoor area according to the following standards: 
i.  The public plaza or outdoor service area shall be designated upon development approval and maintained as a publicly accessible space; 
ii.  Any service uses that take place in the designated setback area must directly relate to the activity of the primary ground floor use (e.g., outdoor seating for a restaurant, outdoor display area for a retail store, etc.); and 
iii.  When the area is not being used as an outdoor service area, it shall remain generally accessible to the public and function as an extension of the public sidewalk environment. 
c.  The front build-to requirement shall not be applicable to properties directly adjacent to Lake Marble Falls. 
C.  Drive-through or Drive-up Facilities in the DN and DT Districts. No drive-through, drive-up, or drive-in facilities shall be permitted in the Downtown or Downtown Transition districts. 
D.  Parking in the DN and DT Districts. 
1.  DN and DT Districts. Parking shall be in accordance with Division 8.2, Off-Street Parking, of these regulations. 
2.  DT District. On-site parking shall be located behind the principal building and is not allowed between the building line and the street. On-street parking is encouraged but shall only be allowed on local-level streets when it is determined by the Director the existing street pavement width and/or the existing right-of-way width is adequate to accommodate. 
3.  The Director may approve parking between the principal building and the street for either district when the property is adjacent to Lake Marble Falls. 
E.  Roofs in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. Rooflines shall be individually distinguishable with variations of height. Roofs shall relate to the building façade articulations. Pitched-roof building forms facing the street are not permitted, except that the Director may make an exception for buildings less than 1,000 square feet when they are not located on a property line shared with another building. 
F.  Balconies in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. Balconies in the DN and DT districts shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Right-of-Way Encroachment. In the DN and DT districts, cantilevered balconies are allowed to encroach into the public right-of-way up to five feet without special approval but shall not extend over street pavement. A minimum 10-foot clearance shall be provided between the balcony and any public sidewalk beneath. 
2.  Materials. Balcony railing materials should be consistent with the character of the district. Glass railing or enclosure around a balcony shall not be permitted. 
G.  Awnings in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) Districts. Awnings and canopies in the DN and DT districts shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Right-of-Way Encroachment. In the DN and DT districts awnings and canopies are allowed to encroach into the public right-of-way without special approval. Awnings and canopies shall not extend further than six feet into the right-of-way and shall not extend over street pavement. 
2.  Minimum Clearance. A minimum clearance of eight feet from finished grade to bottom of the awning or canopy is required. If signage will be placed under the awning or canopy, a minimum clearance of ten feet is required. 
3.  Extent. Awnings and canopies shall not be closer to the edge of the building than one-foot and shall not cover architectural features. Maximum height of the upper attachment of an awning shall not exceed 16 feet above finished grade. 
4.  Materials. Awnings and canopies shall be constructed of proven, high-quality, durable materials, but may not be constructed of corrugated metal or R-Panel. 
5.  Support Features. Awnings and canopies in the public right-of-way shall be supported by the building and shall not utilize poles or other ground mounted support features unless the Director determines the right-of-way width and streetscape is such that a minimum 6-foot unimpeded pedestrian walkway can be maintained between the support feature and the street or parking edge. 
6.  Lighting. Backlighting or internal illumination is prohibited. 
7.  Signage. Logos and writing shall be calculated as signage per Chapter 20 of the City Code. 
H.  Construction of Public Improvements. At the time of construction of new buildings along public streets, or major remodel or addition to the street facing façade of an existing building where the cost of the remodel equals or exceeds 30% of the value of the structure, or upon redevelopment of a property, site improvements in the adjacent public right-of-way shall be constructed consistent with the Downtown Master Plan, including sidewalks, curbing, lighting, and street trees. Construction of on-street parking in the right-of-way adjacent to the site shall count towards the parking requirements of this code at a rate of two (2) spaces for each space constructed.  
Section 4.3.5 - Alternative Building Design 
A.  Purpose. To provide flexibility in the attainment of harmonious building design, an applicant may request an Alternative Building Design using the Administrative Exception process detailed in Section 11.5.4, Administrative Exception. An Alternative Building Design may address requirements within Subsection 4.3.2.C, Building Articulation, Subsection 4.3.2.D, Architectural Elements, and Subsection 4.3.2.E, Building Materials. 
B.  Review Criteria. The Director shall consider the following criteria and standards in determining whether to grant an Administrative Exception for an Alternative Building Design: 
1.  Whether the design meets the intent of the design standards set forth in these regulations; 
2.  Whether the design will produce an aesthetically pleasing building(s) that is comparable to buildings meeting the minimum design standards of these regulations; 
3.  The use of alternative materials such as wood, metal, and glass if they are incorporated into an overall architectural design in an appropriate manner; 
4.  The locations of building walls in relation to streets; 
5.  Whether building walls are significantly screened from view by other buildings on site, natural features, or fencing; and 
6.  The successful use of a variety of building elements or design techniques, additional screening or landscaping or other site design features to achieve the same result. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § III.B.15, 5-21-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.B.15, adopted May 21, 2019, set out provisions intended for use as App. B, § 4.3.4. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as App. B, § 4.3.5.  
DIVISION 4.4 - MASTER PLANNED COMMUNITIES AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 
 
Section 4.4.1 - Generally 
A.  As set out in the City's Comprehensive Plan, flexibility is envisioned for well-planned developments that exhibit uniqueness and character and promote a mix of uses as well as multiple housing types and open spaces while ensuring predictability in the built environment. Where many of the zoning districts in these regulations provide definition for individual housing types and their design standards, there exists a need to accommodate large planned developments that integrate multiple, supporting land uses and innovative design techniques to create special places within the community. 
B.  Master Planned Communities may be developed as set out in Section 4.4.2, Master Planned Communities, with pre-established flexibility for a mix of residential and nonresidential uses within a single zoning district to be administratively reviewed for approval. Planned Development Districts may be proposed as set out in Section 4.4.3, Planned Development Districts.  
Section 4.4.2 - Master Planned Communities 
A.  Intent. The intent of the Master Planned Community is to provide predictable flexibility in the development process by allowing expanded development options including mixed housing types and integrated nonresidential mixed-use in a cohesive development. 
B.  Generally. A Master Planned Community can only be used for new residential or mixed-use development. The overall parcel proposed for development cannot include existing residential or other development as a means to satisfy the minimum percentage requirements set out below. The percentages are based on the total acreage of the tract(s). The development flexibility per district for a Master Planned Community is set out in Table 4.4.2.A, Master Planned Community Development Flexibility. 
Table 4.4.2.A 
Master Planned Community Development Flexibility 
Development Options 	NR District 	TR District 	MR District 
Residential Uses 
Single-Family Detached (including suburban and neighborhood development types) 	Min. 75% 	Max. 25% 	Max. 10% 
Cottage 	Max. 15% 	Not allowed 	Max. 10% 
Single-Family Attached 	Max. 25% 	Min. 65% 	Max. 10% 
Duplex 			Max. 50% 
Townhouse 			Min. 50% 
Triplex 	Max. 5% 	Max. 25% 	
Quadplex 			
Apartment (maximum 14 units/acre) 	Not Allowed 	Max. 15% 	
Apartment (maximum 24 units/acre) 		Not Allowed 	
Loft Apartment 	Max. 5% 	Max. 10% 	Max. 50% 
Nonresidential and Mixed-Uses 
Civic Uses (as identified in Table 3.1.4, Civic Uses by Zoning District) 	Max. 25% 	Max. 35% 	Max. 50% 
Commercial Uses (as identified in Table 3.1.5, Commercial Uses by Zoning District) 	Max. 5% 	Max. 10% 	Max. 15% 
 
C.  Minimum Size. A minimum of 25 acres is required to establish a new Master Planned Community. 
D.  Compatibility within Master Planned Communities. 
1.  Maximum Gross Density of Master Planned Communities. The maximum gross density shall be calculated as the aggregate of each development option located within the Master Planned Community in accordance with Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development. 
2.  Minimum Open Space Area of Master Planned Communities. 
a.  The minimum open space area shall be calculated as the aggregate of each development option located within the Master Planned Community in accordance with Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development. 
b.  The placement and configuration of the overall minimum open space area within a Master Planned Community does not have to be allocated in association with individual development option areas; provided, however, that it shall be configured in a manner that maximizes proximity and connectivity to all development areas within the Master Planned Community. 
3.  Residential Uses. As the master planned communities' framework allows for various lot sizes and housing types, each of the sub-areas shall comply with the following: 
a.  Master Planned Development in the Neighborhood Residential (NR) District. 
i.  Single-family detached and cottage uses in the NR district shall follow the development standards as set out for the Neighborhood Residential (NR) district in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development, and Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development. 
ii.  Single-family attached, duplex, townhouse, triplex, quadplex, and loft apartment uses in the NR district shall follow the development standards as set out for the Transitional Residential (TR) district in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development, and Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development. 
b.  Master Planned Development in the Transitional Residential (TR) District. 
i.  Single-family detached, single-family attached, duplex, townhouse, triplex, quadplex, and loft apartment uses in the TR district shall follow the development standards as set out for the Transitional Residential (TR) district in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development, and Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development. 
c.  Master Planned Development in the Multifamily Residential (MR) District. 
i.  Single-family detached, single-family attached, cottage, and duplex uses in the MR district shall follow the development standards as set out for the Transitional Residential (TR) district in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development, and Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development. 
ii.  Townhouse, triplex, quadplex, apartment, and loft apartment uses in the MR district shall follow the development standards as set out for the Multifamily Residential (MR) district in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development, and Table 4.2.2, Lot and Building Standards for New Residential Development. 
4.  Nonresidential Uses. Nonresidential uses as part of a Master Planned Community are intended to provide the opportunity to develop more complete neighborhoods with an appropriate mix of uses serving the immediate neighborhood. As such, the following standards are necessary to ensure compatibility with the Master Planned Community and nearby areas. 
a.  Nonresidential uses shall comply with all applicable standards set out in these regulations, including Section 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards and Section 4.3.2, Nonresidential, Mixed-Use, and Apartment Design Standards. In addition, commercial uses shall also comply with Section 4.3.3, Special Design Standards for Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District. 
b.  Nonresidential uses cannot receive a Certificate of Occupancy until a minimum of 25 percent of the residential units associated with the Master Planned Community, or 100 residential units, whichever is lesser, have received a Certificate of Occupancy. 
c.  Nonresidential uses shall take access from an arterial or collector street and cannot be located within 500 linear feet from an existing residential building not part of the Master Planned Community. 
5.  External Compatibility. 
a.  Where a Master Planned Community abuts, is adjacent to, or is located across a street from existing residential uses, the housing types that are nearest or across the street shall be comparable to the existing housing in terms of the housing type, scale, and method of access. 
b.  The landscape bufferyard standards of Division 9.3, Buffering, shall be applicable along any property boundaries abutting or adjacent to properties not within the Master Planned Community. 
6.  Internal Compatibility. Where a Master Planned Community is comprised of uses which would normally be required in different zoning districts, some development options still warrant separation by a bufferyard to ensure compatibility. Apartment, triplex, and quadplex uses shall provide a Type A bufferyard adjacent to single-family detached, single-family attached, cottage, duplex and townhouse uses within the Master Planned Community. All other uses shall provide a Type B bufferyard adjacent to single-family detached, single-family attached, cottage, duplex, and townhouse uses within the Master Planned Community. Bufferyards shall be in accordance with Table 9.3.1.B, Bufferyard Requirements. 
E.  Concept Plan and Development Phasing. 
1.  Generally. A parcel proposed for development may be developed in phases, with each phase separately platted. To ensure compliance with overall maximum gross density, minimum open space area, and other requirements, a Concept Plan, as set out in Section 11.3.5, Concept Plan, for the entire parcel proposed for development is required prior to, or concurrent with, the first application for Preliminary Plat approval. 
2.  Consistency with Concept Plan. Individual phases of development shall be in accordance with the overall configuration of the Concept Plan to ensure the orderly development of the entire Master Planned Community. This could include such things as temporary alley and street extensions, temporary cul-de-sacs, off-site utility extensions, or modifications to future phases if preliminary phases are not consistent with the overall Concept Plan. A determination of compliance with the Concept Plan shall be made during the platting process of each individual phase of development.  
Section 4.4.3 - Planned Development Districts (PDD) 
A.  Generally. The Planned Development District is a tool intended to accommodate the planning, design, and development of integrated land uses and densities and facilitate new and innovative development concepts that cannot be accommodated by other zoning districts or development scenarios. To protect against the misuse of the district as a vehicle for variances and exceptions from these regulations, Planned Development Districts should be utilized for innovative developments that cannot be accomplished through other processes and procedures established by these regulations. 
B.  Applicability. A Planned Development District may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other zoning districts in this Code. While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions which would not otherwise allow the development to occur, procedures and standards are established herein to ensure against misuse of increased flexibility. 
C.  Planned Development Types. Planned Developments shall be categorized as one of the following: 
1.  Conceptual Planned Development Districts. Conceptual Planned Development District applications are allowed for large 50+ acre developments which may require phased development over an extended period of time. Conceptual Planned Development Districts require Concept Plan approval in conjunction with the granting ordinance and Site Development Plan approval prior to commencement of each phase of the development in accordance with the development standards of the Planned Development District ordinance. Conceptual Planned Development Districts do not require the level of detail and specificity of design as the Detailed Planned Developments. The applicant for a 50+ acre development may nevertheless choose to submit a Site Development Plan or a Detailed Planned Development District. 
2.  Detailed Planned Development Districts. Detailed Planned Development District applications are required for developments under 50 acres that require the review and approval of a Site Development Plan concurrently with the Planned Development District approval. 
D.  Minimum Qualifications of Proposed Planned Development Districts. The following requirements identify the minimum qualifications for a proposed Planned Development District. Additional review criteria are established in Section 11.3.3, Planned Development District Zoning. 
1.  The minimum size of a Planned Development District shall be 3 acres, unless located within the boundaries of the original township where the size can be less than 3 acres but not less than 1/2 of a city block (contiguous lots not interrupted by streets, alleys, or other lots). 
2.  Conceptual Planned Development Districts shall be a minimum of 50 acres. 
3.  Planned Development Districts shall not be permitted in the ENZ Districts. 
E.  Components of a Planned Development District Ordinance. A Planned Development ordinance becomes a regulating document and shall contain document components that will regulate land use and development within the Planned Development District. These components shall be comprised of the elements as established in Section 11.3.3, Planned Development District Zoning. 
F.  Establishing and Developing a Planned Development District. A Planned Development District is created by ordinance and shall follow the application and approval procedures established in Section 11.3.3, Planned Development District Zoning.  
DIVISION 4.5 - LOT AND BUILDING INTERPRETATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS 
 
Section 4.5.1 - Lot and Setback Interpretations and Exceptions 
A.  Generally. All development shall adhere to the lot size, lot width, lot setback, and building height requirements of these regulations, except as specified in this Section. 
B.  Lot Size and Width Exceptions. Minimum lot size and lot width requirements of this Section do not apply to platted lots in which the principal use of the lot is common area, open space, landscape lots, drainage conveyance, access, street median, or public utilities. 
C.  Setback Encroachments. No permanent or temporary building, structure, or other constructed element may encroach into a required setback of this Section, except as set out in Table 4.5.1, Permitted Setback Encroachments. 
Table 4.5.1 
Permitted Setback Encroachments 
Permitted Encroachment 	Permitted Location 	Restrictions 
All permitted encroachments in any setback shall not be located within a public utility easement without approval of a license to encroach by the City. 
Architectural feature projections 	Architectural features, including roof eaves or overhang, are allowed in all setbacks provided the encroachment is limited to 24". 
Driveways, residential 	Front setback 	Driveways are allowed in the front setback provided that they do not run parallel to a public street unless a circular driveway. 
	Side setback 	Driveways are allowed only when providing direct access to a side-loaded garage, detached rear garage, or other designated parking area provided that they are located a minimum of three feet from the property line. 
	Rear setback 	Driveways are allowed only when providing direct access to a designated parking area from a rear alley or public street. 
Fences/Walls 	Any setback 	Fences and walls are allowed per the standards set out in Section 4.6.4, Fences and Walls. 
Landscape features 	Any setback 	Landscape features shall not impede the sight visibility triangle. 
Mechanical equipment 	Side and rear setback 	Mechanical equipment is allowed in the side and rear setbacks if set back a minimum of three feet from any property line. 
Public utility features (e.g., transformers, gas meters, etc.) 	Any setback 	No restrictions. 
Patios/decks/terraces/outdoor kitchens (uncovered) 	Side and rear setback 	These features are allowed provided that they are located behind the principal building and set back a minimum of three feet from the side and rear property lines. 
Pergolas/arbors (unenclosed) 	Side and rear setback 	These features are allowed provided that they are located behind the principal building and set back a minimum of five feet from the side and rear property lines. 
		These features shall not exceed 10 feet in height. 
Playground/swing set 	Side and rear setback 	No restrictions. 
Pools 	Side and rear setback 	Pools are allowed provided that they are located behind the principal building and set back a minimum of five feet from the side and rear property lines. 
Porches, covered (unenclosed) 	Any setback 	An unenclosed, covered porch may extend up to six feet into any required setback but not closer than 10 feet to a side or rear property line and 15 feet to a front property line, unless otherwise permitted by the zoning district. 
Sidewalks 	Any setback 	No restrictions. 
Steps/stairs (uncovered) 	Any setback 	A maximum of six steps may encroach in any setback. 
Storage shed 	Side and rear setback 	Storage sheds are allowed provided that they are located behind a principal building and set back a minimum of five feet from the side and rear property lines if not exceeding eight feet in height or set back at least 10 feet from the side and rear property lines if not exceeding 15 feet in height. 
Stormwater ponds 	Any setback 	Stormwater ponds are allowed in any setback provided that they are designed with a vegetated slope not to exceed 3:1 and do not include any structural walls. Stormwater ponds within a street setback or adjacent to a residential lot shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § III.B.16, 5-21-2019)  
DIVISION 4.6 - SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Section 4.6.1 - Accessory Buildings and Structures 
A.  Generally. The construction and use of accessory buildings and structures, except accessory dwelling units (see Section 4.2.9, Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)), are subject to the standards of this Section. 
B.  Exemptions. The following accessory structures are customarily located on a property with a principal use, are considered incidental to the principal use, and are exempt from the regulations of this Section. 
1.  Fences and walls (see Section 4.6.4, Fences and Walls); 
2.  Enclosures for solid waste collection, provided that the enclosure does not include additional storage beyond that needed for solid waste collection; and 
3.  Satellite dishes and antennas. 
C.  General Standards for All Accessory Buildings and Structures. All accessory building and structures shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Timing of Construction. No accessory building or structure may be erected on a lot until construction of the principal building or establishment of a principal use has commenced. 
2.  Location. 
a.  In all zoning districts, accessory buildings and structures shall be located in a rear or side yard and shall meet the required setbacks set out in Section 4.2.2, New Residential Development Lot and Building Standards, or Section 4.3.1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Building Standards, whichever may be applicable; unless excepted as a permitted encroachment in Section 4.5.1, Lot and Setback Interpretations and Exceptions. 
b.  Accessory buildings and structures are not allowed in easements unless written permission is given by the easement holder; such permission shall be submitted with the application for a permit. 
3.  Design. Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions set out below and as set out in Table 4.6.1, Accessory Building and Structure Design Standards. 
a.  A portable storage shed is considered an accessory structure with regards to the maximum number allowed and maximum combined footprint allowed per Table 4.6.1, however, it is not subject to the side or rear setback requirements of Table 4.6.1 provided that it meets the following: 
i.  It is less than or equal to 100 square feet in floor area and less than eight feet in height; 
ii.  It is freestanding, moveable, and has no permanent foundation; 
iii.  It is setback at least 3 feet from side or rear lot lines; 
iv.  It does not contain plumbing or electrical installations; and 
v.  It is screened from ground-level view of abutting streets and properties. 
b.  Accessory buildings or structures which are structurally attached to the principal building shall conform to all the standards of the principal building, unless exempted by the standards set out in Table 4.5.1, Permitted Setback Encroachments. 
c.  Accessory buildings and structures associated with nonresidential, mixed-use or apartment development shall comply with the exterior building material requirements set out in Table 4.3.2.B., Building Material Standards. The accessory building or structure shall be finished with the same materials as the principal structure or use materials that are aesthetically compatible and complementary. 
d.  Converted semi-trailers and modular shipping containers can be used as accessory structures in the BP or IN districts, provided that they are used for storage and meet the screening standards set out in Section 4.6.5, Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise. 
Table 4.6.1 
Accessory Buildings and Structure Design Standards 
Zoning District 	Lot Size 	Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings or Structures 	Maximum Number of Stories 2 	Maximum Size of Individual Accessory Building or Structure 	Maximum Combined Footprint of All Accessory Buildings or Structures 4 	Setbacks 
						Front Setback 	Interior Side Setback 	Street Side Setback 	Rear Setback 
FR 
(agricultural uses) 	N/A 	N/A 	Not to exceed max height of district 	N/A 	Maximum lot coverage permitted by district 	Same as for principal structure 	20 ft 	35 ft 	25 ft 
FR 
(non-agricultural uses) 	4 acres or more 	3 1 	2 	1,200 sf 	Maximum lot coverage permitted by district 	Behind front building line of house 	20 ft 	35 ft 	25 ft 
	Less than 4 acres 	2 1 	2 	1,200 sf 	30% of the rear yard area 	Behind rear building line of house 	20 ft 	35 ft 	25 ft 
RE, ENZ-1 	4 acres or more 	3 1 	2 	1,200 sf (but may not exceed house sf) 	30% of the rear yard area 	Behind rear building line of house 	15 ft 	25 ft 	25 ft 
	Less than 4 acres 	2 1 	1/2 3 	1,200 sf (but may not exceed house sf) 	30% of the rear yard area 	Behind rear building line of house 	15 ft 	25 ft 	25 ft 
NR, TR, DR, ENZ-2, ENZ-3, ENZ-5 	2 acres or more 	2 1 	1/2 3 	50% of the sq ft of house or 1,000 sf, whichever is less; however, a detached garage allowed max of 600 sf (provided it is the only garage on site) 	30% of the rear yard area 	Behind rear building line of house 	5 ft 	15 ft 5 	10 ft 
	Less than 2 acres 	2 1 	1/2 3 	25% of the sq ft of house or 800 sf, whichever is less; however, a detached garage allowed max of 600 sf (provided it is the only garage on site) 	30% of the rear yard area 	Behind rear building line of house 	5 ft 	15 ft 5 	10 ft 
MR, ENZ-4 	Same as for principal building 
Nonresidential Uses (all districts) 	Same as for principal building 
Table Notes: 
1 Maximum number of accessory buildings/structures includes detached accessory dwelling units (ADUs). 
2 Maximum number of stories cannot exceed the height of the principal building or maximum building height of zoning district, whichever is less. 
3 Maximum number of stories is one, unless the first story of accessory building includes a detached garage, then maximum stories is two. 
4 Maximum footprint of all accessory buildings/structures cannot exceed maximum set out in this Table or maximum lot coverage for zoning district, whichever is less. 
5 A side entry garage must be setback at least 25 ft from street side property line. 
  
Section 4.6.2 - Boat Docks 
A.  Purpose. Minimal standards are established for the access and storage of boats on Lake Marble Falls and corresponding waterways to ensure safety, compatibility, and harmony consistent with the following: 
1.  To allow access and enjoyment of the water through diverse and creative ways, while providing a basis for safety and compatibility; 
2.  To ensure that the size and intensity of structures on Lake Marble Falls and area waterways do not deconstruct from the character of the Lake and area waterways; 
3.  To ensure that docks are not excessive in size, storage, or utilization in relation to the size and surface area of Lake Marble Falls and navigable waterways; 
4.  To increase safety by providing separation between dock structures and navigable boating access to and from docks; and 
5.  To ensure docks have lighting, storage, and utilization consistent with character and operation of the prevailing existing dock inventory that exists in the City. 
B.  General Boat Dock Standards. The following are design and construction requirements applicable to all boat docks within the City: 
1.  A permit issued by the City is required for the construction, addition, or remodel of any boat docks within the City limit. Maintenance does not require a permit. 
2.  All boat dock construction shall comply with the City's adopted building codes. 
3.  No boat dock may be permitted or erected on a lot until construction of the principal building or establishment of a principal use has commenced. 
4.  All boat dock(s) shall be fixed or anchored to the shoreline of the property for which the primary use is established. 
5.  Boat dock length. 
a.  Boat docks shall not extend further into Lake Marble Falls than thirty-five feet (35') from the shoreline. 
b.  To preserve the navigable area along all adjoining waterways, boat docks shall not extend from the shore further than twenty feet (20') or 20% of the total width of the channel where the dock is proposed; whichever is less. In no instance shall the navigable area be reduced to less than 40 feet. 
6.  Fueling facilities and permanent storage of fuel, oil, or other related chemicals shall be prohibited on the boat dock and within any accessory storage constructed upon the dock. 
7.  Boat docks shall not be enclosed on any sides, except the square footage designed and constructed for the allowed dock storage area herein. 
8.  All boat docks are prohibited from having any living quarters constructed upon or within the structure. 
9.  Boat dock(s) are an accessory use to the primary usage of the property or development. Therefore, all boat dock(s) are prohibited from being constructed without a primary building existing or permitted in conjunction with a primary use on the premises to which the dock is fixed/anchored. 
10.  All dock lighting shall be full cut-off fixture or dark sky compliant, unless it is related to safety illumination required by law. 
11.  Any boat dock(s) that, due to its size or operating characteristics, requires compliance with the Highland Lakes Marina Ordinance must be approved and permitted by LCRA and the City of Marble Falls. 
12.  Public boat docks owned or operated by a governmental entity shall be exempt from these standards. 
C.  Residential Boat Dock Standards. The following are design and construction requirements applicable to boat docks for single-family residential properties and developments within the City: 
1.  Each property is allowed one boat dock. However, each boat dock may include more than one boat slip, provided the overall dimensions of the boat dock do not exceed those prescribed herein. 
2.  Residential boat docks shall not: 
a.  Exceed 14 feet in finished floor elevation (lower or upper floor height) from the Lake Marble Falls water surface elevation at property; 
b.  Exceed 800 square feet in water level deck footprint, excluding boat slips, but including permanent personal watercraft ramps, docks and storage; or 
c.  Exceed 50 square feet of enclosed storage on the dock. 
3.  Residential boat docks may be covered by a roof or a second story sundeck, provided a second story sundeck shall not extend beyond the footprint of the first level nor be covered by a roof. 
4.  Residential boat docks may be recessed into the shoreline. 
5.  Residential boat docks shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from a projected side yard line, as defined in this code. 
6.  Residential day docks are allowed but must be constructed upon the shoreline and not project over the water. Day docks must be a minimum of 20 feet in length and may span up to 100% of the property width. Day docks may be combined with a standard boat dock in accordance with these standards. 
D.  Commercial Boat Dock Standards. The following are design and construction requirements applicable to boat docks for commercial or multifamily lots and developments within the City. 
1.  Each property is allowed one boat dock. However, each boat dock may include more than one boat slip, provided the overall dimensions of the boat dock do not exceed those prescribed herein. 
2.  Commercial boat docks shall not: 
a.  Exceed 18 feet in finished floor elevation (lower or upper floor height) from the Lake Marble Falls water surface elevation at property; 
b.  Exceed 1,000 square feet in deck surface area or footprint, excluding boat slips, but including permanent personal watercraft ramps, docks and storage; 
c.  Exceed 200 square feet of enclosed storage on the dock; or 
d.  Park and sell boats at any time. 
3.  Commercial boat docks may be covered by a roof or a second story sundeck, provided a second story sundeck shall not extend beyond the footprint of the first level nor be covered by a roof. 
4.  Commercial boat docks may be recessed into the shoreline. 
5.  Commercial boat docks shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from a projected side yard line, as defined in this code. 
6.  Commercial day docks are allowed but must be constructed upon the shoreline and not project over the water. Day docks must be a minimum of 20 feet in length and may span up to 100% of the property width. Day docks may be combined with a standard boat dock in accordance with these standards. 
7.  Commercial boat docks that do not comply with these standards and provide an alternate design in conjunction with a primary use development plan and is consistent with the purposes stated herein may be considered for approval by the Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission.  
Section 4.6.3 - Mechanical Equipment and Solid Waste Receptacles 
A.  Generally. These standards apply to all new development and redevelopment of nonresidential, apartment; manufactured home parks, RV parks, and tiny house developments; and mixed-use buildings in all zoning districts. The type and location of screening shall be delineated and submitted with the Site Development Plan. 
B.  Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment associated with building operations (e.g., HVAC systems, electrical boxes, natural gas meters, etc.) shall be screened as set out in this subsection. 
1.  Ground-Level and Building-Mounted Equipment. Mechanical equipment and meters shall be located in the rear or side setback and screened by landscaping, walls, or fences. The screening shall be maintained at least one foot higher than the equipment that is being screened. 
2.  Roof-Mounted Equipment. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from ground-level views from abutting properties and abutting rights-of-way by: 
a.  Parapet walls with cornice treatments; or 
b.  Screening walls that use colors, building materials, or architectural features that are consistent with the design of the principal building. 
C.  Solid Waste Collection Receptacles. Solid waste collection receptacles for nonresidential development, specifically dumpsters and other non-rolling receptacles, shall be screened as set out in this subsection. 
1.  Location. Solid waste collection receptacles shall be located as follows: 
a.  Individual Development. Located behind the front building line on the same lot; 
b.  Multi-Lot Unified Development or Shopping Center. Located in a centralized collection area within 500 feet of all uses they are intending to serve. 
c.  Alley Access. If the parcel proposed for development has access to an alley, the receptacles shall be accessed from the alley. 
2.  Strength of Surface. Solid waste receptacles shall be placed on a reinforced concrete pad. 
3.  Size. Solid waste collection areas shall be of adequate size to accommodate one or more solid waste receptacles (for trash and recycling, as may be applicable) that are of sufficient size to serve the intended uses on site. The size may vary depending on the frequency of collection. 
4.  Setbacks. All solid waste and/or recycling collection areas shall be set back at least: 
a.  Fifteen feet from the lot lines of residential uses that are part of the same development as the parcel proposed for development; and 
b.  Thirty feet from the lot lines of residential uses that are not part of the same development as the parcel proposed for development. 
5.  Screening. 
a.  The receptacle(s) shall be screened by an enclosure using the same building material(s) as the principal building or provide an alternative material that is an equal or better aesthetic design. In the Industrial District, the receptacle does not require screening if located behind a fence or wall. 
b.  The minimum height of the enclosure shall be one foot higher than the receptacles being stored. 
c.  The receptacles shall be accessed via a gate clad with an opaque fence material with a structural metal frame which remains closed at all times except during collection.  
Section 4.6.4 - Fences and Walls 
A.  Generally. The requirements of this Section apply to both residential and nonresidential fences and walls constructed for the purposes of screening, privacy, and property protection. These requirements are intended to allow for fence construction in a manner that protects property and the health and safety of people and animals, while ensuring compatibility with, and contribution to, a quality-built environment. 
B.  Applicability. This Section shall apply to the following situations within the City limits, except for fences or walls in support of farm or ranch uses: 
1.  All new development or redevelopment; or 
2.  Where 50 percent or more of an existing fence, wall, or screen is being replaced. 
C.  General Standards for all Fences and Walls. All fences and walls within the City limits shall comply with the following, unless otherwise exempted herein: 
1.  Permit Required. The construction of a fence or wall shall require a permit. 
2.  Street Visibility. Fences and walls shall not be located within the sight visibility triangle. 
3.  Easements. Fences and walls authorized by the City to be located within drainage easements shall be designed in a manner to avoid limiting or obstructing the flow of water. 
4.  Location, Height, and Setback Requirements. All fences and walls shall comply with the height and setback requirements set out in Table 4.6.4, Location, Fence, and Wall Height and Setback Requirements. 
Table 4.6.4 
Location, Fence, and Wall Height and Setback Requirements 
Location 	Height 1, 2 	Setack 3 	Additional Standards 
Front Yard 	3.5' 	0' 	Fences and walls shall have a maximum 50% opacity. 
	6' 	20' 	20' setback is from street right-of-way and shall be landscaped green space. 4 
Street Side Yard 	3.5' 	0' 	Fences and walls shall have a maximum 50% opacity. 
	6' 	10' 	10' setback is from street right-of-way and shall be landscaped green space. 
Interior Side Yard 	6'/8' 	0' 	Where the use of the property or one the abutting properties is nonresidential, industrial, or mixed-use, the maximum height is eight feet. If both are residential, the maximum height is six feet. 
Rear Yard 			
Double Frontage 	3.5' 	0' 	Fences and walls shall have a minimum 50% opacity. 
	6' 	5' 	10' setback is from street right-of-way and shall be landscaped green space. 
Arterial Street Frontage 	8' 	5' 	Frontage abuts a major or minor arterial. 
Table Notes: 
1 Decorative columns, pilasters, stone caps, sculptural elements, and other similar architectural features may exceed the maximum height by up to one foot, provided that such taller elements comprise no more than 10 percent of the total wall length in elevation view. 
2 Fences and walls meeting the criteria for outdoor storage may be allowed additional height as set out in Section 4.6.5, Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise. 
3 All fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of two feet from an existing public sidewalk and three feet from an alley right-of-way. 
4 The setback can be reduced by demonstrating a 20' landscaped area between the back of curb and fence location, which may be partially or full located within the right-of-way. 
 
5.  Materials. 
a.  Generally. Materials shall be durable and in character for the use of development it is serving (i.e., residential fencing shall be of a material commonly made and sold for residential fencing or wall construction uses). 
b.  Materials Allowed. Permitted materials include weather resistant wood species, split rail, PVC/vinyl, wood treated with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency approved preservatives, painted wood, ornamental iron or powder-coated aluminum, brick, stone, or masonry. 
c.  Materials Allowed with Limitations. 
i.  Barbed-wire fences and electric fences are prohibited in residential districts, except for public utility buildings or wherever the Director finds that such are necessary to address a security interest. 
ii.  Chain link fences are prohibited in the front yards in all districts but are permitted in interior side and rear yards that do not abut or directly face a public street. A parcel proposed for development in the IN and BP Districts shall have no limitations on the use of chain link material for fences. 
d.  Prohibited Materials. Prohibited fence and wall materials include scrap lumber, plywood, tree branches, tree trunks, sheet metal, plastic, fiberglass sheets, and spikes, nails, or other injurious sharp points on the tops or sides of the fence. 
6.  Orientation. The finished side of all fences along front yards, street side yards, and public parks shall face outward toward the abutting right-of-way. 
7.  Maintenance. 
a.  Fences and walls shall be maintained in an upright position and in good condition. 
b.  Fences and walls that are partially destroyed or damaged shall be either completely replaced with a new fence or repaired with the same materials so that its appearance is restored to its prior appearance. New replacement fences require a new fence permit. 
c.  Fences that require periodic maintenance, such as natural wood material, shall be cleaned, sealed, or otherwise kept in good condition and appearance. 
D.  Special Fences. 
1.  Properties Along Highway 2147. Fences and walls constructed on the front property line of lots along State Highway 2147 from U.S. Highway 281 southwest to the City limits that also have Lake Marble Falls access shall be a maximum height of eight feet. The fence or wall must be constructed to have a minimum of 40 percent of the surface area of the fence or wall be stucco, stone, brick, or any combinations thereof and the remaining surface area must be wood, iron or other similar material. The entryway or gate shall have a minimum opening of 15 feet and must be positioned no less than 35 feet from the edge of pavement on State Highway 2147. 
2.  Sport Courts and Fields. Fencing for sport courts and fields (e.g., around tennis courts) is permitted but shall not exceed 15 feet. 
3.  Swimming Pools. Pool fences around swimming pools shall comply with state standards and the City's adopted building codes. 
E.  Residential Perimeter Screening. To provide buffer protection and a pleasing, sustainable aesthetic appearance, screening shall be required for single-family detached, single-family attached, cottage, duplex, manufactured house, and townhouse subdivisions, tiny house developments, manufactured home parks, and RV parks along the perimeter boundary adjacent to arterial and major collector roadways. 
1.  Screening Standard. 
a.  Material. Materials shall consist of brick, stone, stucco, decorative concrete, or other material of similar quality and durability. 
b.  Wall Height. Each wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height to a maximum of eight feet in height from finished grade. 
c.  Column Spacing and Height. Decorative masonry columns shall be located generally every 40 feet. Decorative columns, pilasters, stone caps, sculptural elements, and other similar features may exceed the maximum eight-foot wall height by one foot, provided that such taller elements comprise no more than 10 percent of the total wall length in elevation view. 
2.  Alternative Standard. An alternative screening standard may be considered by the Director if it is demonstrated that it materially complies with the intent of this subsection and that it results in a screening wall that is generally low-maintenance, durable, and of similar aesthetic appearance. Meeting this alternative standard could include, but not be limited to, a combination of one or more of the following: 
a.  Living/landscaped screen with decorative metal (e.g., wrought iron) fence sections with masonry columns; or 
b.  A combination of berms and living/landscaped screening with decorative metal and masonry columns; or 
c.  A combination of berms, and living/landscaped screening, decorative masonry retaining walls. 
3.  Easement Required. A maintenance easement shall be required at least five feet in width located on the residential side of the screening wall, opposite of the street. The easement shall be dedicated to a property owners' association. 
4.  Timing of Compliance. Perimeter screening walls shall be included as part of the Construction Plans and installed prior to final acceptance of the public improvements for the subdivision (or appropriate surety provided, per Article 6, Subdivision Design and Land Development). 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § III.B.17, 5-21-2019)  
Section 4.6.5 - Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise 
A.  Generally. Outdoor storage and display areas are permitted on properties used for nonresidential purposes subject to the standards of this Section. 
B.  Applicability. This Section applies to outdoor storage areas of equipment, materials, or goods that are not for sale, and also to outdoor display of merchandise for sale. This Section does not apply to outdoor storage areas needed to support farm or ranch uses or for outdoor residential storage normally associated with residential uses. 
C.  Requirements for Outdoor Storage Areas. 
1.  Permitted Uses. Outdoor storage areas may be used to store materials, goods, and merchandise associated with the primary use of the site, subject to the following: 
a.  Materials, goods, and merchandise shall not be actively for sale. 
b.  Vehicles or equipment shall be in working condition and used to support operations of the principal use. 
2.  Limited Uses. Vehicles or equipment, in working condition or inoperable, that are temporarily stored for repair, impounding, or similar short-term containment are allowed within a designated outdoor storage area if such activity is directly associated with the principal use. 
3.  Prohibited Uses. Outdoor storage areas shall not be used to dispose of waste, vehicles, or machines; store or dispose of hazardous materials; or store or dispose of materials that will create windblown dust or debris or stormwater contaminants. 
4.  Location. All outdoor storage areas shall only be located in the buildable area of the rear yard or interior side yard and shall not be located in a required setback, bufferyard, or areas that are required or used for access, parking, loading, stacking, or vehicular circulation. 
5.  Height of Outdoor Storage Materials. The maximum height of stored materials shall be one foot below the required screening, except for vehicles or equipment. 
6.  Additional Outdoor Storage Requirements. All outdoor storage areas shall comply with the height and setback requirements set out in Table 4.6.5, Additional Outdoor Storage Requirements. 
Table 4.6.5 
Additional Outdoor Storage Requirements 
Use 	Maximum Area 	Additional Standards 
Farm and Ranch Uses 	N/A 	N/A 
Residential Uses 	N/A 	N/A 
Civic and Commercial Uses 	15% of the floor area of principal building 	Enclosed by a wall for street/public right-of-way frontage that is designed to the principal building's façade and composed of the same materials as the principal building. 
	10% of the floor area of principal building 	Enclosed by a durable wall or opaque fence of sufficient height to completely screen the stored materials from public view and rights-of-way. 
Industrial 	N/A 	The outdoor storage is located within the buildable area and enclosed by a wall or opaque fence and gate of sufficient height to completely screen the stored materials from public view and rights-of-way. 
Office Uses 	N/A 	Outdoor storage of materials is not allowed. 
 
7.  Site Development Plan Required. All outdoor storage areas shall be clearly shown on the Site Development Plan for the property. Where no Site Development Plan exists, all required information shall be shown on a scaled drawing or property survey submitted with the Building Permit or the Certificate of Occupancy. 
D.  Requirements for Outdoor Merchandise Display Areas. 
1.  Outdoor display areas shall not be located in required bufferyards, sight visibility triangles, easements, street rights-of-way (except for public sidewalks) or areas that are required or used for access, parking, loading, stacking, or vehicular circulation. New display areas may be located in a parking lot but shall not occupy required parking spaces unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
2.  If the outdoor display area is located on a public sidewalk, it shall not impede a pedestrian clear zone that shall be a minimum of four feet wide. 
3.  Designated outdoor display areas shall be denoted on the Site Development Plan for the property.  
Section 4.6.6 - Wireless Transmission Facilities/Cell Towers 
A.  Generally. Wireless transmission facilities are permitted in accordance with this Section and Article 3, Land Use. 
B.  Applicability. This Section applies to broadcast systems, cellular, commercial mobile radio services, common carrier wireless access exchange services, enhanced specialized mobile radio, personal communication services paging, personal wireless services, public service and emergency systems, specialized mobile radio, tower builder, unlicensed wireless services, and wireless cable systems. 
C.  Exceptions. This Section does not apply to the following: 
1.  Satellite antennas, amateur radio antennas or television antennas used for residential or household purposes; 
2.  Television and AM/FM radio broadcast towers and associated facilities; 
3.  Facilities owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator; and 
4.  Functionally equivalent services, as specified by Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
5.  Ordinary maintenance of existing telecommunications facilities and support structures, as defined herein, is exempt from permitting requirements. 
D.  Application Procedures. 
1.  A Conditional Use Permit pursuant to the requirements of Section 11.3.4, Conditional Use Permit, shall be obtained for all new monopole tower wireless transmission facilities. 
2.  Wireless transmission facilities co-located or mounted on existing towers, structures or buildings may be approved administratively by the Director without approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
3.  Prior to the construction or installation of any wireless transmission facility tower, building or structure, a Building Permit must be obtained. Wireless transmission facilities must be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations and under the seal of a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. 
E.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for the Director, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council to render an informed decision. 
1.  New Wireless Transmission Facility Tower, Structure, or Building. The following items are required for all applications to construct a new wireless transmission facility tower, structure or building. 
a.  Site Development Plan, pursuant to Section 11.5.3, Site Development Plan. 
b.  A vicinity map showing abutting properties, land uses, zoning, and roadways within one mile of a proposed wireless transmission facility. 
c.  Elevation drawings of the proposed facility showing all antennas, towers, tower heights, structures, existing buildings, walls and/or roofs on which antennas are mounted, equipment buildings/cabinets, fencing, screening, lighting, and other improvements related to the facility showing specific materials, placement and colors. 
d.  A narrative report describing the facility and the technical, economic, and other reasons for its design and location, the need for the facility and its role in the network, and describing the capacity of the structure, including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate. 
e.  A coverage map and a survey of existing towers including type and location and a statement to demonstrate the need for the new tower and supporting documentation as to why co-location is not possible on an existing tower in the area. 
f.  A removal statement stating that should the facility be abandoned or discontinued use, the facility shall be removed at the expense of the owner/operator. 
2.  Co-Located or Mounted Wireless Transmission Facilities. The following items are required for all applications for co-located or mounted wireless transmission facilities. 
a.  Co-location agreement or lease agreement if co-located with other wireless transmission facilities or mounted on another structure or building. Such agreement shall indicate: 
i.  The extent to which all agree to allow co-location of additional wireless transmission facility equipment by other service providers on the applicant's structure or within the same site location on a reasonable and non-discriminatory basis; 
ii.  An understanding of maintenance and inspection requirements as required by Subsection 4.6.6.I, Maintenance; and 
iii.  An understanding that if the service provider fails to remove the wireless transmission facility upon 60 days of its discontinued use, the responsibility for removal falls upon the landowner, and in the event the wireless transmission facility is not removed within another 60 days, the City may remove the wireless transmission facility and recover the costs associated with such removal from the landowner and place a lien on the property until such costs are paid. 
b.  A certification and sealed report from a registered professional engineer stating that all structural components of the wireless transmission facility comply with all applicable codes and regulations. In the case of wireless transmission facility towers, the report should further note the extent to which the tower is designed and/or built to accommodate co-location. 
F.  Location Standards. 
1.  Generally. Wireless transmission facilities are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the appropriate application approval process outlined in this Section and pursuant to the standards herein. 
2.  Location Restrictions. 
a.  Wireless transmission facility towers are prohibited in public easements. 
b.  Wireless transmission facility towers are prohibited within 1,000 feet of Lake Marble Falls. 
3.  Fall Zone. Wireless transmission facility towers should be located in such a manner that if the structure or facility should fall along its longest dimension it will remain within the owned or leased property boundaries of the service provider and will avoid existing structures, existing public streets, and existing utility lines. If a proposed wireless transmission facility tower has a potential for affecting a nearby property or structure upon collapse or scattering of equipment debris, the situation must be addressed by applicant. 
G.  Design Standards. 
1.  Generally. The following design standards apply to all wireless transmission facilities: 
a.  Facilities shall be located and designed to be compatible and blend in with surrounding buildings and existing uses in the area. This may be accomplished through the use of compatible architectural elements such as materials, color, texture, scale and character. 
b.  All wireless transmission facilities and associated structures shall comply with applicable state and local building codes. 
c.  All lots on which new wireless transmission facilities are located shall have access to a public right-of-way by an access drive constructed of asphalt or concrete. One off-street parking space shall be provided at each freestanding wireless transmission facility tower. 
d.  Except as provided herein, all ancillary structures associated with wireless transmission facilities, including but not limited to equipment storage structures or buildings, shall be designed in accordance with the standards of the principal structures in the applicable zoning district, including, but not limited to building height, setback, materials, etc. 
e.  To the extent possible, wireless transmission facilities shall be designed and placed on the site in a manner that takes maximum advantage of existing trees, mature vegetation. Such use of existing vegetation may be used as a substitute for or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements. 
f.  Landscaping and buffering shall be provided in accordance with Article 9, Trees, Landscaping, and Buffering. 
g.  All ancillary structures associated with wireless transmission facilities shall be screened in accordance with Section 4.6.3, Mechanical Equipment and Solid Waste Receptacles. 
h.  Lighting shall be limited to mandatory safety lighting required by Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communications Commission. 
i.  The use of any portion of a wireless telecommunications facility for signs, with the exception of safety, identification, and notification information as may be required by the FCC or other governmental authority, is prohibited. 
2.  Monopole Towers. In addition to the standards of Subsection 4.6.6.G.1, Generally, above, the following design standards apply to monopole towers: 
a.  Monopole towers shall be set back at the following distances between the base of the monopole tower and all residential districts: 
i.  For towers less than 60 feet: the height of the wireless transmission facility, plus 30 feet; 
ii.  For towers over 60 feet and less than 90 feet: one and one-half times the height of the wireless transmission facility; 
iii.  For towers over 90 feet and less than 105 feet: two times the height of the wireless transmission facility; 
iv.  For towers over 105 feet and less than 120 feet: two and one-half times the height of the wireless transmission facility; or 
v.  Three times the height of the wireless transmission facility for towers over 120 feet. 
b.  The base of a wireless transmission facility with a tower, including all mechanical equipment and accessory structures, must be completely enclosed by a fence, wall or barrier which limits climbing access to such wireless transmission facility and any supporting systems, lines, wires, buildings or other structures. The base must be fully screened from view of residential structures, residentially zoned properties or public roadways by a substantially opaque screening fence designed and built to provide privacy. 
i.  The fence shall be a minimum height of eight feet and consistent in color and character to surrounding structures and properties. 
ii.  The fencing shall have no openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches measured in any direction. 
iii.  The fencing may contain gates or doors allowing access to the wireless transmission facility and accessory structures for maintenance purposes; such gates or doors shall be kept completely closed and locked except for maintenance purposes and shall be located so that all gates and doors do not intrude into the public right-of-way. 
3.  Co-Location Accommodation. All new wireless transmission facilities shall be designed to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for other users. 
a.  Towers less than 120 feet in height shall accommodate antennas for at least one additional user. 
b.  Towers greater than 120 feet in height shall accommodate antennas for at least two additional users. 
c.  Co-location of wireless transmission facilities are subject to the provisions of Subsection 4.6.6.G.4, Co-Located or Mounted Wireless Transmission Facilities, below. 
4.  Co-Located or Mounted Wireless Transmission Facilities. Wireless transmission facilities may co-locate or be mounted on any structure or building provided that they comply with all other standards regarding height requirements; co-location; historic districts, structures or sites; residential structures; residentially zoned property; setbacks and site development, and submittal requirements of these regulations. In addition to the standards of Subsection 4.6.6.G.1 above, the following design standards apply to wireless transmission facilities that are mounted or attached to other structures or buildings: 
a.  Where appropriate, mounted or attached wireless transmission facilities shall be disguised as an architectural feature or design element compatible in design, architectural style, and scale of the structure or building. 
b.  The mounted wireless transmission facility shall not project more than 10 feet above the roof line or height of the structure and shall not exceed the height limit of the highest permitted structure in the district in which it is located. 
c.  Adequate safety measures shall be taken to prevent access of mounted or attached wireless transmission facilities by unauthorized people. 
H.  Co-Location Waiver. 
1.  Generally. Applicants should cooperate with other service providers in co-locating additional antennas on existing towers and/or structures to the extent that co-location is reasonably economical and technically feasible. An applicant should exercise good faith in co-locating with other providers and sharing the permitted site. 
2.  Waiver Request. Upon request of the applicant, the City Council may waive the requirement that new support structures accommodate the co-location of other service providers. The applicant shall show: 
a.  Co-location at the site is found to be non-essential to the public interest; 
b.  That the construction of a shorter support structure with fewer antennae will promote community compatibility; and 
c.  That co-location would cause interference with existing telecommunications facilities, as demonstrated by submitted technical evidence. 
3.  Procedures. A waiver of the co-location requirement for new wireless transmission facilities shall be presented to the City Council for their consideration. 
4.  Review Criteria. In considering whether to approve a Co-Location Waiver, the City Council shall consider the following criteria: 
a.  The appropriateness of the location and design of the wireless transmission facility; 
b.  The potential for interference with the enjoyment of the use surrounding properties; 
c.  The proposed height of the wireless transmission facility relative to surrounding structures; 
d.  The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which the Co-Location Waiver is sought; and 
e.  Compliance with City regulations. 
I.  Maintenance. 
1.  The owner or operator of a wireless transmission facility shall be responsible for the maintenance of the wireless transmission facility and shall maintain all buildings, structures, supporting structures, wires, fences or ground areas used in connection with a wireless transmission facility in a safe condition and in good working order, as required by City building, fire or any other applicable codes, regulations or ordinances or to standards that may be imposed by the City at the time of the granting of a permit. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance of the paint, landscaping, fencing, equipment enclosure, and structural integrity. If the City finds that the wireless transmission facility is not being properly maintained, the City will notify the owner of the wireless transmission facility of the problem. If the applicant fails to correct the problem within 30 days after being notified, the City may undertake maintenance at the expense of the applicant or revoke the permit, at its sole option. 
2.  By applying for a wireless transmission facility permit under this Article, the applicant specifically grants permission to the City, its duly authorized agents, officials, and employees, to enter upon the property for which a permit is sought, after first providing a reasonable attempt to notify a person designated by the applicant, except in the event of an emergency, for the purpose of making all inspections required or authorized to be made under this part of the regulations. The City may require periodic inspections of wireless transmission facilities to ensure structural integrity and other Code compliance. Based upon the result of an inspection, the City may require repair or removal of a wireless transmission facility. 
J.  Time Limits. The City shall act within a reasonable period of time to review and recommend requests to place, construct, or modify telecommunications facilities after an application is filed. Unless otherwise agreed between the City and the applicant or provided by state or federal law, reasonable review and action by the City shall take no more than: 
1.  Ninety days for wireless co-location applications, and 
2.  One hundred fifty days for all other wireless siting applications.  
ARTICLE 5 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
DIVISION 5.1 - GENERAL NUISANCE STANDARDS 
 
Section 5.1.1 - General Nuisance Standards 
A.  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, all the uses and activities permitted by these regulations within the City limits of the City of Marble Falls or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall conform to the standards of this Section using adequate and appropriate prevention and/or mitigation techniques as may be necessary to prevent or abate the nuisance to abutting properties and protect the public health and safety. 
B.  Glare. Any operation or activity producing intense glare shall be performed in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard across lot lines. Direct illumination from any source of light or direct welding glare shall be screened from adjoining properties and reflected light from these sources shall not exceed 0.5 lumens at or beyond the lot line of the property in which the use is located. 
C.  Smoke and Particulate Matter. Smoke emitted from any vent, stack, chimney, skylight, window, building opening, or combustion process shall comply with the Texas Clean Air Act and the rules and regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
D.  Toxic and Noxious Matter. In no case shall the concentration of toxic or noxious matter (chemical or biological) be released across source lot lines that endangers the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to persons, property, or the use of property or land, or render unclean the waters of the state to the extent of being harmful or inimical to public health, animal or aquatic life, or the use of such waters for domestic water supply, recreation, or other legitimate and necessary uses. Disposal of toxic or hazardous waste within the City is specifically prohibited. 
E.  Explosives. Explosives shall be stored, utilized and manufactured in accordance with applicable local, state, and federal laws. All applications for uses involving fire and involving fire and explosive hazards shall only be permitted when specifically approved by the Fire Marshal. Such approval shall indicate compliance with all applicable fire codes and policies of all local government entities with jurisdiction. 
F.  Storage or Burning of Trash. No storage of rubbish or trash shall be allowed. No burning of rubbish or trash shall be allowed unless otherwise permitted or approved by the City of Marble Falls Fire Chief or his/her designee. 
G.  Odors. No use shall be permitted to produce the emission of objectionable or offensive odors in such concentration as to be readily perceptible at or beyond the lot line of the property in which the use is located. 
H.  Dust and Debris. No use shall be permitted to produce dust or debris at or beyond the lot line of the property in which the use is located. 
I.  Vibration. No use shall be permitted to produce ground vibrations which are noticeable without instruments at or beyond the lot line of the property in which the use is located. 
J.  Noise. No use shall be permitted which causes, allows, or permits activities which violate the noise nuisance provisions set out in Section 14-3, Generally, of the City's Code of Ordinances, or as may be amended.  
DIVISION 5.2 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
Section 5.2.1 - Authority, Findings of Fact, Purpose, Interpretation, and Methods 
A.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, §§ 16.3145 and 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council adopts this Division pursuant to this grant of authority. The provisions of this Division are intended to set out requirements that are not less stringent than those which are required for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
B.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of City are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Division to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
7.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
D.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Division, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes or the City's Home Rule Charter. 
E.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this Division uses the following methods: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.  
Section 5.2.2 - General Provisions 
A.  Applicability. The Division shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City. 
B.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Burnet County and incorporated areas," dated November 1, 2019, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM), dated November 1, 2019, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Division. 
C.  Establishment of a Floodplain Development Permit. A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Division. 
D.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this Division and other applicable regulations. 
E.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, conditions or restrictions (CCRs). However, where this Division and another ordinance, easement, covenant, condition, or restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Division does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Division shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-07C , § II, 7-16-2019; Ord. No. 2019-O-11D , § II.A, 11-19-2019)  
Section 5.2.3 - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
A.  General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
1.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
4.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
5.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
6.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
7.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
B.  Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
1.  Generally. The requirements in this subsection apply to all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: 
a.  Subsection 5.2.2.B, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard; 
b.  Subsection 11.1.12.B.5, Floodplain Information and Determination; or 
c.  Subsection 5.2.3.C.3, Generation of Base Flood Elevation Data. 
2.  Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. See Section 11.5.2, Floodplain Development Permit. 
3.  Nonresidential Construction. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either: 
i.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot above the base flood level, or 
ii.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. This option is only allowed if the Floodplain Administrator finds that the criteria for a Floodplain Variance that are set out in Section 11.3.8, Floodplain Development Variances, are met. 
b.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. 
c.  A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood-proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
4.  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
5.  Manufactured Homes. 
a.  Manufactured Homes in Zone A. All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Manufactured Homes in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE. All that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, shall be: 
i.  Elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation, and 
ii.  Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured Homes in Zones A1-30, AH and AE. All manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of Subsection 5.2.3.B.5.b be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood elevation, or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are: 
a.  No less than 36 inches in height above grade, and 
b.  Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
6.  Recreational Vehicles. 
a.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM, shall: 
i.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or 
ii.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
iii.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 11.5.2, Floodplain Development Permit, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in Subsection 5.2.3.B.5, Manufactured Homes. 
b.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
C.  Standards for Subdivision Proposals. 
1.  Generally. All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be designed in a manner that is consistent with: 
a.  Subsection 5.2.1.B, Findings of Fact, 
b.  Subsection 5.2.1.C, Statement of Purpose, and 
c.  Subsection 5.2.1.E, Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. 
2.  Permit Requirements. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain Development Permit requirements of Section 11.5.2, Floodplain Development Permit, and the provisions of this Section 5.2.3, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
3.  Generation of Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Subsection 5.2.2.B, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, or Subsection 11.1.12.B.5, Floodplain Information and Determination. 
4.  Adequate Drainage Provided. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
5.  Location of Public Utilities and Facilities. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
D.  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
1.  Generally. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 5.2.2.B, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the provisions of this subsection shall apply. 
2.  Elevation of New Construction and Substantial Improvements (Residential). All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); 
3.  Elevation of New Construction and Substantial Improvements (Nonresidential). All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
4.  Certification Required. A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section are satisfied. See Section 11.5.2, Floodplain Development Permit. 
5.  Drainage Paths. Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
E.  Floodways. 
1.  Generally. Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection 5.2.2.B, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the provisions of this subsection shall apply. 
2.  Encroachments Prohibited. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
3.  Permitted Exceptions. 
a.  If Subsection 5.2.3.E.2 above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 5.2.3, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction, and 
b.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, § 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by § 65.12.  
DIVISION 5.3 - LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT 
 
Section 5.3.1 - Intent of Low Impact Development 
A.  Intent. The intent of this Division is to encourage best practices of low impact development (LID) and site design techniques in order to promote environmental values and promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, and healthful development of the City. The provisions of this Division are intended to: 
1.  Reduce impacts of the built environment and human use of the land. 
2.  Promote comprehensive and efficient site design practices of properties. 
3.  Promote efficient on-site stormwater management systems. 
4.  Allow for flexible site design for new developments or redevelopments that encourage the use of low impact development techniques. 
5.  Implement provisions of the Marble Falls Comprehensive Plan that encourage environmental protection and use of low impact development techniques. 
B.  Applicability. This Division applies to all properties and parcels proposed for development seeking to implement low impact development techniques.  
Section 5.3.2 - Low Impact Development Techniques 
A.  Generally. The selection, design, and implementation of low-impact development techniques should utilize best practices of these techniques and the preservation of natural areas within individual sites. 
B.  Low Impact Development Methods. Credits are granted for the utilization of low-impact development technique, with each method counting as three (3) credits up to a maximum of 12 credits per grouping, as listed below. These credits can be applied towards an increase in maximum lot coverage, decrease in off-street parking requirements, and decrease in site landscaping requirements. Additionally, the areas where low-impact development techniques are being applied may count towards the open space requirements in Table 4.2.1, Development Options and Yield for New Residential Development. 
1.  Stormwater Collection (12 credits total). 
a.  Rain garden; 
b.  Bioswale; 
c.  Green roof; 
d.  Rainwater harvesting; 
2.  Stormwater Conveyance and Treatment (12 credits total). 
a.  Vegetated filter strip; 
b.  Parking lot island bioretention cell; 
c.  Swale blocks; 
d.  Constructed stormwater wetlands; 
3.  Preservation of Natural Areas (12 credits total). 
a.  Conservation of natural creek corridors and floodplains; 
b.  Native tree canopy and understory species; 
c.  Native grassland; 
d.  Similar natural characteristics untouched during development.  
Section 5.3.3 - Low Impact Development Credits 
A.  Generally. Certain development standards may be modified through the use of low impact development credits gained by the application of the methods described in Section 5.4.2. Total credits gained may be applied simultaneously to each of the following categories to the maximum extent allowed. 
1.  Lot Coverage. Maximum lot coverage limitations, as specified in Section 4.2.3 and Section 4.3.1, may be increased by one percentage point for each credit obtained through the use of LID techniques (1:1 percentage/credit), with a maximum of 5 percent increase allowed. 
2.  Off-street Parking. When required off-street parking spaces number 10 spaces or greater, the number of spaces may be reduced by two percentage points for each credit obtained through the use of LID techniques (2:1 percentage/credit), with a maximum of 15 percent decrease allowed. 
3.  Minimum Open Space. The minimum open space percentage required for residential zoning districts may be reduced by one percentage point for each credit obtained through the use of LID techniques (1:1 percentage/credit), with a maximum of 5 percent decrease allowed.  
Section 5.3.4 - Low Impact Development Quality Control and Maintenance 
A.  Generally. The requirements of drainage systems established in Section 6.2.10, Stormwater Collection and Conveyance Systems, shall also apply to low impact development facilities. 
B.  On-Going Responsibility. 
1.  Developer. The developer shall ensure that all drainage improvements within public easements or rights-of-way are functioning properly prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. The developer shall be responsible for removing any significant build-up of sediment or debris from drainage improvements, with the exception of backlot and side lot drainage swales, at the eleventh month of the second year for the required two-year maintenance bond for the applicable facilities. The City shall inspect the improvements to determine any maintenance or correction of deficiencies at the conclusion of this period. 
2.  Owner/Operator. After expiration of the maintenance bond, the owner/operator shall be responsible for on-going maintenance and correction of deficiencies, to ensure long-term functioning of the LID improvement. 
C.  Maintenance and Inspection. Water quality control structures, retention and detention facilities, and Best Management Practices (BMPs) for nonpoint source pollution control permitted by the City under Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution, of the City's Code, shall be maintained and inspected in accordance with Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution, and any permits or authorizations issued thereunder.  
ARTICLE 6 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND LAND DEVELOPMENT  
DIVISION 6.1 - GENERAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
 
Section 6.1.1 - Subdivision of Property 
A.  Generally. This Article shall be applicable to the filing of plats and the subdivision of land, as that term is defined herein and in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, within the corporate limits of the City of Marble Falls and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as they may be from time to time adjusted by annexation or disannexation. The City shall have all remedies and rights provided by said Chapter 212 with regard to the control and approval of subdivisions and plats both within the City and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant to agreements with Burnet County. 
B.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Article, it is the intention of the City Council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions within the City of Marble Falls and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Minimum standards for development are contained in the City's Technical Construction Standards and Specifications (TCSS), the building code, applicable articles of the Code of Ordinances, and in these regulations. However, the Comprehensive Plan (including the Future Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Park and Open Space Plan, and other related plans) contains policies designed to achieve an optimum quality of development in Marble Falls and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various ordinances regulating land development, a standardization of development will occur. This will produce a monotonous municipal setting and physical environment within the community. Subdivision design shall be of a quality that will carry out the purpose and spirit of the policies expressed within the Comprehensive Plan and within these regulations and shall be encouraged to exceed the minimum standards required herein. 
C.  Purpose. The procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions of land are intended to: 
1.  Promote the development and the utilization of land in a manner that assures an attractive and high-quality community environment in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Marble Falls; 
2.  Guide and assist property owners and applicants in the correct procedures to be followed, and to inform them of the standards which shall be required; 
3.  Protect the public interest by imposing standards for the location, design, class and type of streets, walkways (sidewalks), alleys, utilities and essential public services; 
4.  Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development within the City's limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction; 
5.  Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight; 
6.  Integrate the development of various tracts of land into the existing community, and coordinate the future development of adjoining tracts; 
7.  Ensure the most efficient and beneficial provision of public facilities and services for each tract being subdivided; 
8.  Provide for compatible relationships between land uses and buildings; provide for the circulation of traffic throughout the municipality, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways; provide for pedestrian circulation that is appropriate for the various uses of land and buildings; and provide the proper location and width of streets; 
9.  Prevent pollution of the air, streams and bodies of water; assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; safeguard both surface and groundwater supplies, as well as natural resources and endangered or threatened plant and animal life; and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land; 
10.  Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the municipality, and ensure development that is appropriate with regard to these natural features; 
11.  Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision; 
12.  Ensure that public or private facilities are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve proposed and future developments and citizens within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction; 
13.  Protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; 
14.  Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from fire, flood and other danger; and prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
15.  Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the community, and encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the community; 
16.  Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the community and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; 
17.  Guide public and private policy and action in providing adequate and efficient transportation systems, public utilities, and other public amenities and facilities; and 
18.  Encourage the development of a stable, prospering economic environment. 
D.  Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Article shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and development activity within the City's limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction: 
1.  The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels; or 
2.  All subdivisions of land whether by metes and bounds division or by plat, which were outside the jurisdiction of the City's subdivision regulations in Burnet County or Blanco County, Texas and which subsequently came within the jurisdiction of the City's subdivision regulations through: 
a.  Annexation; or 
b.  Extension of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction; or 
3.  The combining of two (2) or more contiguous tracts, lots, sites or parcels for the purpose of creating one (1) or more legal lots in order to achieve a more developable site, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
4.  When a Building Permit is required for the following uses: 
a.  Residential single-family. 
i.  Construction of a new single-family dwelling unit; or 
ii.  Moving of a primary structure or a main building onto a piece of property; or 
b.  Nonresidential and multifamily. 
i.  Construction of a new nonresidential or multifamily structure; or 
ii.  Additions, such as increasing the square footage of an existing building by more than thirty (30) percent of its gross floor area; or 
iii.  Moving a primary structure onto a piece of property; or 
5.  For tracts where any public improvements are proposed; or 
6.  When building structures on or across platted property line; or 
7.  Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land lying within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more tracts, and claims exemption from Subchapter A of Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code for purposes of development, that results in parcels or lots all greater than five (5) acres in size; or in the event that development of any such tract is intended, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated, he shall first obtain approval of a Development Plat that meets the requirements of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212, Subchapter B, Regulation of Property Development, Sections 212.041 through 212.050, as may be amended. (See Division 11.4, Subdivision Permits and Approvals, of these regulations for requirements for Development Plats.) 
E.  Applicability. 
1.  Requirement to Plat. No subdivision plat shall be recorded until a Final Plat, accurately describing the property to be conveyed, has been approved in accordance with these regulations and with other applicable City regulations (described in Subsection 6.1.1.E.2, Compliance with Ordinances, below). No Building Permit, Certificate of Occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit, flood plain permit, utility tap, or certificate of acceptance for required public improvements shall be issued by the City for any parcel of land or plat until: 
a.  A Final Plat has been approved in accordance with Division 11.4, Subdivision Permits and Approvals; and 
b.  All public improvements required by these regulations have been constructed and accepted by the City of Marble Falls; or 
c.  Assurances for completion of improvements have been provided in accordance with Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions of this Article. 
2.  Compliance with Ordinances. Compliance with all City ordinances pertaining to the subdivision of land, and the Comprehensive Plan, shall be required prior to approval of any development application governed by these regulations. It is the property owner's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, City ordinances. Applicable ordinances and requirements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Comprehensive Plan, which includes the Future Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Park and Open Space Plan, and all other associated maps and plans; 
b.  Building codes; 
c.  Flood damage prevention code; 
d.  Fire prevention code; 
e.  Other applicable sections of these regulations; 
f.  Other applicable chapters of the City's Code of Ordinances; and 
g.  City of Marble Falls Storm Water Ordinance. 
F.  Exemptions. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to: 
1.  Development of land legally platted and approved prior to the effective date of these regulations, except as otherwise provided for herein (construction of facilities and structures shall conform to design and construction standards in effect at the time of construction) and for which no re-subdivision is sought; or 
2.  Development of land constituting a single tract, lot, site or parcel for which a legal deed of record describing the boundary of said tract, lot, site or parcel was filed of record in the Deed Records of Burnet County, Texas on or before June 27, 2005; or 
3.  Sale, inheritance, or gift of land by metes and bounds of tracts upon which no improvements, development, subdivision or alteration is occurring; or 
4.  Existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations; or 
5.  Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
6.  When a Building Permit is requested for unplatted or already platted parcels for one (1) or more of the following activities: 
a.  Replacement or reconstruction of an existing primary single-family or duplex structure, but not to exceed the square footage, nor deviate from the original location, of the original structure; 
b.  Building additions, such as increasing the square footage of a residence or other structure, not over thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the structure (except when an expansion crosses a platted lot line); 
c.  Accessory buildings (as defined in these regulations); 
d.  Remodeling or repair which involves no expansion of square footage; or 
e.  Moving a structure off a lot or parcel, or for demolition permits.  
DIVISION 6.2 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Section 6.2.1 - Streets 
A.  Generally. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the City of Marble Falls Thoroughfare Plan and TCSS, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets or driveways (whether within the City of Marble Falls, within its ETJ area, or within adjacent municipal or county areas), to topographical conditions, to public safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Reserve or residual strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property, or to or from any street or alley, or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes, or which will not be taxable or accessible for improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision unless such are required by the City in the public interest (such as to enhance public safety or other public interest). All streets shall be constructed in accordance with Division 6.3, Improvements Required by the City, and with the City's TCSS. 
2.  Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, shall be properly related to the Thoroughfare Plan and any amendments thereto, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development. All streets shall be open and unobstructed at all times. The layout of the street network shall, to the greatest extent possible, be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes in order to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction, thereby helping to reduce storm water runoff and preserve natural, scenic characteristics of the land. 
B.  Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares. 
1.  Responsibility for Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares. The developer shall ensure that the subdivision is served by adequate streets and thoroughfares and shall be responsible for the costs of rights-of-way and street improvements, in accordance with the following policies and standards, and subject to the City's cost participation policies on oversized facilities. 
2.  General Adequacy Policy. Every subdivision shall be served by improved streets and thoroughfares adequate to accommodate the vehicular traffic to be generated by the development. Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for traffic circulation; shall be properly related to the City's Thoroughfare Plan, road classification system, Comprehensive Plan and any amendments thereto; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each development. 
3.  Road Network. New subdivisions shall be supported by a road network having adequate capacity, ingress/egress, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. The adequacy of the road network for developments of two hundred (200) or more dwelling units, or for developments generating two thousand (2,000) or more "one-way" trips per day, or for developments involving collector or arterial streets not appearing on the City's adopted Thoroughfare Plan, shall be demonstrated by preparation and submission, prior to or along with the Preliminary Plat application, of a Traffic Impact Analysis prepared in accordance with Subsection 6.2.1.D, Traffic Impact Analysis, below, which takes into consideration the need to accommodate traffic generated by the development, land to be developed in common ownership and other developed property. In the event that the property to be developed is intended as a phase in a larger development project or constitutes a portion of the land to be ultimately developed, the Planning or Zoning Commission or City Council may require a demonstration of adequacy pursuant to this Section for additional phases or portions of the property as a condition of approval for the proposed Preliminary Plat. In the event that the applicant submits a Traffic Impact Analysis for an entire phased development project, the City may require an update of the study for each subsequent phase of the development which reflects any applicable changed conditions. If the Preliminary Plat is in conformance with the Thoroughfare Plan and if the Preliminary Plat is for a development of less than two hundred (200) dwelling units or for a development generating less than two thousand (2,000) "one-way" trips per day, then a Traffic Impact Analysis is not required. 
4.  Approach Roads and Access. All subdivisions must have at least two (2) points of vehicular access (primarily for emergency vehicles) and must be connected via improved roadways to the City's improved thoroughfare and street system by one (1) or more approach roads of such dimensions and improved to such standards as are hereinafter set forth. Requirements for dedication of right-of-way and improvement of approach roads may be increased depending upon the size or density of the proposed development, or if such need is demonstrated by Traffic Impact Analysis. 
a.  "Two (2) points of vehicular access" shall be construed to mean that the subdivision has at least two (2) improved roads accessing the subdivision from the City's improved thoroughfare system, and the subdivision has at least two (2) road entrances. The City Council may, at its discretion and upon a finding that such will not compromise public safety or impede emergency access, accept a single median-divided entrance from the City's improved thoroughfare system provided that the median extends into the subdivision for an unbroken length of at least one hundred (100) feet to an intersecting internal street which provides at least two (2) routes to the interior of the subdivision. For example, the entrance street is not a dead-end or cul-de-sac, and it does not create a "bottleneck" allowing only one (1) emergency route into the interior of the subdivision. Residential lots may not front onto any median-divided street section, and residential driveways may not be located in front of a median. (Also see Subsection 6.2.1.O, Points of Access, below.) 
b.  The subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate emergency access for public safety vehicles. Each residential lot in the subdivision shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated public street as required by applicable zoning or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is greater, unless other provisions have been authorized through planned development approval. Each nonresidential lot shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated public street as required by applicable zoning or fifty (50) feet, whichever is greater, unless other provisions have been authorized through Planned Development approval. 
5.  Off-site Improvements. Where traffic impact analysis demonstrates the need for such facilities, or where the City believes public safety is at risk, the property owner shall make such improvements to off-site collector and arterial streets and intersections as are necessary to mitigate traffic impacts generated by the development or in conjunction with related developments. The City may participate in the costs of oversize improvements with the property owner as set out herein, and subject to the City's cost participation policies on oversized improvements. 
6.  Street Dedications. 
a.  Dedication of right-of-way. The property owner shall provide all rights-of-way required for existing or future streets, and for all required street improvements, including perimeter streets and approach roads, as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan and as required by the TCSS or by other valid development plans approved by the City. In the case of perimeter streets, half of the total required right-of-way width for such streets shall be provided unless the proposed development is on both sides of the street, in which case the full right-of-way width shall be provided, or unless there is some other compelling reason to require more than half of the right-of-way width (such as avoiding the infringement upon or demolition of existing structures, avoiding crossing a creek or flood plain or some other obstacle, or other similar circumstance). In some instances, more than half of the required width shall be required when a half street is impractical or unsafe and depending upon the actual or proposed alignment of the street, such as in the case of a curved street, as may be required by the City. 
b.  Perimeter streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision or addition, the other half of the street shall be dedicated, and an appropriate amount of the street shall be improved, by the developer of the new subdivision or addition. 
c.  Slope easements. The dedication of easements, in addition to dedicated rights-of-way shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes shall be no steeper than three (3) feet horizontal run to one (1) foot vertical height, or a three-to-one (3:1) slope. 
7.  Street Construction. All streets and thoroughfares shall be constructed and paved to City standards and within rights-of-way as required by the Thoroughfare Plan and these regulations, and in accordance with the TCSS and other City standards as may be from time to time amended or adopted. 
8.  Traffic Control. Intersection improvements and traffic control devices shall be installed as warranted in accordance with the Traffic Impact Analysis required by Subsection 6.2.1.D, Traffic Impact Analysis, below, or as may be required by the City for traffic safety and efficiency. Construction and design standards shall be in accordance with City standards and the TCSS. 
9.  Phased Development. Where a subdivision is proposed to occur in phases, the applicant, in conjunction with submission of the Preliminary Plat, shall provide a schedule of development. The schedule shall set forth the intended plan of development and dedication of rights-of-way for streets and street improvements, whether on-site or off-site, intended to serve each proposed phase of the subdivision. The City Council shall determine whether the proposed streets and street improvements are adequate pursuant to standards herein established and may require that a Traffic Impact Analysis be submitted for the entire project or such phases as the City Council determines to be necessary to adjudge whether the subdivision will be adequately served by streets and thoroughfares. 
10.  Private Streets. New subdivisions may not be constructed with private streets, nor may an existing subdivision's public streets be converted to private ownership. Any private street subdivisions that were in existence (i.e., platted of record at the county) on the effective date of these regulations shall be allowed to remain as private street subdivisions provided that the conditions of the private streets and the maintenance thereof continues to meet or exceed City standards, and provided that a viable homeowner's association (HOA) continues to exist to maintain the private streets and all appurtenances. The City will not assist in enforcing deed restrictions. The City may periodically inspect private streets and may require any repairs necessary to ensure efficient emergency access and to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare. 
a.  Construction and Maintenance Cost. The City shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street. 
b.  Traffic Control Devices. All private traffic control devices and regulatory signs shall conform to the "Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices", as amended, and to City standards. 
c.  Restricted Access. The entrances to all private streets shall be clearly marked with a sign, placed in a prominent and visible location, stating that the streets within the subdivision are private, and that they are not maintained nor regularly patrolled by the City. All restricted access entrances shall be manned twenty-four (24) hours every day, or they shall provide a reliable, alternative means of ensuring access into the subdivision by the City, by emergency service providers, and by other utility or public service providers, such as postal carriers and utility companies, with appropriate identification. The method to be used to ensure City and emergency access into the subdivision shall be approved by the City's fire department and by any other applicable emergency service providers. If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required herein, the City may enter the private street subdivision and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association. 
d.  Waiver of Services. Certain City services may not be provided for private street subdivisions. Among the services which may not be provided are: routine law enforcement patrols, enforcement of traffic and parking regulations, and preparation of accident reports. Depending upon the characteristics of the development and upon access limitations posed by the design of entrances into the subdivision, other services (such as sanitation) may not be provided, as well. 
e.  Petition to Convert to Public Streets. The property owner's association may petition the City to accept private streets and any associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and upon the favorable vote of a majority of the membership. However, in no event shall the City be obligated to accept said streets as public. Should the City elect to accept the streets as public, then the City has the right to inspect the private streets and to assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the City's acceptance of the streets. The City shall be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The City may also require, at the association's or the lot owners' expense, the removal of any guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot or within any other common area. 
f.  Hold Harmless. The property owners association, as owner of the private streets and appurtenances, shall release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any other governmental entity, and any public utility entity for damages to the private streets that may be occasioned by the reasonable use of the private streets by same, and for damages and injury (including death) arising from the condition of the private streets, out of any use of access gates or cross arms, or out of any use of the subdivision by the City or governmental or utility entity. 
C.  Escrow Policies and Procedures. 
1.  Request for Escrow. Whenever these regulations require a property owner to construct a street or thoroughfare, or other type of public improvement, the property owner may, if there exists unusual circumstances, such as a timing issue due to pending roadway improvements by another agency such as TxDOT or the County, that would present undue hardships or that would impede public infrastructure coordination or timing, petition the City to construct the street or thoroughfare, usually at a later date, in exchange for deposit of escrow as established in this Section. If more than one street or thoroughfare must be constructed in order to meet adequacy requirements for roadways, as demonstrated by a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA), the City Manager (or designee) may prioritize roadways for which escrow is to be accepted and require the deposit of all funds attributable to the development in escrow accounts for one or more of such affected roadways. The City Council shall review the particular circumstances involved (a TIA may be required to facilitate the City Council's deliberations on the matter), and shall determine, at its sole discretion, whether or not provision of escrow deposits will be acceptable in lieu of the property owner's obligation to construct the street or thoroughfare with his or her development. 
2.  Escrow Deposit with the City. Whenever the City Council agrees to accept escrow deposits in lieu of construction by the owner of the property under these regulations, the property owner or developer shall deposit in escrow with the City in an amount equal to his or her share of the costs of design, construction, permits, reviews and approvals, inspections, any additional land acquisition, and an appropriate (and realistic) inflation factor to ensure that the actual "future dollar" costs will be covered when actual construction occurs in the future. Such amount shall be reviewed and approved by the City Manager (or designee) and by the City Engineer and shall be paid prior to release of the Construction Plans by the City Engineer. The obligations and responsibilities of the property owner shall become those of the property owner's transferees, successors and assigns; and the liability therefore shall be joint and several. 
3.  Determination of Escrow Amount. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by using the maximum comparable "turnkey" bid price of construction of the improvements (including design, permits, reviews and approvals, inspections and any additional land acquisition that may be needed). Such determination of the escrow amount shall be made as of the time the escrow is due hereunder and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Manager (or designee) and the City Engineer. 
4.  Termination of Escrow. Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which have been placed with the City under this Section and which have been held for a period of ten (10) years from the date of such payment or agreement in the event that the City has not authorized the preparation of plans and specifications for construction of such roadway facilities for which the escrow was made, shall, upon written request, be returned to the property owner, along with one-half (½) of its accrued interest. Such return does not remove any obligations of the property owner for construction of the required facilities if a Building Permit has not been issued on the subject lot or if a new Building Permit is applied for. 
5.  Refund. If any street or highway for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other than the City or is reconstructed by another governmental authority at no cost to the City, the escrowed funds and accrued interest shall be refunded to the property owner or applicant who originally paid the escrow amount after completion and acceptance of the public improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is borne by the City and the other portion of the cost by another party or governmental authority, the difference between the property owner's actual proportionate cost and the escrowed funds, including accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded after completion and acceptance of the improvements. 
6.  Interest Limitation. If money is refunded within six (6) months of deposit, only the principal will be refunded. Monies returned after this date will be refunded with one-half of its accrued interest. 
D.  Traffic Impact Analysis. 
1.  Generally. Any proposed development project or plat involving a significant change to a proposed roadway alignment from that shown on the City of Marble Falls Thoroughfare Plan (or involving a development of two hundred (200) or more dwelling units, or for developments generating two thousand (2,000) or more "one-way" trips per day) shall be preceded by submission, City staff review, and Planning and Zoning Commission review, and City Council approval of a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) as specified in Subsection 6.2.1.D.2, Required Components of Traffic Impact Analysis, below. Such a proposed roadway alignment change shall also be preceded by (or simultaneous with) an amendment to the City's Thoroughfare Plan showing the new proposed alignment. Failure to provide for such approvals prior to submission of a Preliminary Plat (or concurrently with the Preliminary Plat application) shall be grounds for denial of the plat application. 
2.  Required Components of Traffic Impact Analysis. Whenever these regulations (or the City Council, in unique instances which do not necessarily meet the above criteria but which may significantly affect the public health, safety or welfare, such as a proposed subdivision that will only be accessed via substandard roadways which may pose an impediment to emergency response vehicles) require submission and City Council approval of a TIA, the following elements shall be included: 
a.  General Site Description. The TIA shall include a detailed description of the roadway network within one (1) mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the anticipated states of construction, and the anticipated completion date of the proposed land development. This description, which may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items: (1) all major intersections; (2) all proposed and existing ingress and egress locations; (3) all existing roadway widths and rights-of-way; (4) all existing traffic signals and traffic-control devices; and (5) all existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one (1) mile radius of the site. 
b.  Proposed Capital Improvements. The TIA shall identify any changes to the roadway network within one (1) mile of the site that are proposed by any government agency or other developer. This description shall include the above items as well as any proposed construction project that would alter the width or alignment of roadways affected by the proposed development. 
c.  Roadway Impact Analysis. 
i.  Transportation Impacts. 
a)  Trip Generation. The average weekday trip generation rates (trip ends), the average weekend trip generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional), the highest average a.m. and p.m. hourly weekday trip generation rates, and the highest hourly weekend generation rates (for uses other than residential or institutional) for the proposed use shall be determined based upon the trip generation rates contained in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation book; or shall be based upon data generated by actual field surveys of area uses compatible to the proposed use and approved by the City Manager (or designee) and the City Engineer. 
b)  Trip Distribution. The distribution of trips to arterial and collector roadways within the study area identified in Subsection 6.2.1.D.2.a, General Site Description, above, shall be in conformity with accepted traffic engineering principles, taking into consideration the land use categories of the proposed development; the area from which the proposed development will attract traffic; competing developments (if applicable); the size of the proposed development; development phasing; surrounding existing and anticipated land uses, population and employment; existing and projected daily traffic volumes; and existing traffic conditions identified pursuant to Subsection 6.2.1.D.2.a, General Site Description, above. 
ii.  Adequacy Determination. The roadway network included within the TIA shall be considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing roadways identified as arterials and collectors can accommodate the existing service volume, and the service volume of the proposed development, and the service volume of approved but unbuilt developments holding valid, unexpired Building Permits at a level of service "C" or above. 
d.  Intersection Analysis. 
i.  Level of Service Analysis. For intersections within the roadway TIA area described in Subsection 6.2.1.D.2.a, General Site Description, above, a level of service analysis shall be performed for all arterial to arterial, arterial to collector, collector to arterial, and collector to collector intersections, and for any other pertinent intersections identified by the City Manager (or designee) or by the City Engineer. Also, level of service analyses will be required on all proposed site driveway locations for all nonresidential developments. The City may waive analysis of minor intersections and site driveway locations within the one-mile radius. The level of service analysis shall be based upon the highest hourly average a.m. or p.m. peak weekday volume or highest average hourly peak weekend volume as determined from a two-day survey of weekday volumes and, where necessary, a one-day survey of weekend volumes. The level of service analysis shall take into consideration the lane geometry, traffic volume, percentage of right-hand turns, percentage of left-hand turns, percentage (and typical size) of trucks, intersection width, number of lanes, signal timing and progression, roadway grades, pedestrian and bicycle flows, school routes, number of accidents, and peak hour factor. 
ii.  Adequacy Analysis. The intersections included within the TIA shall be considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing intersections can accommodate the existing service volume, the service volume of the proposed development, and the service volume of approved but unbuilt developments holding valid, unexpired Building Permits at level of service "C" or above. 
e.  Effect of Adequacy Determination. If the adequacy determination for roadways and intersections indicates that the proposed development would cause a reduction in the level of service for any roadway or intersection within the study area identified in Subsection 6.2.1.D.2.a, General Site Description, above that would cause the roadway to fall below the level of service required hereby, the proposed development shall be denied unless the developer agrees to one (1) of the following conditions: 
i.  The deferral of Building Permits until the improvements necessary to upgrade the substandard facilities are constructed; 
ii.  A reduction in the density or intensity of development; 
iii.  The dedication or construction of facilities needed to achieve the level of service required herein; or 
iv.  Any combination of techniques identified herein that would ensure that development will not occur unless the levels of service for all roadways and intersections within the TIA study are adequate to accommodate the impacts of such development. 
E.  Arrangement of Streets Not Shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. For streets that are not shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan, such as local residential streets, the arrangement of such streets within a subdivision shall: 
1.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets from or into surrounding areas; 
2.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City Council to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets impractical; 
3.  Provide for future access, such as by stubbing streets for future extension, to adjacent vacant areas which will likely develop under a similar zoning classification or for a similar type of land use; and 
4.  Not conflict in any way with existing or proposed driveway openings (including those on the other side of an existing or planned median-divided arterial, in which case new streets shall align with such driveway openings such that median openings can be shared). 
F.  Residential Collector Streets and Minor Residential Streets. Residential collector streets and minor residential streets shall be laid out such that their use by through traffic will be discouraged, such as via circuitous routes or multiple turns or offsets, but such that access is provided to adjacent subdivisions. 
1.  Wherever the right-of-way width of a collector or residential street must transition to a greater or lesser width, such transition shall occur along the front, side or rear lot lines of adjacent lots (for a reasonable distance) and shall not occur within the street intersection itself. In other words, the right-of-way width shall be the same on both sides of the street intersection. 
2.  To the greatest extent possible, the number of lots fronting along residential collector streets shall be minimized in order to ensure adequate traffic safety and efficiency. No more than twenty (20) percent of the total centerline length of a collector street may have residential lots fronting onto the collector on each side of the street. For example, a collector street having a total centerline length (from one (1) terminus to another) of one thousand (1,000) feet may have lots fronting onto it with a total frontage distance of two hundred (200) feet on each side of the street. Calculations shall be submitted with the construction plat application (and provided to the Director and City Engineer) verifying that lots fronting onto a collector street do not exceed the above. 
G.  Subdivisions Abutting Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the City Council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage (lots which back onto the arterial), deep lots with rear service alleys, or such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
H.  Reserve Strips Prohibited. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is required by the City and approved by the City Council. 
I.  Intersections. 
1.  Intersecting, undivided streets with centerline offsets of less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet shall be avoided. 
2.  Intersecting streets onto an existing or future divided roadway must be configured such that the centerline offset will accommodate the appropriate median opening and left-turn lanes (with required transition and stacking distances) on each divided roadway and shall be aligned with any existing or proposed streets or driveways on the opposite side of the divided roadway (in order to share the median opening). 
3.  A street intersection with a major thoroughfare shall be at a ninety (90) degree angle and shall be tangent to the intersecting street for at least one hundred (100) feet. 
4.  All other street intersections shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at a ninety (90) degree angle or radial to the centerline of the intersecting street for the full right-of-way width of the intersecting street, and tangent to the intersecting street for at least fifty (50) feet. 
5.  No street shall intersect at an angle that is less than eighty-five (85) degrees. 
J.  Right-of-Way Widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan and as defined by the corresponding roadway cross-sections on the Thoroughfare Plan and in the City's TCSS manual. 
K.  Half Streets. Construction of half streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conforming with the other requirements of these regulations and the Thoroughfare Plan, and where the City Council makes a determination that there is no immediate benefit to be gained by constructing the full street section since no access from the street will be needed by the subdivision in question. The City Council may also find that it would be more practical, or cost effective, to delay construction of the other half of a street until when the adjoining property is developed. If the property owner is responsible for one-half (½) of the street, then the property owner shall either construct the facility along with his or her development or shall provide escrow for the construction cost of his or her share of the facility (including all applicable street appurtenances such as median openings, left turn lanes into the development, sidewalks with barrier-free ramps, drainage structures, etc.) unless the City participates in the construction of the facility. Whenever a partial street has been previously platted along a common property line, the other portion of the street right-of-way shall be dedicated such that the right-of-way is increased to the street's ultimate planned width. Improvements shall be made to all on-site facilities as defined herein. 
L.  Street Length. 
1.  Maximum and Minimum Length. The maximum length of any block or street segment (including a looped street) shall be one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet and the minimum length of any block or street segment shall be four hundred (400) feet, as measured along the street centerline and between the point(s) of intersection with other through, but not dead-end or cul-de-sac, streets. 
2.  Cul-de-sac. A cul-de-sac street shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet, and at the closed end shall have a turnaround bulb with an outside pavement diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least one hundred twenty (120) feet. The length of a cul-de-sac shall be measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the centerpoint of the cul-de-sac bulb. 
3.  Overlength Streets or Cul-de-sacs. The Commission may recommend, and the City Council may approve, waivers/suspensions for overlength streets or cul-de-sacs, whether temporary or permanent, upon considering the following: 
a.  Alternative designs which would reduce street or cul-de-sac length; 
b.  The effect of overlength streets upon access, congestion, delivery of municipal services, and upon convenience to residents of the subdivision in traveling to and from their homes; and 
c.  Means of mitigation, including but not limited to additional mid-block street connections, limitation on the number of lots to be served along an overlength street segment or cul-de-sac, temporary (or permanent) points of emergency access, and additional fire protection measures. 
M.  Dead-End Streets Prohibited. 
1.  Generally. Except in unusual cases, no dead-end streets will be approved. 
2.  Exceptions. Dead-end streets that are provided to connect with future streets on adjacent land may be permitted under the following provisions: 
a.  No more than one (1) lot (per side) can front onto the dead-end street stub unless a temporary turnaround bulb (with the appropriate temporary street easement) is provided at the end. 
b.  A temporary dead-end street shall not exceed the maximum allowed length of a normal cul-de-sac, and the temporary turnaround bulb must be constructed like a cul-de-sac, as provided in Subsection 6.2.1.K.2, Cul-de-sac, above (the City Engineer may authorize the use of asphalt or other durable paving material than concrete for the arc, or "wing", portions of the temporary turnaround bulb in order to minimize the cost of removing those portions later on). 
c.  A note shall be placed on the Final Plat clearly labeling any temporary dead-end streets (if any) that will at some point be extended into the adjacent property. Any required temporary turnaround easements shall be shown on the Final Plat along with their appropriate recording information if they are off-site or established by separate instrument. 
d.  Signage shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as on the barricade, also stating that the street will be extended in the future. Signage and lettering must be large enough to be legible by a person with normal vision at a twenty-foot distance. 
N.  Street Names of Extended Streets. New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets and shall be dedicated at equal or greater right-of-way widths than the existing streets for an appropriate transition length, if applicable. 
O.  Construction of Streets. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with paving widths and specifications as set forth in the TCSS of the City of Marble Falls at the time at which the Preliminary Plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application. 
P.  Points of Access. All subdivisions shall have at least two (2) points of access from improved public roadways (also see Subsection 6.2.1.B.4, Approach Roads and Access, above). All residential developments shall provide no less than one (1) entrance for every seventy-five (75) lots, or portion thereof, including temporary dead-end stubbed streets that will eventually provide connections into adjacent future developments and thence to an arterial or collector street. Driveway access onto roadways shall be provided and designed in accordance with the City's TCSS and construction standards that are in effect at the time the Preliminary Plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application. Residential driveway cuts shall not be allowed on roadways that are larger than a residential collector street (sixty-foot right-of-way) unless specifically approved by City Council with the Preliminary Plat application.  
Section 6.2.2 - Alleys 
A.  In Nonresidential District. Service alleys in nonresidential districts, if provided or constructed by the developer, shall be a minimum right-of-way width of twenty (20) feet and a pavement width of twenty (20) feet. 
B.  In Residential Districts. In residential districts, alleys shall be parallel, or approximately parallel, to the frontage of the street. Alleys in residential districts shall provide a minimum of twenty (20) feet of right-of-way and twenty (20) feet of pavement. 
C.  General Design Standards for Alleys. 
1.  Alleys shall be paved in accordance with the City of Marble Falls TCSS and construction standards that are in effect at the time the Preliminary Plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application. 
2.  Where the deflection of alley alignment occurs, the design of the paving and property line shall be as established by the TCSS. 
3.  Dead-end or "hammerhead" alleys shall not be allowed. Alleys must have adequate turnouts and street entrances such that vehicular traffic flow is continuous and efficient. Where a temporary dead-end alley situation is unavoidable, a temporary turnaround bulb or turnout onto a street, either of which will need a temporary easement for street or alley purposes, shall be provided as determined by the City Engineer. 
4.  Alleys may not exceed a maximum length of one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet, as measured along the centerline of the alley and between intersections with other alleys or entrances onto streets (at the right-of-way line of the street at the alley entrance). The Commission may recommend, and the City Council may approve, waivers/suspensions for overlength alleys upon consideration of the following: 
a.  Alternative designs which would reduce alley length; 
b.  The effect of overlength alleys upon access, congestion, delivery of municipal services, and upon convenience to residents of the subdivision in accessing rear driveways and in driving around to the front of their homes; and 
c.  Means of mitigation, including but not limited to additional mid-block alley turnouts, limitation on the number of lots to be served along a single alley segment, temporary points of access, and additional fire protection measures. 
5.  Alley intersections shall be perpendicular and at a twenty (20) degree angle or radial to the intersecting alley centerline for the full alley right-of-way width, and intersection pavement shall be of sufficient width and inside radius to accommodate waste collection and emergency vehicles. Intersections shall be three-way wherever possible, and four-way intersections shall be avoided. No alley intersection serving more than four directions shall be allowed.  
Section 6.2.3 - Easements 
A.  Minimum Width of Easements. The minimum width for City utility easements shall be twenty (20) feet or less as otherwise required by the City Engineer if adjacent to a public street and adequate area exists behind the back of the curb. The minimum width for City drainage easements shall be as required by the City Engineer. The width of easements for other utility providers, such as for gas, electric, telephone or cable television, shall be as required by that particular entity. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to determine appropriate easement widths required by other utility companies (also see Section 6.2.8, Utility Services). Wherever possible, easements shall be centered or along front or side lot lines rather than across the interior or rear of lots, particularly where no alleys will be provided behind the lots. 
B.  Drainage Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way or channel, there shall be provided a storm drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with such course and of such additional width as may be designated by the City Engineer, subject to determination according to proper engineering considerations. The required width shall conform to the requirements set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and/or the City. Parallel streets or parkways shall be required adjacent to certain portions of creek or drainageways to provide maintenance access and/or public access and visibility into public open space or recreation areas (see Section 6.2.11, Areas for Public Use, and Section 6.2.12, Protection of Drainage and Creek Areas). The number of lots that back or side onto creeks, drainageways, public parks and open spaces, and public school sites shall be severely limited, and possibly prohibited, such that public access, visibility, safety and security within these areas are maximized. Other utilities may be permitted within a drainage or floodway easement only if approved by the City Engineer and any other applicable entity requiring the drainage or floodway easement. 
C.  Easements and Dimensional Regulations. A lot's area shall be computed inclusive of all easements. However, there shall be a minimum buildable area, exclusive of required easements, buffer zones and setbacks for each lot. The minimum buildable area shall be an area one-half (½) of the required minimum lot size. If the City disputes the buildable area of any lot, the applicant shall submit verification in writing that the buildable area is adequate for the type of housing product (or nonresidential building) proposed for that lot. Final approval of the allowed buildable area for any lot shall be by the City. 
D.  Utility Easements. Where alleys are not provided in a residential subdivision, a minimum fifteen-foot wide utility easement shall be provided along the front of all lots, adjacent to and flush with the street right-of-way line for the potential placement of utility facilities. 
E.  Easements Established on Subdivision Plat. For new development, all necessary on-site easements shall be established on the subdivision plat and not by separate instrument, and they shall be labeled for the specific purpose, and to the specific entity if other than the City, for which they are being provided. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: a water, sanitary sewer or drainage easement, which is dedicated to the City for a water or sanitary sewer line or for a drainage structure; an access easement, which is dedicated to the public for unrestricted access purposes; a fire lane easement, which is dedicated to the City and its fire suppression and emergency medical service providers for access purposes; an electrical, gas or telephone easement, which is dedicated to the specific utility provider that requires the easement; and so on. 
F.  Visibility Easements. 
1.  Whenever an intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way occurs, a triangular visibility area shall be created. The visibility easement for each type of intersection shall be as follows: 
a.  Intersection of two major arterials: Forty (40) feet on each side; 
b.  Intersection of all other streets onto a major arterial: Twenty (20) feet on each side; 
2.  The maximum height of fences, walls, signs, and other similar fixed items shall be thirty (30) inches within the visibility easement. All landscaping (and any other fixed feature) within the triangular visibility area shall be designed to provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between thirty (30) inches and eight (8) feet. A limited number of single-trunked trees may be permitted in this area provided they are trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area. Landscaping, except grass and low ground cover, shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from the edge of any street pavement.  
Section 6.2.4 - Blocks 
A.  General Guidelines to Determine Length. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, setbacks and dimensions (if within the City's corporate limits); and 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic and for pedestrians or bicyclists traveling to a public park or school site or other facility within or close to the neighborhood. 
B.  Intersections. Intersecting streets, which determine the lengths and widths of blocks, shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross-traffic adequately, to provide adequate fire protection, and to conform to customary subdivision practices. 
1.  Maximum Length. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, the block lengths shall not exceed one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet in length. 
2.  Minimum Length. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, the blocks shall not be less than four hundred (400) feet in length. 
3.  Exceptions. In cases where physical barriers or property ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may be increased or decreased (through issuance of a waiver/suspension by the City Council with plat approval) to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety.  
Section 6.2.5 - Sidewalks 
A.  On Residential and Collector Streets. Pedestrian concrete walkways (sidewalks) not less than five (5) feet wide shall be required within a residential subdivision on both sides of residential and collector streets, and sidewalks not less than six (6) feet wide shall be provided within all nonresidential developments and along all perimeter arterials, for both residential and nonresidential developments, as set forth in the City of Marble Falls TCSS. Root barriers will be required underneath, and along with the construction of, all public sidewalks per the City's TCSS, particularly in locations where trees are (or will be) in close proximity to the sidewalk. Barrier-free ramps shall be constructed at all street intersections and at any other locations deemed appropriate by the City due to anticipated pedestrian travel patterns. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the street right-of-way, one (1) foot away from the right-of-way line, and at least five (5) feet away from the street curb. In certain instances, the City Council may, at its sole discretion, approve placement of the sidewalk adjacent or closer than five (5) feet to the curb provided that such placement benefits the general public by allowing more space for landscaping, such as for street trees, screening shrubs, and decorative walls and fences, and provided that the width is increased to a minimum of five (5) feet of sidewalk pavement or to such a width as may be needed in the interest of public safety. 
B.  On Perimeter Roadways or Arterials to Development. All sidewalks along a perimeter roadway or arterial are considered part of the overall development's required public improvements and shall be installed prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the City and prior to Final Plat approval, unless surety is provided, per Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions, of these regulations. In any event, a Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued for any lot within the subdivision until the required sidewalks are in place or appropriate surety is provided. The cost and provision of any perimeter sidewalks, such as along major thoroughfares, may be escrowed as a part of a developer's agreement, if approved by the City Council. The City has the right, but not the obligation, to refuse escrow and to require paving of the sidewalks if, in its sole opinion, immediate provision of the sidewalks is necessary for safe pedestrian circulation or if it would otherwise protect the public health, safety, convenience or welfare. 
C.  Fee in Lieu of Construction. When the subdivision requirements are waived in accordance with Section 11.4.8, Subdivision Waiver and Suspension, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may require the payment of a fee-in-lieu of construction of the sidewalk(s) to the City of Marble Falls Sidewalk Fund. Payments to will be calculated based on the linear feet of sidewalk waived as set out in Appendix C, Master Fee Schedule, of the City Code of Ordinances and be used for the sole purpose of equipping public streets within the City with sidewalks The fee in lieu of sidewalks shall be paid in full to the City prior to the recording of the Final Plat. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.C.1, 2, 5-21-2019)  
Section 6.2.6 - Lots 
A.  Conform to Zoning District Regulations. Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established Zoning District as provided in Article 2, Zoning Districts and Article 4, General Development Regulations, if located within the City's corporate limits. 
B.  Frontage on or Adjacent to Public Streets Required. Each lot on a subdivision plat shall have frontage onto or be adjacent to a dedicated, improved public street unless platted as an approved private street subdivision in accordance with this Article (see Subsection 6.2.1.B.10, Private Streets). Lot width and access shall conform to the provisions of applicable Zoning District as provided in Article 2, Zoning Districts and Article 4, General Development Regulations, (if within the City's limits), Comprehensive Plan, and any other applicable City code or ordinance. In the ETJ, single-family residential detached lots shall have a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet of frontage, and nonresidential lots shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of frontage, along a dedicated, improved street. 
C.  Irregular-Shaped Lots. Irregular-shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet lot width and frontage requirements of the appropriate zoning district (if within the City's limits) and shall provide a reasonable building pad without encroachment into front, side or rear yard setbacks or into any type of easement. Also, the rear width shall be sufficient to provide access for all necessary utilities, service providers and franchisees, including access for driveways and solid waste collection when alleys are present (minimum twenty-foot alley frontage). Triangular, severely elongated or tapered or "panhandle" lots shall be avoided, and the City reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its sole opinion, will not be suitable or desirable for the purpose intended, which is an obvious attempt to circumvent the purpose and intent of lot configuration or lot width minimums, or which is so oddly shaped as to create a hindrance to the logical lot layout of surrounding properties. 
D.  Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines will be at ninety (90) degree angles or radial to street right-of-way lines to the greatest extent possible unless it is not practical based on topography. The City reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its sole opinion, is shaped or oriented in such a fashion as to be unsuitable or undesirable for the purpose intended, or which is not attractively or appropriately oriented toward its street frontage. 
E.  Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where they may be essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials, as defined in Section 6.2.1, Streets, or to overcome a specific disadvantage or hardship imposed by topography or other factors. Where lots have double frontage, building setback lines shall be established for each street side, and rear yard screening shall be provided in accordance with Section 6.3.6, Retaining Wall Requirements, Construction Regulations, and Design Criteria. Residential lots shall not back onto any residential street or collector street within a residential area or neighborhood and shall not have more than one-half (½) of its perimeter boundaries along streets.  
Section 6.2.7 - Building Lines 
Generally. For property that is not subject to the City's zoning regulations, such as property that lies within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the minimum front building line (for a residential or nonresidential lot) shall be twenty-five (25) feet unless a different setback is specified by these regulations.  
Section 6.2.8 - Utility Services 
A.  Utility Metering for Single-Family or Duplex Units. The metering for utilities such as water, gas and electricity shall be located on not more than two (2) units for single-family or duplex to be served, not grouped together in a centralized location(s), such as "gang-box" style metering stations, which shall not be permitted. 
B.  Location of Utility Easements. The locations, widths and configurations of easements for any utility service provider other than the City of Marble Falls shall be determined, approved and acquired (if necessary) by the applicable utility service provider. 
C.  Subject to Inspection. All utility installations shall be subject to inspection by the City and shall be in conformance with any applicable City design standards related to their placement within public rights-of-way within easements, or elsewhere in the City (including on private property).  
Section 6.2.9 - Water and Wastewater Facility Design 
A.  Connection to City's Water System Required. All new subdivisions shall be connected with the City's water system and shall be capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including fire protection. An alternative source of water may be used for irrigation purposes only and for a nonresidential use only (e.g., a public park, a public school, etc.), subject to City approval and provided that all appropriate permits are procured from the City, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and any other applicable agency(s). Such alternative water source may not be used for potable (i.e., drinking) water supply under any circumstances. The design and construction of water system improvements and alternative water sources shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance with applicable regulations of the TCEQ. 
2.  Design and construction of water service from the City shall be in accordance with the standards in the City's TCSS manual, and in accordance with TCEQ standards, whichever is the most stringent requirement. 
3.  Design and construction of a fire protection and suppression system shall be in accordance with the standards in the TCSS manual, and in accordance with the City's fire department and fire code. 
B.  Connection to City's Wastewater Collection and Treatment System Required. All new subdivisions shall be served by the City's wastewater collection and treatment system. The design and construction of the wastewater system improvements shall be in accordance with the standards in the City's TCSS manual, and in accordance with TCEQ standards whichever is the most stringent requirement. If a sanitary sewer service is not available, the City shall still require installation of sewer lines in accordance with City standards. All lines shall be capped for future connection when service is available. 
C.  Subdivider Responsibilities. The subdivider shall be responsible for: 
1.  Phasing of development or improvements in order to maintain adequate water and wastewater services; 
2.  Extensions of utility lines (including any necessary on-site and off-site lines) to connect to existing utility services; 
3.  Providing and/or procuring all necessary easements for the utilities (whether on-site or off-site); 
4.  Providing proof to the City of adequate water and wastewater service; 
5.  Providing provisions for future expansion of the utilities if such will be needed to serve future developments, subject to the City's oversize participation policies, if applicable; 
6.  Providing all operations and maintenance of the utilities, or providing proof that a separate entity will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of the utilities; 
7.  Providing all fiscal security required for the construction of the utilities; 
8.  Obtaining approvals from the applicable utility providers if other than the City; 
9.  Complying with all requirements of the utility providers, including the City; and 
10.  Providing plans and specifications for alternative wastewater disposal systems including but not limited to grinder pumps as required by the TCSS manual. 
D.  Extensions Required Along Adjacent Streets or Thoroughfares. Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the entire frontage of the subdivision adjacent to a street or thoroughfare. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities shall be accomplished in such a manner as to allow future connections to said utilities by new subdivisions. If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision due to physical constraints, the City Council may waive the requirement for adjacent utility line construction at the time of Preliminary Plat approval and prior to construction of the subdivision. 
E.  Compliance with State Regulations Required. Installation, operations and maintenance of utilities not specifically referenced herein shall comply with regulations of the TCEQ and with any other applicable state rules and regulations, whichever is the most stringent requirement. 
F.  Subdivider Responsible for Costs. The subdivider shall pay all design, legal, engineering, material, construction and installation costs of all improvements required by these regulations unless otherwise provided in this Section. In the event a subdivider desires the extension of water or sewer lines to serve the subdivision, the subdivision shall bear the entire design, engineering, material, easement, and construction and installation costs of all adjacent border, off-site improvements. The City shall specify the size of all lines. 
G.  Subject to Inspection by City. The construction of water and sewer lines in accordance with City plans and specifications will be installed by a contractor of the subdivider's choice. All such construction shall be subject to inspection by the City and no portion of any line installed in any excavation shall be covered unless and until the construction of such portion shall have been inspected by the City. 
H.  Requirements Prior to Connecting to or Extending Abutting Lines. Where an existing water or sewer line lies within or abuts the subdivision, the subdivider shall make no connections to or extensions of such existing lines without first paying to the City the cost of the size line equal length to that portion of such existing line which lies within or abuts the subdivision which would be required to serve the subdivision. This cost shall be determined by the City. 
I.  On-Site Waste Disposal. Subdivisions less than thirty (30) acres in area containing residential lots three (3) acres in size or larger may utilize on-site waste disposal systems if TCEQ and county health requirements are met.  
Section 6.2.10 - Stormwater Collection and Conveyance Systems 
A.  Required Permits and Authorizations. Unless otherwise exempt under Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution, of the City's Code, all property owners subject to these land use regulations shall obtain all permits or authorizations required by Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution, of the City's Code. 
B.  System Design Requirements. Drainage improvements shall be designed so as to not cause damage to other property, shall accommodate runoff from the upstream drainage area in its anticipated maximum "build-out" condition, and shall be designed in accordance with the most recently adopted drainage criteria manual to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The City may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, or the construction of off-site drainage improvements in order to mitigate the impact of the proposed development. No stormwater collection system shall be constructed unless it is designed in accordance with the drainage criteria manual by a licensed professional engineer, and unless it is reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. All plans submitted to the City shall include a layout of the drainage system together with supporting calculations for the design of the system. 
C.  Conform to NPS Technical Manual. All erosion and sedimentation controls shall conform to the NPS Technical Manual, as amended, a copy of which is on file at the City. 
D.  Alterations to Existing Drainageways. No person, individual, partnership, firm or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, reclaim, reroute or change the course or location of any existing ditch, channel, stream or drainageway without first obtaining written permission of the City Engineer and any other applicable agency (such as FEMA or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) having jurisdiction. The City Engineer may, at his or her discretion, require preparation and submission of a FEMA or flood study for a proposed development if there are concerns regarding storm drainage on the subject property or upstream or downstream from the subject property. The costs of such study, if required, shall be borne by the developer. 
E.  Impact on the Design of Streets, Lots, and Building Lines. In order to help reduce storm water runoff, and resulting erosion, sedimentation and conveyance of nonpoint source pollutants, the layout of the street network, lots and building sites shall, to the greatest extent possible, be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of cut and fill on slopes in order to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction. 
F.  Concentrated Surface Cross-Street Flow. No concentrated surface cross-street flow (i.e., perpendicular to traffic flow) of storm water runoff shall be permitted unless approved by the City Engineer. When and if such drainage flow is allowed, it must be across a concrete street (i.e., valley gutter) and as approved by the City Engineer. 
G.  Design of Storm Water Treatment Facilities. All storm water treatment facilities shall be designed using materials and techniques as established in the City's NPS Technical Manual or as may be required by the City Engineer.  
Section 6.2.11 - Areas for Public Use 
Generally. The applicant shall give consideration to suitable and adequate sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other areas for public use or service so as to conform to the recommendations contained in the City's Comprehensive Plan; Park and Open Space Plan; and other applicable plans. Any provision for schools, parks or other public facilities shall be indicated on the Preliminary and Final Plats and shall be subject to approval by City Council.  
Section 6.2.12 - Protection of Drainage and Creek Areas 
A.  Required. All creeks and drainage areas shall be preserved and protected in their natural condition wherever possible unless significant storm drainage improvements are required by the City in these areas. All development adjacent to creeks and drainage areas shall be in accordance with the City's TCSS manual, and with any other City policies or ordinances related to aesthetics or public access or enjoyment of creeks and waterways. 
B.  Definitions and Methodology for Determining the Floodway Management Area (FMA). The definitions for "floodway" and "floodway fringe" shall correspond to those set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the concept of a floodway is used as a tool to assist the local community in the aspect of flood plain management. Under this concept, the area of the 100-year flood is divided into a floodway and floodway fringe. The floodway is the channel of a stream plus any adjacent flood plain areas that must be kept free of encroachment in order that the 100-year flood may be carried without substantial increases in flood heights as defined by FEMA. The area between the floodway and boundary of the 100-year flood is termed the floodway fringe. The floodway fringe is the area which can be used for development by means of fill according to FEMA and City engineering criteria. 
C.  Areas Where an FMA is Required. Lake Marble Falls, Whitman Creek and Backbone Creek and their related tributaries and streams and all other drainage areas or regulated floodways as referenced on the applicable floodway and flood boundary map (flood insurance rate map, or FIRM) shall be included in the FMA. If FEMA does not specify a floodway zone in any of the creeks or their tributaries, it shall be the developer's responsibility to establish and identify the FMA. The determination shall be made by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the City Engineer. Where improvements to a drainage area are required by other ordinances of the City for the purpose of safety or other reasons related to drainage, those ordinances shall also be observed. The FMA is intended to apply to a creek or channel which is to remain open or in its natural condition unless otherwise approved by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the full City Council. The creek shall remain in its natural state unless improvements are permitted or required by the City due to the pending development of properties adjacent to or upstream of the required improvements. 
D.  Ownership and Maintenance of the FMA. The area determined to be the FMA shall be designated on the Preliminary Plat. Approximate locations shall be shown on zoning change requests—accurate locations of the FMA shall be established on the Preliminary Plat and prior to site construction. At the City's option, the FMA shall be protected by one of the following methods: 
1.  Dedication to the City of Marble Falls; or 
2.  Easement(s). Creeks or drainageways on tracts which have private maintenance provisions, other than single- or two-family platted lots, can be designated as the FMAs by an easement to the City on the Preliminary Plat (with the appropriate plat language, as required by the City). Subdivisions with platted single-family or two-family lots may designate the FMA by easement provided there are adequate maintenance provisions (such as by a mandatory homeowner's association), but no lots or portions of lots may be platted in the easement unless specifically allowed by the City. The area designated as FMA may be identified by a tract number; or 
3.  Certain recreational uses normally associated with or adjacent to flood prone areas (no structures allowed in the FMA), such as golf courses or certain types of parks. The uses allowed shall be in conformance with these regulations and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
E.  Clearing of Drainageway Required. Prior to acceptance of any drainageway as an FMA by the City, the area shall be cleared of all debris and brush (except for mature trees) and placed in a maintainable state. Floodway management areas dedicated to the City shall be left in a natural state except those areas designated for active recreational purposes and unless storm drainage requirements do not permit this to occur. 
F.  Design Criteria. The following design criteria shall be required for development adjacent to the FMA: 
1.  Adequate access shall be provided to and along the FMA for public and/or private maintenance. An unobstructed area a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide with a maximum 5:1 slope (five (5) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical), the length of the floodway shall be provided adjacent to or within the FMA. On the opposite side of the drainage area, an unobstructed area having a minimum width of five (5) feet shall be provided. 
2.  Lots in a single-family, Planned Development District single-family, or duplex residential zoning district shall not be platted within the FMA, and no more than ten (10) percent of the linear length of the FMA (on each side) shall be allowed to have lots backing or siding onto it. If lots back or side onto an FMA, at least two (2) reasonable points of access to the FMA, each a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, shall be provided. Streets, alleys and open-ended cul-de-sacs may qualify as access points if designed such that they are navigable by maintenance vehicles (e.g., alleys must be twenty-foot width). All areas of the FMA shall be accessible from the access points and shall be visible from access points. Lots used for multifamily dwellings may be platted in the FMA if the FMA is identified as an easement and is maintained as open space for use by the residents and provided that access to the FMA is possible by City maintenance vehicles, should that need arise. If the FMA is to be public park land, then adequate public access and good public visibility shall also be provided to all portions of it. 
3.  Public streets may be approved in the FMA by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council (if they conform to applicable engineering standards). 
4.  Linear public streets may be required to be constructed adjacent to some (or all) portions of the FMA to allow access for maintenance or recreational opportunities, and/or to allow increased visibility into creek areas for public safety and security purposes. 
5.  Alternate designs to facilitate equal or better access may be permitted if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
G.  Altered Drainage Areas. Drainage areas which have been altered and are not in a natural condition can be exempted from an FMA and this Section at the discretion of the City Council and upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.  
DIVISION 6.3 - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED BY THE CITY 
 
Section 6.3.1 - General Requirements of Improvements Required by the City 
A.  Purpose. The requirements of this Article as set forth below are designed and intended to ensure that, for all subdivisions of land within the scope of this Article, all improvements as required herein are installed properly and: 
1.  The City can provide for the orderly and economical extension of public facilities and services; 
2.  All purchasers of property within the subdivision shall have a usable, buildable parcel of land; and 
3.  All required improvements are constructed in accordance with City standards. 
B.  Adequate Public Facilities Policy. The land to be divided or developed must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services. No subdivision shall be approved unless and until adequate public facilities exist or provision has been made for water facilities, wastewater facilities, drainage facilities, electricity and street facilities which are necessary to serve the development proposed, whether or not such facilities are to be located within the property being platted or off-site and should provide connectivity of streets and utilities to abutting and adjacent property. This policy may be defined further and supplemented by other ordinances adopted by the City. 
C.  Condition of Approval to Bear Costs. If the City requires as a condition of approval for a property development project that the developer bear a portion of the costs of municipal infrastructure improvements by the making of dedications, the payment of fees, or the payment of construction costs, the developer's portion of the costs may not exceed the amount required for infrastructure improvements that are roughly proportionate to the proposed development as approved by a professional engineer who holds a license issued under Chapter 1001, Occupations Code, and is retained by the City. The cost to retain the engineer to make such determination of proportionality shall be the applicant's responsibility. 
D.  Appeals. The applicant may dispute the determination made by the engineer retained by the City and may submit a written appeal to the City Council within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the determination of the engineer. At the City Council meeting, the applicant may present evidence and testimony under procedures adopted by the City Council. After hearing any testimony and reviewing the evidence, the City Council shall make the applicable determination within 30 calendar days following the final submission of any testimony or evidence by the applicant. 
E.  Right to Collect Impact Fees. This Section does not diminish the City's authority or modify the procedures regarding impact fees as adopted by the City in accordance with Chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
F.  Developer Participation Agreements. The City may negotiate and execute an agreement in accordance with Local Gov't Code Section 212.071 with a developer of a subdivision or owner or developer of any land within the City, for the purpose of constructing public improvements, not including a building. The public improvements may be related to the development itself and/or to the construction of improvements with increased capacity above the capacity required for the development in anticipation of additional and future development in the area. 
G.  City Cost Participation. The developer shall construct the improvements and the City shall participate in the cost of construction of the improvements either as a lump sum or as a percentage of the total actual costs not attributable or necessitated by the development. The contract terms shall include the requirements as provided for in Subchapter C of Section 212.071 et. seq. of the Texas Local Government Code, Developer Participation in Contract for Public Improvements, and as it may be subsequently amended from time to time. 
H.  Public Improvements Required. Public improvements that are required by the City of Marble Falls for the acceptance of a subdivision by the City shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Water and wastewater facilities; 
2.  Storm water drainage, collection and conveyance facilities; 
3.  Water quality, erosion and sedimentation controls; 
4.  Streets; 
5.  Street lights; 
6.  Street signs; 
7.  Alleys; 
8.  Sidewalks, including barrier-free ramps at street intersections and other appropriate locations; 
9.  Screening and/or retaining walls; 
10.  Traffic control devices required as part of the project; and 
11.  Appurtenances to the above, and any other public facilities required as part of the proposed subdivision. 
I.  Compliance with Design Standards and Regulations. All aspects of the design and implementation of public improvements shall comply with the City's current design standards and any other applicable City codes and ordinances, including preparation and submittal of Construction Plans and construction inspection. The construction of all of the improvements required in these regulations shall conform to the latest edition of the City's TCSS, as may be amended, and to any other applicable City standards. 
J.  Changes or Amendments to the TCSS and Other Construction or Design Documents. The Technical Construction Standards and Specifications (TCSS) will, from time to time, require revisions and updates to allow for changing construction technology. When changes are required, the TCSS may be amended by separate ordinance. It is the applicant's responsibility to be aware of, and to conform with, all TCSS requirements (including amendments) that are in place as of the time a complete development application for a Preliminary Plat (including required Construction Plans) is received by the City.  
Section 6.3.2 - Monuments 
A.  Generally. In all subdivisions and additions, monuments shall be established at the corner of each block in the subdivision consisting of an iron rod or pipe not less than three-quarters (¾) inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches deep, when possible, and set flush with the top of the ground. Lot corner monuments shall be placed at all lot corners except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron rods or pipes of a diameter of not less than one-half (½) inch and eighteen (18) inches deep, when possible, and set flush with the top of the ground. In addition, curve point markers shall be established of the same specifications as lot corners. Each block corner monument shall include a cap with the surveyor's name and registration number attached to it. All block and lot corners shall be installed prior to the final acceptance of the subdivision by the City and prior to filing the plat at the County. All survey work around the boundary area, as well as within the subdivision, shall have an error of closure of one (1) in seven thousand five hundred (7,500) or less. 
B.  Concrete Monuments. A subdivision shall have at least two (2) concrete monuments set by the surveyor, if not already existing, for two (2) corners of the subdivision, and such concrete monuments shall be located at opposite ends (or at widely separated corners) of the subdivision and clearly shown on the Final Plat prior to filing at the county. The Final Plat shall also show clear ties to existing concrete monuments in the vicinity of the subdivision. The design and installation of concrete monuments shall be in accordance with the City's TCSS.  
Section 6.3.3 - Street Lights 
All street lighting shall be in conformance with the City's TCSS, and any other applicable City codes.  
Section 6.3.4 - Street Names and Signs 
A.  Approval Required. Street names must be submitted to the City for review and approval in accordance with the City's guidelines for the naming of streets. The City shall forward all proposed street names to others for review, including the U.S. Postal Service, and any other applicable emergency service providers. Proposed street names shall be submitted for review along with (and as a part of) the Construction Plat and shall become fixed at the time of approval of the Final Plat. On the Final Plat, street names shall not be changed from those that were approved on the Preliminary Plat unless special circumstances have caused the major realignment of streets or a proposed street name(s) is discovered to have already been used elsewhere in the City (or some other similar eventuality). If additional street names are needed for the Final Plat, then they must be submitted for review and approval by the City, the U.S. Postal Service, and applicable emergency service providers, including 911 dispatch, along with the Final Plat application. A fee may be established by the City for the changing of street names after approval of the Preliminary Plat. 
B.  Names of Corporations or Business Prohibited. The names of corporations or businesses shall not be used as street names, unless approved by the City Council. The City will maintain a list of existing street names (and "reserved" street names that have been approved on a Preliminary Plat) and will update the list as new streets are platted. 
C.  Duplication Prohibited. New street names shall not duplicate existing street names either literally or in a subtle manner (for example, Smith Street vs. Smythe Street; Oak Drive vs. Oak Place vs. Oak Court vs. Oak Circle; Cascade Drive vs. Cascading Drive); shall not be so similar as to cause confusion between names (for example, Lakeside Drive vs. Lake Side Drive vs. Lake Siding Drive); and shall not sound like existing street names when spoken (for example, Oak Drive vs. Doak Drive vs. Cloak Drive; Lantern Way vs. Land Tern Way). 
D.  Consistent Naming of Extended Streets. New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Streets crossing thoroughfares or other roadways shall bear the same name on both sides of the thoroughfare, wherever practical, unless otherwise approved by City Council. 
E.  Responsibility of Cost. The property owner shall provide payment for street name signs for the development (two (2) signs for four-way intersections, and one (1) sign for three-way intersections). The cost of each street name sign installation shall include the cost of the sign assembly, pole and all costs associated with installation. Payment by the property owner will be due prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the City. The City shall order and install the street signs after payment is received by the City for the cost of the signs. 
F.  Design Compliance Required. Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the City's guidelines before issuance of a Building Permit for any structure on the streets approved within the subdivision.  
Section 6.3.5 - Street and Alley Improvements 
A.  Required by Developer. All on-site, such as internal, streets and alleys shall be constructed by the developer at the developer's expense, unless otherwise allowed by this Article. If the subdivision is adjacent to a planned or future or substandard arterial or collector street, as shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan, and derives access, whether direct or indirect, from said roadway, then the developer shall be required to design and construct a reasonable portion of the roadway as well as any required median openings and left turn lanes needed to serve their subdivision (see Section 6.3.9, Improvements to Adjacent (Perimeter) Streets and Utilities). The City Council may, at its option, accept escrow funds in lieu of immediate roadway construction if the subdivision derives principal access from another improved roadway and if delaying construction or improvement of the road will not harm or otherwise inconvenience neighboring property owners or the general public. 
B.  Design Requirements. All streets and alleys shall be constructed per the specifications in the City's TCSS. 
1.  The minimum street and alley paving standards for which the construction shall be made by the developer are shown in the TCSS. 
2.  In addition to the above-mentioned minimum standards, barrier-free ramps for physically challenged persons shall be constructed at all street corners, driveway approaches, appropriate mid-block crosswalks, and in locations where accessible parking spaces are provided. All barrier-free ramps and other accessibility considerations shall comply with Section 228 of the Highway Safety Act, as currently amended, and with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended. 
3.  All signs and barricades shall be in conformity with the TCSS, with ADA standards, and with specifications for uniform traffic control devices, as adopted by the City, by Burnet or Blanco County, by the Texas Department of Transportation, and by the Texas Department of Public Safety, as applicable. 
C.  Driveway Access. Driveway access and cuts shall be in conformance with Article 7 of these regulations and the City's TCSS.  
Section 6.3.6 - Retaining Wall Requirements, Construction Regulations, and Design Criteria 
A.  Retaining Wall Requirements. In general, the use of retaining walls shall be minimized, wherever possible, through minimal and balanced cut and fill on property. When property within or directly adjacent to a subdivision contains changes in elevation exceeding two and one-half (2½) feet and the slope exceeds one (1) unit vertical in two (2) units horizontal, a retaining wall shall be required at the locations specified herein prior to the acceptance of the subdivision: 
1.  Location A. The grade change roughly follows a side or rear lot line. 
2.  Location B. The grade change is adjacent to a proposed building site boundary. 
3.  Location C. The grade change is adjacent to a water course or drainage easement. 
B.  Retaining Wall Design and Construction. All retaining wall design and construction shall be in compliance with the provisions of the building code and the TCSS of the City of Marble Falls and shall be approved by the City Engineer. 
C.  Retaining Wall Maintenance. Retaining walls shall be maintained by the owner of the property where such retaining wall is located. 
D.  Retaining Wall Prohibited within Utility or Drainage Easement. Retaining walls shall not be constructed within any portion of a utility or drainage easement, unless approved by the City Engineer.  
Section 6.3.7 - Screening and Landscaping Construction Regulations, Requirements, and Design Criteria 
A.  Screening. 
1.  Generally. Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear and/or side yards of single-family or two-family residential lots are adjacent to an arterial thoroughfare (greater than sixty (60) feet in right-of-way width on the Thoroughfare Plan); a four (4) lane collector street; are separated from a thoroughfare by an alley; or back up to a collector or residential street (which is not allowed unless specifically approved by City Council), the developer shall provide, at his or her sole expense, a minimum six-foot tall masonry screening wall (also see Subsection 6.3.7.A.7 below), or some other alternative form of screening, if approved by City Council, according to the following alternatives and standards. All screening shall be adjacent to the right-of-way or property line and fully located on the private lot(s), including columns and decorative features. All forms of screening shall conform to the requirements of City ordinances and policies that govern sight distance for traffic safety. Any required screening device that is wholly or partially destroyed or damaged shall be replaced or repaired with the same materials and shall be finished such that its appearance is restored to how it was before being destroyed or damaged. 
2.  Screening Alternatives. Screening shall be provided in accordance with, and shall be constructed to, standards and criteria as set forth in the City's TCSS and other related City code(s) and policy(s). An alternative form of screening, in lieu of the six- to eight-foot tall masonry wall, may be approved by City Council on a landscaping/screening wall plan submitted with the Construction Plans. Such possible alternatives may include, but may not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Living/landscaped screen with decorative metal (e.g., wrought iron) fence sections with masonry columns; 
b.  A combination of berms and living/landscaped screening, either with or without a decorative metal or "WoodCrete" type of fence with masonry columns; 
c.  A combination of berms, decorative masonry retaining walls (no taller than six (6) feet in height where facing or visible to a public street) and living/landscaped screening, either with or without a decorative metal or "WoodCrete" type of fence with masonry columns; or 
d.  Some other creative screening alternative may be approved if it meets the spirit and intent of this Section, if it is demonstrated to be long-lasting and generally maintenance-free, and if the City Council finds it to be in the public interest to approve the alternative screening device. 
e.  Any required screening device shall be, or shall achieve, at least six (6) feet in height and at least ninety (90) percent opacity within three (3) years of initial installation/planting. Any landscaping used to achieve the purpose of required screening shall be equipped with an underground irrigation system with appropriate double-check valve(s), automatic controller(s), and automatic moisture- and freeze-sensors. Trees used for overstory screening shall be on a separate bubbler irrigation system that can be programmed to provide deep-watering of trees at intervals that may differ from the rest of the irrigation system. 
f.  The use of wood or other privacy fences immediately behind or abutting an alternative screening device that utilizes living screening elements (i.e., landscaping), berms, retaining walls and/or open (i.e., non-opaque) fence sections shall not be permitted due to the creation of a "no man's land" and subsequent maintenance nuisance in the area between the two (2) devices/fences, and due to the detrimental visual appearance of this type of arrangement. 
g.  The use of any alternative form of screening in lieu of the masonry wall, particularly a device utilizing landscaping, shall require formation of a property/homeowners' association in accordance with Section 6.3.1, General Requirements of Improvements Required by the City. 
3.  Screening Maintenance Easement. A wall/screening maintenance easement at least five (5) feet in width shall be dedicated to a property owners association on the private lot side and adjacent to the entire length of the screening wall or device. 
4.  Installation Required. The screening wall/device shall be installed prior to approval of the Final Plat and prior to final acceptance of the subdivision (or appropriate surety provided, per Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions). Landscape materials may be installed after the subdivision is accepted, upon approval of the City Manager (or designee), but in no case later than six (6) months following acceptance of the subdivision. Failure to properly install all components of a required screening wall or device within the allowed time frame, and without the appropriate developer's agreement and surety, shall constitute a violation of these regulations and the developer may be subject to a penalty pursuant to Article 13, Enforcement, of these regulations. 
5.  Landscaping Requirements. All plants, such as trees, shrubs and ground covers, shall be living and in sound, healthy, vigorous and growing condition, and they shall be of a size, fullness and height that is customary for their container or ball size, as per the latest edition of the "American Standard for Nursery Stock", by the American Association of Nurserymen, as may be amended and the City's approved tree list. 
6.  Hardscaping Requirements. All masonry, wrought iron, steel or aluminum screening wall or fence plans and details must be designed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, and must be approved by the City Engineer. Masonry walls shall be in accordance with the City's design standards, and the use of "ThinWall" type of construction (i.e., that does not conform with the TCSS) shall be prohibited due to problems with inferior strength and the higher cost of long-term maintenance. Decorative metal fencing shall be solid stock, not tubular, and shall have masonry columns at a minimum spacing of forty (40) feet on center unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer and City Council. 
7.  The height of required screening devices, including spans between columns, shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and shall be no more than eight (8) feet tall. Decorative columns, pilasters, stone caps, sculptural elements, and other similar features may exceed the maximum eight-foot height by up to two (2) feet for a total maximum height of ten (10) feet for these features, provided that such taller elements comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the total wall length in elevation view. Features that are taller than ten (10) feet in height shall require City Council approval on the landscaping/screening plans submitted with the Construction Plans. 
8.  Screening Prohibited Within Utility or Drainage Easements. Screening fences, walls and devices shall not be constructed within any portion of a utility or drainage easement unless specifically authorized by the City and by any other applicable utility provider(s). 
B.  Entryway Features. 
1.  Generally. Subdivisions may provide a low maintenance landscaped entryway feature at access points from streets and thoroughfares into the subdivision. The entryway feature shall be placed on private property and within an easement identified for such use (limited portions of the feature or landscaping may be placed within the right-of-way, but only with City Council approval on the landscaping/screening plans) and shall observe all sight visibility requirements. Most of the feature or landscaping shall be located on private property so that long-term maintenance responsibility will be borne by the property owner or an approved homeowners association (see Section 6.3.1, General Requirements of Improvements Required by the City). Entryway features that are located mostly or entirely within City right-of-way shall only be allowed with City Council approval. Prior to City Council approval, the City may require the applicant to execute an agreement with the City that relieves the City of maintenance responsibility and that indemnifies and holds the City harmless for damage or injury incurred by or in conjunction with such features in the right-of-way. 
2.  Design Requirements. 
a.  The entryway feature shall include low maintenance, living landscaped materials as approved by the City Council. The design of the entryway feature shall also include an automatic underground irrigation system that is equipped with moisture- and freeze-sensors, and may also include subdivision identification, such as signage located on the wall. All plants shall be living and in a sound, healthy, vigorous and growing condition, and they shall be of a size, fullness and height that is customary for their container or ball size, as per the latest edition of the "American Standard for Nursery Stock", by the American Association of Nurserymen, and the City approved tree list as may be amended. Any walls or structures used in the entryway feature must conform to the City's regulations pertaining to maximum height within the front yard of residential lots (see Section 4.6.4 of these regulations) wherever the adjacent lot sides onto the arterial street and the wall will be located within the front yard setback area. 
b.  The design of the entryway shall be in accordance with design policies in the City's TCSS. The design of the entry shall be reflected on the landscape, screening and irrigation plans submitted along with the Construction Plans and the Preliminary Plat and shall be approved by the City Council. 
3.  Applicant Responsibility. The maintenance of the entryway shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a period of at least two (2) years or until Building Permits have been issued for eighty (80) percent of the lots in the subdivision, whichever date is later. Following that period of time, maintenance responsibility shall be borne by the private property owner(s) upon whose lot(s) the entryway feature is located, or by an approved homeowners' association (see Section 6.3.1, General Requirements of Improvements Required by the City). If, at some point in time, the maintenance responsibility shifts to the City, the City shall have the right to upgrade, reduce or eliminate entirely, at its sole option, the landscaping and other amenities in order to simplify or minimize the amount of time, effort and cost that maintenance of the entryway will require. 
C.  Landscaping. All landscaping shall be in conformance with Article 9 of these regulations, as amended. 
D.  Signage. All signage shall be in conformance with Chapter 20 of the City Code, as amended.  
Section 6.3.8 - Water and Wastewater Requirements 
A.  Conformance with Regulations. The installation of all water and wastewater lines shall be in conformance with Section 6.2.8, Utility Services. 
B.  Adequate Provision Required. No Final Plat shall be approved for any subdivision within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction until the applicant has made adequate provision for a water system and a sanitary sewer system of sufficient capacity to adequately provide service to all tracts and lots within the area to be subdivided. The design and construction of the water system and of the sanitary sewer system to serve the subdivision shall be in conformance with the City's master plans for water and wastewater facilities and with the TCSS and shall be approved by the City Engineer (also see Section 6.2.8, Utility Services). 
C.  Sufficient Sizing and Outlets Required. Water system with mains of sufficient size and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate and safe domestic water supply and to furnish fire protection to all lots shall be provided. Water lines shall extend to the property line in order to allow future connections into adjacent undeveloped property, and a box for the water meter(s) for each lot shall be installed either in the right-of-way or immediately adjacent to the right-of-way in a water meter easement. 
D.  Utility Connection Available at Property Line. Services for utilities shall be made available to the property line of each lot in such a manner as will minimize the necessity for disturbing the street pavement and drainage structures when connections are made. 
E.  Adequate Fire Protection. Fire protection shall be provided in accordance with Section 6.2.8, Utility Services, with the City's TCSS manual, and with any other City policy or ordinance pertaining to fire protection or suppression. The Fire Chief, or designee, shall have the authority to approve the locations and placement of all fire hydrants and fire lanes and may, at his or her discretion, modify fire hydrant spacing or fire lane placement based upon special design or distance circumstances. All required fire lanes shall be shown as "fire lane easements" on the Preliminary and Final Plats, along with the applicable fire lane language block. Vertical construction (i.e., any building construction above foundation/slab level) shall not commence until all required fire lanes are properly installed and accepted by the City, nor until all fire hydrants have been installed, inspected, tested and accepted by the City.  
Section 6.3.9 - Improvement of Adjacent (Perimeter) Streets and Utilities 
A.  Construction Required. When a proposed subdivision, whether residential or nonresidential, abuts on one (1) or both sides of an existing substandard street, or on a planned or future roadway as shown on the current Thoroughfare Plan, the developer shall be required to improve or construct the street according to the developer's proportionate share of the substandard road or the new road as is necessary to accommodate the new development, including appurtenant sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, storm drainage structures, screening and landscaping, median openings and/or left turn lanes (if a divided thoroughfare), water quality or erosion controls, and other utilities as defined in Article 14, Definitions and Interpretation, to bring the same up to City standards, or to construct a new road in accordance with current street construction standards of the City as determined by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 6.3.1, General Requirements of Improvements Required by the City. 
B.  Calculating Proportionate Share. The developer's proportionate share of improvements to a substandard perimeter road shall be determined in accordance with Section 6.3.1, General Requirements of Improvements Required by the City. Design and construction of the roadway shall be in accordance with the City's Thoroughfare Plan (with respect to right-of-way width and general location), the TCSS manual, and with any other applicable City codes and ordinances. Depending upon the specific roadway in question, the Traffic Impact Analysis results and the determination by the City Engineer, any oversizing shall be borne by the City, the county, and the state or by some other entity. Any participation in the cost of oversizing of the improvement by the City shall be in accordance with Section 6.3.1, General Requirements of Improvements Required by the City. The City Council may, at its option, accept escrow funds in lieu of immediate roadway construction if the subdivision derives principal access from another improved roadway and if delaying construction and improvement of the road will not harm or otherwise inconvenience neighboring property owners or the general public. 
C.  Responsibility for Bridges. The developer's share for major bridges and similar region-serving drainage structures and for railroad crossings (including the appurtenant roadway paving, sidewalks/ pedestrian pathways, abutments, safety railings and cross-arms, median areas, etc.) shall be in accordance with the City of Marble Falls policies and ordinances for the construction of such facilities. 
D.  Streets Crossing Utility Easements. Streets which dead-end at power lines or similar rights-of-way or easements, and which are intended for future extension across these rights-of-way or easements, shall be constructed in the right-of-way or easement for half the distance across the right-of-way or easement, and shall be further restricted as set forth in Section 6.2.1, Streets. As with any other dead-end street, a note shall be placed on the Final Plat clearly labeling the dead-end streets that will, at some point, be extended across the power line easement (or right-of-way), and signage shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as on the barricade, also stating that the street will be extended in the future. Signage size and lettering shall be large enough to be legible by a person with normal vision at a distance of twenty (20) feet.  
Section 6.3.10 - Stormwater and Water Quality Controls 
A.  Generally. An adequate storm sewer system, consisting of inlets, pipes and other underground structures with approved outlets, as outlined in Drainage Criteria Manual, shall be designed where runoff of storm water and the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions or inadvertent storm water retention, such as standing or pooling water, as established by the City Engineer, will not be considered for development until adequate drainage has been provided. In no case shall storm water drainage be diverted artificially to adjacent properties or across roadways. No storm water drainage will be permitted to flow from one lot or piece of property onto another under separate ownership unless such drainage does not harm, damage, or otherwise pose an inconvenience to the other properties, and is specifically approved by the City Engineer, and the necessary off-site drainage easement is procured on the affected property(s). 
B.  Design Criteria. The criteria for use in designing water quality control structures, and other best management practices (BMPs) for nonpoint source pollution control shall conform to Section 6.2.10, Stormwater Collection and Conveyance Systems, of these regulations, and Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution, of the City's Code. 
C.  Developer Responsibility. The developer shall ensure that all drainage improvements within public easements or rights-of-way are functioning properly prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. The developer shall be responsible for removing any significant build-up of sediment or debris from drainage improvements, with the exception of backlot and sidelot drainage swales, at the eleventh month of the second year for the required two-year maintenance bond for the applicable facilities. The City shall inspect the improvements to determine any maintenance or correction of deficiencies at the conclusion of this period. 
D.  Maintenance and Inspection. Water quality control structures, retention and detention facilities, and BMPs for nonpoint source pollution control permitted by the City under Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution, of the City's Code, shall be maintained and inspected in accordance with Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution, and any permits or authorizations issued thereunder.  
DIVISION 6.4 - REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Section 6.4.1 - Withholding City Services and Improvements until Acceptance 
The City hereby defines its policy to be that the City will withhold all City services and improvements of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of all other City services from any subdivision or property until all of the street, utility, storm drainage and other public improvements, as well as lot improvements such as retaining walls and grading and installation of improvements required for proper lot drainage and prevention of soil erosion on the individual residential lots, are properly constructed according to the approved Construction Plans and to City standards, and until such public improvements are dedicated to and accepted by the City.  
Section 6.4.2 - Guarantee of Public Improvements 
A.  Property Owner's Guarantee. Before approving the Final Plat of a subdivision located all or partially within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the City Council must be satisfied that all required public improvements have been (or soon will be) constructed in accordance with the approved Construction Plans and with the requirements of these regulations. 
B.  Improvement Agreement and Guarantee. The City Council, upon Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation, may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approval of the Final Plat, and may permit the property owner to enter into an improvement agreement by which the property owner covenants to complete all required public improvements no later than two (2) years following the date upon which the Final Plat is approved. The City Council may also require the property owner to complete or dedicate some of the required public improvements prior to approval of the Final Plat, and to enter into an improvement agreement for completion of the remainder of the required improvements during such two-year period. The improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the property owner and the City. 
C.  Improvement Agreement Required for Oversize Reimbursement. The City shall require an improvement agreement pertaining to any public improvement for which the developer shall request reimbursement from the City for oversize costs. The City Council, as it deems appropriate, has the authority to authorize the approval of such agreement as meeting the requirements of the City, and the City shall not withhold approval as a means of avoiding compensation due under the terms herein. The City Manager (or designee) is authorized to sign an improvement agreement on behalf of the City. 
D.  Security. Whenever the City permits an applicant to enter into an improvement agreement, it shall require the applicant to provide sufficient security, covering the completion of the public improvements. The security shall be in the form of cash escrow or, where authorized by the City, a performance bond or letter of credit or other security acceptable to the City Council and the City Attorney, as security for the promises contained in the improvement agreement. Security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements and lot improvements. The issuer of any surety bond and letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager and the City Attorney. 
E.  Performance Bond. If the City Council authorizes the applicant to post a performance bond as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the performance bond shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  All performance bonds must be in the forms acceptable to the City Manager and the City Attorney. 
2.  All performance bonds must be executed by such sureties as are named in the current list of "Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies", as published in Circular 570, as may be amended, by the Financial Management Service, Surety Bond Branch, U.S. Department of the Treasury. 
3.  All performance bonds must be signed by an agent and must be accompanied by a certified copy of the authority for him or her to act. 
4.  All performance bonds shall be obtained from surety or insurance companies that are duly licensed or authorized in the State of Texas to issue performance bonds for the limits and coverage required. 
5.  If the surety on any performance bond furnished by the applicant is declared bankrupt, or becomes insolvent, or its right to do business in terminated in the State of Texas, or the surety ceases to meet the requirements listed in Circular 570, the developer shall, within twenty (20) calendar days thereafter, substitute another performance bond and surety, both of which must be acceptable to the City. 
F.  Letter of Credit. If the City Council authorizes the applicant to post a letter of credit as security for its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the letter of credit shall: 
1.  Be irrevocable; 
2.  Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods, but in no event less than two (2) years; and 
3.  Require only that the City present the issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an authorized representative of the City certifying to the City's right to draw funds under the letter of credit. 
G.  Requests for Reduction in Security. As portions of the public improvements are completed in accordance with the TCSS and the approved Construction Plans, the applicant may make written application to the City Manager to reduce the amount of the original security. If the City Manager is satisfied that such portion of the improvements has been completed in accordance with City standards, he or she may, but is not required to, cause the amount of the security to be reduced by such amount that he or she deems appropriate, so that the remaining amount of the security adequately insures the completion of the remaining public improvements. 
H.  Reduction in Security Upon Acceptance. Upon acceptance by the City of all required public improvements, the City shall authorize a reduction in the security to ten (10) percent of the original amount of the security if the applicant is not in breach of the improvement agreement. The remaining security shall be security for the applicant's covenant to maintain the required public improvements and to warrant that the improvements are free from defects for one (1) year thereafter. If the required security for maintenance and warranty is otherwise provided by the contractors or by others, the City will release the entire amount of the developer's security.  
Section 6.4.3 - Temporary Improvements 
A.  Generally. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the City and shall maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the City. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the applicant shall file with the City a separate improvement agreement and escrow or, where authorized, a letter of credit, in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, ensuring that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained and removed. 
B.  Temporary Public Improvement Easements. Any temporary public improvement (e.g., a temporary cul-de-sac, alley turnout, drainage swale, erosion control device, etc.) shall be placed within an easement established specifically for that purpose. The recording information of the instrument establishing the temporary easement shall be clearly shown on the Final Plat for the subdivision prior to approval of the Final Plat. A temporary easement for a required public improvement shall not be abandoned without the City Engineer's approval and without written consent by the City.  
Section 6.4.4 - Government Units 
Governmental units to which these contract and security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the contract and security, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agents authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Section.  
Section 6.4.5 - Failure to Complete Improvements 
A.  No Improvement Agreement. For plats for which no improvement agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the public improvements are not completed within the period specified by the City, the plat approvals shall be deemed to have expired. 
B.  With Improvement Agreement. In those cases where an improvement agreement has been executed and security has been posted, and the required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the City may: 
1.  Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; 
2.  Suspend Final Plat approval until the public improvements are completed, and may record a document to that effect for the purpose of public notice; 
3.  Obtain funds under the security and complete the public improvements itself or through a third party; 
4.  Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which public improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete the public improvements on the property; or 
5.  Exercise any other rights or remedies available under the law.  
Section 6.4.6 - Acceptance of Dedication Offers 
Acceptance of formal offers for the dedication of streets, public areas, easements or parks shall be by authorization of the City Manager (or designee). The approval by the City Council of a Preliminary or Final Plat shall not, in and of itself, be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the City of any street, public area, easement or park shown on the plat. The City may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect.  
Section 6.4.7 - Maintenance and Guarantee of Public Improvements 
The property owner shall maintain all required public improvements for a period of two (2) years following acceptance of the subdivision by the City and shall also provide a one-year maintenance bond (warranty) that all public improvements will be free from defects for a period of one (1) year following such acceptance by the City.  
Section 6.4.8 - Construction Procedures 
A.  Site Development Permit Required. A Site Development Permit is required from the City prior to beginning any site development-related work in the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction which affects erosion control, storm drainage, vegetation or tree removal, or a flood plain. 
B.  Pre-construction Conference. The City shall require that all contractors participating in the construction meet for a pre-construction conference to discuss the project prior to release of a grading permit and before any filling, excavation, clearing or removal of vegetation and any trees that are larger than six (6) inch caliper as defined in these regulations, unless such grading is approved in the Construction Plans. All contractors shall be familiar with and shall conform to applicable landscape and tree protection/preservation provisions per these regulations. 
C.  Conditions Prior to Authorization. Prior to authorizing release of a Site Development Permit, the City Engineer shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been met: 
1.  The Preliminary Plat has been approved by the City Council (and any conditions of such approval have been satisfied); 
2.  All required Construction Plans are completed and approved by the City Engineer; 
3.  All necessary off-site easements and dedications required for City-maintained facilities and not shown on the plat must be conveyed solely to the City, such as by filing of a separate instrument, with the proper signatures affixed. The original of the documents and the appropriate fees for filing the documents at the County (per Burnet or Blanco County requirements and the City's submission guidelines, as may be amended from time to time) shall be returned to the City Secretary prior to approval and release of the Construction Plans by the City Engineer; 
4.  All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of approved Construction Plans bearing the stamp of release of the City Engineer, and at least one (1) set of these plans shall remain on the job site at all times; 
5.  A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers where a responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the City; and 
6.  All applicable fees must be paid to the City. 
D.  Nonpoint Source Pollution Controls and Tree Protection. All nonpoint source pollution controls, erosion controls, and tree protection measures and devices shall be in place, to the Public Works Director's satisfaction, prior to commencement of construction on any property.  
Section 6.4.9 - Inspection and Acceptance of Public Improvements 
A.  General Procedure. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the City's Public Works Director or designated administrative official. Construction shall be in accordance with the approved Construction Plans and the TCSS of the City of Marble Falls (and other applicable codes and ordinances). Any change in design that is required during construction should be made by the licensed professional engineer whose seal and signature are shown on the plans. Another engineer may make revisions to the original Construction Plans if so authorized by the owner of the plans, and if those revisions are noted on the plans or documents and are signed, sealed and dated by the responsible engineer. All revisions shall be approved by the City Engineer. If the City's Public Works Director finds, upon inspection, that any of the required public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the City's standards and TCSS, then the property owner shall be responsible for completing and correcting the deficiencies (at his/her expense) such that they are brought into conformance with the applicable standards. 
B.  Letter of Satisfactory Completion. The City will not deem required public improvements satisfactorily completed until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the City Engineer, through submission of detailed sealed "as-built", or record, drawings of the property which indicate all public improvements and their locations, dimensions, materials and other information required by the City Engineer, and until all required public improvements have been completed. The "as-builts" shall also include a complete set of sealed record drawings of the paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer and other public improvements, showing that the layout of the lines and grades of all public improvements are in substantial compliance with the Construction Plans for the plat, and showing all changes made in the plans during construction, and containing on each sheet an "as-built" stamp bearing the signature and seal of the licensed professional engineer and the date. One (1) reproducible drawing of the utility plan sheets containing the as-built information shall also be submitted. The engineer or surveyor shall also furnish the City with a copy of the approved Final Plat and the Construction Plans, if prepared on a computer-aided design and mapping system, in such a digital format (on disk) that is compatible with the City's mapping system. 
C.  Transfer of Rights to Public Improvements. Acceptance of the development shall mean that the developer has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the City for use and maintenance. The City Council may, at its option, accept dedication of a portion of the required public improvements if the remaining public improvements are not immediately required for health and safety reasons, and if the property owner has posted a performance bond, letter of credit or cash bond in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of those remaining improvements for a length of time to be determined by the City Council. If the remaining public improvements are greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and are not completed within the determined length of time, the City will impose a penalty that equals ten (10) percent of the performance bond, letter of credit, or cash bond. The obligation to complete the improvements remains with the developer, and all future Building Permits or Certificates of Occupancy will be withheld until the improvements are complete. If the remaining public improvements are less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the developer shall pay the actual dollar amount. The length of time may be extended due to inclement weather or unforeseen delays by mutual agreement between the developer and the City. 
D.  Certificate of Completion for Public Improvements. Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the City Manager (or designee) shall submit a certificate to the developer stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed.  
Section 6.4.10 - Deferral of Required Improvements 
A.  Option to Defer. The City Council may, upon petition of the property owner and favorable recommendation of the City Engineer, defer at the time of plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, are not required in the immediate interests of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Deferral Requirements. Whenever a petition to defer the construction of any public improvements required under these regulations is granted by the City Council, the property owner shall deposit in escrow his or her share of the costs (in accordance with City participation and oversizing policies) of the future public improvements with the City prior to approval of the plat, or the property owner may execute a separate improvement agreement secured by a cash escrow or, where authorized, a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred public improvements upon demand of the City.  
Article 7 - ACCESS, DRIVEWAYS AND CIRCULATION  
DIVISION 7.1 - ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND DRIVEWAYS 
 
Section 7.1.1 - Generally 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Division is to promote safety, improved mobility, and provide for good access to abutting properties. Access management reduces the potential for accidents and improves travel conditions by minimizing conflicts between through and turning vehicles. Accordingly, access points along public streets shall be appropriately considered according to the standards of this Division. 
B.  Applicability. The access management standards of this Division apply to residential and nonresidential development in the City limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
C.  Access Denial and Alternatives. 
1.  All lots of record shall be granted at least one access point. If such access point does not meet the provisions of this Division and all options have been exhausted, the access point can be granted, to the extent possible, at the most restrictive length of measurement. 
2.  Alternatives to the provisions of this Division may be considered in accordance with Section 7.1.4, Alternatives to Access Standards. 
D.  State Highway Jurisdiction. For roadways owned and operated by TxDOT, or similar state-authorized transportation authority, access locations shall be governed in accordance with TxDOT standards and approval processes:  
Section 7.1.2 - Street Access and Driveway Standards 
A.  Driveway Width. 
1.  Single-family Detached and Duplex Residential Uses. 
a.  For front-loaded lots 65 feet or smaller in width, driveway width at the right-of-way line shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot width, measured in linear feet at front building line. 
b.  For front-loaded lots over 65 feet wide, driveway width at the right-of-way line shall not exceed 26 feet. 
c.  For lots over 90 feet wide, circular driveways are permitted; provided however, the combined width of the two access points shall not exceed 30 feet. 
d.  Rear-loaded lots have no maximum driveway width. 
e.  Driveways shall be constructed of surface materials as set out in Section 8.2.4, Parking Dimensions and Parking Lot Design. However, when a residential driveway exceeds 200 feet in length, only the first 200 feet shall be required to meet the surface material requirements, provided the remaining driveway access to the residence can withstand the minimum fire truck access requirements. 
2.  All Other Uses. 
a.  Driveways shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width at the right-of-way line. Driveways in the DN or DT districts may be reduced to 20 feet if the Director determines the narrower width will benefit downtown pedestrian access and/or character and adequate access can be maintained. 
b.  Driveways exceeding 30 feet in width at the right-of-way line shall require a center median clearly designating a separation of ingress and egress lanes. Such median shall be constructed with a mountable curb and located within the apron. 
c.  Driveways shall not exceed 45 feet in width at the right-of-way line. 
d.  Driveways shall be constructed of surface materials as set out in Section 8.2.4, Parking Dimensions and Parking Lot Design. 
B.  Street Access Spacing. 
1.  Same Side of Street. Access points shall be spaced from intersections and other access points located along the same side of the street in accordance with Table 7.1.2.A, Access Spacing, Same Side of the Street. 
Table 7.1.2.A 
Access Spacing, Same Side of Street 
Street Classification 	All Arterials and Collectors 	Local Street 
	=50 mph 	45 mph 	40 mph 	35 mph 	30 mph 	Any speed 
Access to All Residential Uses 1 	425' 	360' 	300' 	250' 	60' 	— 2 
Access to Industrial 	425' 	360' 	300' 	250' 	200' 	60' 
Access to all other uses 	425' 	360' 	300' 	250' 	200' 	50' 
Table Notes: 
1 Residential uses, other than apartment, shall not have driveway access on Arterials and Major Collectors. 
2 For new lots, a minimum of 50' corner clearance shall be provided between a street intersection and the closest access point on either side of the street. 
 
2.  Opposite Sides of Street. In order to prevent conflicting left-turn movements, connections on opposite sides of arterial and collector streets shall be directly opposite each other or offset by a distance of no less than 150 feet. This provision shall not apply when a permanent median protects against such turning movements. 
3.  Limited-Access Driveways. The Director may consider shorter access spacing than set out in Table 7.1.2.A, Access Spacing, Same Side of Street, for limited-access driveways. Limited-access driveways include right-in/right-out only driveways, right-in only, right-out only, or hooded/protected-turn access points. In no case shall a limited-access driveway be established at a spacing closer than 200 feet to any other access point on an arterial or collector street. 
4.  Sight Visibility Triangle. A sight triangle is established at all intersections with a public street where no structures, landscaping, fences, signs, etc., shall be permitted to obstruct visibility between three and eight feet off the ground. Trees are permitted if branches are maintained above eight feet. The sight visibility triangle does not apply to development in the DN or DT district that is subject to build-to requirements. As set out in Table 7.1.2.B, Minimum Sight Triangle Distance Requirements, the sight triangle area shall be measured from the corner curb, equidistant within the tangent, in each direction for the following distances and then connected to form the sight triangle. Where the intersection includes two different street types, the measurement for the higher classification street shall apply. 
Table 7.1.2.B 
Minimum Sight Triangle Distance Requirements 
Speed Classification 	Minimum Sight Triangle Distance 
Arterial Street 	35' 
Collector Street 	25' 
Local Street 	20' 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.D.1, 2, 5-21-2019)  
Section 7.1.3 - Inter-Parcel Connectivity 
A.  Generally. Neighboring nonresidential development parcels shall be connected through private driveway cross-access. 
B.  Required Standards. 
1.  The cross-access driveway connection shall be a minimum width of 24 feet, sufficient for two-way directional traffic, and should generally run parallel to the principal street. 
2.  The location of the connection shall generally be within the first 60 feet of depth of the parcel proposed for development. The location may be adjusted for natural features such as terrain, heritage trees, existing hydrological resources, or other constraints such as existing development, at the discretion of the Director. 
3.  Driveway stub-outs shall be constructed to the lot boundary even if the abutting development did not provide for a connection, so as to allow for the potential future cross-access connection between properties. 
4.  Driveway stub-outs are not required to connect to abutting parcels zoned DN or DT that are subject to build-to requirements.  
Section 7.1.4 - Alternatives to Access Standards 
A.  Generally. The access management requirements of this Division may be modified according to the standards of this Section. 
B.  Reduction of Spacing Requirements. The spacing requirements of Section 7.1.2, Street Access and Driveway Standards, may be reduced if the Director determines the following conditions apply and that the general purposes of this Division have been met. 
1.  Safety and operational considerations of the proposed access point is not contrary to the purpose of this Division; and 
2.  No other alternatives exist, and construction of the access point is along the property line farthest from the intersection or closest access point. To provide reasonable access under these conditions, but also the safest operation, a limited-access driveway may be required by the Director, as set out in Subsection 7.1.2.B.3, Limited-Access Driveways. In such a case, the applicant shall also demonstrate that: 
a.  The inability to meet the access spacing requirements was not due to the owner subdividing the property after the effective date of these regulations without providing internal access; 
b.  The abutting landowner refused a request to provide cross-access; and 
c.  A recorded instrument to ensure that the connection will be provided and access will be consolidated upon the earlier of: 
i.  Approval for development, substantial improvement, or redevelopment, of the abutting property, if providing such connection is a requirement of the development approval; or 
ii.  The applicant's parcel and the abutting parcel coming under common ownership.  
ARTICLE 8 - PARKING, LOADING, STACKING, AND LIGHTING  
DIVISION 8.1 - GENERALLY 
 
Section 8.1.1 - General Requirements 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish standards for the adequate provision of parking, loading, stacking, and outdoor lighting. 
B.  Applicability of Division. All new development or redevelopment, substantial improvement, or expansion of existing development shall comply with the standards of this Article. 
1.  New Development. All new parcels proposed for development shall include outdoor lighting and the required number of parking, loading, and stacking spaces as set out in this Article. 
2.  Existing Development. Modifications to existing development which result in changes of use or changes to site conditions shall provide improvements as set out in Division 12.5, Nonconforming Sites. 
C.  Location of Parking, Loading, Stacking and Lighting. All areas for parking, loading, stacking, and outdoor lighting required by this Article shall be located on an individual property and not on a public street, unless exempted by Section 8.2.3, Alternate Parking Arrangements or Subsection 8.2.1.B, Required Parking, Downtown Districts. 
D.  Plans Required. Plans for the location, design, and layout of parking, loading, stacking, and outdoor lighting shall be indicated on the Site Development Plan. 
E.  Timing of Completion. Required parking, loading, stacking, and outdoor lighting will be ready for use and approved by the Director prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
F.  Maintenance. Required parking, loading, stacking, and outdoor lighting shall be kept in good condition.  
DIVISION 8.2 - OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
Section 8.2.1 - Required Off-Street Parking Spaces 
A.  Required Parking, Generally. The parking spaces required for individual uses provided in this subsection are set out in Table 8.2.1.A, Required Parking, and are delineated by the land use classifications set out in Division 3.1, Land Uses by Zoning District, for all zoning districts except in the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) districts. Required off-street parking for the Downtown (DN) and Downtown Transition (DT) districts is set out in Subsection 8.2.1.B, Required Parking, Downtown Districts. 
Table 8.2.1.A 
Required Parking 
Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking Spaces 
Agriculture and Ranch Use 
Animal raising or production 	None 
Commercial Stables 	None 
Crop Production and Sales 	None 
Game Ranch 	None 
Residential Uses 
Cottage or Tiny House 	1 space per dwelling unit 
Single-Family, Detached or Attached 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Industrialized Housing 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Manufactured Home 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Duplex 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Townhouse 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Apartment, Triplex, or Quadplex 	1.5 spaces for dwelling units 1 BR and efficiency 
2 spaces for dwelling units 2 BR and greater 
Live-work unit 	3 spaces per dwelling unit 
Loft Apartment 	1 space per dwelling unit 
Civic Uses 
Aviation Uses, Fixed Wing 	Determined by the aviation institution 1 
Aviation Uses, Rotary Wing 	Determined by the aviation institution 1 
Cemetery 	Determined by the cemetery institution 1 
Child-care Facility, Day-Care Center 	1 space per 400 sf GFA 
Child-care Facility, Residential 	1 space for every 2 bedrooms 
College/University 	Determined by the university 1 
Community Assembly/Amenity 	1 space per 300 sf GFA 
Education, Elementary or Middle School 	2 spaces per classroom, plus 1 per 4 seats of auditorium or flex performance space 
Education, High School 	10 spaces per classroom, plus 1 per 4 seats of auditorium or flex performance space 
Government 	1 space per 250 sf GFA up to 10,000 sf GFA. Above 10,000 sf GFA determined by governmental entity 1 
Housing and Services for the Aging 	1 space per 3 living units 
Hospital 	Determined by the hospital 1 
Neighborhood Amenity 	1 space per 300 sf GFA 
Religious Assembly 	1 space per 300 sf GFA 
Social Service Institution 	1 space per 300 sf GFA 
Transportation Facilities 	Determined by Director 1 
Utilities, Local/Neighborhood 	No parking required 
Utilities, Major 	Determined by the Director 1 
Wireless Transmission Facility 	No parking required 
Commercial Uses 
Animal Clinic or Services 	1 space per 300 sf GFA 
Bar or Night Club 	1 space per 100 sf GFA 
Brewery/Distillery/Winery 	1 space per 100 sf GFA of public area, plus 1 space per 1,000 sf GFA of brewing/manufacturing area 
Business or Trade School 	Determined by the school 1 
Campground 	1 space per camp site 
Food and Drink Establishment (general) 	1 per 100 sf GFA, including outdoor seating 
Food and Drink Establishment (neighborhood) 	1 per 100 sf GFA, including outdoor seating 
Hotel/Lodging, Full Service 
Hotel/Lodging, Limited Service 
Hotel/Lodging, Resort 	1 space per guest room, plus 1 space per 300 sf GFA of meeting rooms/conference center, offices, and all recreation facilities open to the public, plus 50% of required parking for restaurants/bars open to the public 
Medical Clinic 	1 space per 250 sf GFA 
Office 	1 space per 300 sf GFA 
Office, Medical 	1 space per 250 sf GFA 
Office Showroom 	1 space per 400 sf GFA 
Parking, Commercial 	N/A 
Pawn Shop 	1 space per 250 sf GFA 
Personal Services 	1 space per 250 sf GFA up to 10,000 sf GFA, plus 1 space per 500 sf GFA above 10,000 GFA 
Recreation/Entertainment, Indoor 	1 space per 250 sf GFA 
Recreation/Entertainment, Outdoor 	Determined by Director 1 
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park 	1 space per RV space 
Retail Sales, General 	1 space per 250 sf GFA up to 10,000 sf GFA, plus 1 space per 500 sf GFA above 10,000 GFA 
Retail Sale and Services, Heavy Equipment 	1 space per 300 sf GFA up to 25,000 sf GFA, plus 1 space per 1,000 sf GFA above 25,000 GFA 
Retail Sales and Services, Large Scale 	1 space per 250 sf GFA up to 25,000 sf GFA, plus 1 space per 1,000 sf GFA above 25,000 GFA 
Shopping Center 	1 space per 200 sf GFA up to 20,000 sf GFA, plus 1 space per 500 sf GFA above 20,000 GFA 
Special Event Venue 	Determined by Director 1 
Vehicle Gas or Fueling Station 	1 space per 250 sf GFA 
Vehicle Sales and Rentals 	1 space per 500 sf GFA of office space and indoor showroom, plus parking requirement for any applicable vehicle services 
Vehicle Services 	1 space per 200 sf GFA, plus 3 spaces per service bay 
Industrial Uses 
Contractor Services 	1 space per 500 sf GFA 
Heavy Industrial Services 	1 space per 2,000 sf GFA 
Light Industrial Services 	1 space per 1,000 sf GFA 
Research and Development 	1 space per 500 sf GFA 
Resource Extraction 	Determined by establishment owner 1 
Scrap and Salvage Yard 	1 space per 5,000 sf GFA of storage area up to 20,000 sf GFA 
Storage, Self 	1 space per 250 sf GFA of office/retail space 
Storage Yard 	1 space per 500 sf GFA of office space 
Warehouse 	1 space per 1,250 sf GFA 
Waste Related Services 	1 space per 1,250 sf GFA 
Table Notes: 
1 Where parking is to be determined by the Director or the business or establishment owner, the applicant shall present the Director with a justification for the proposed number and location of parking spaces. Such justification may potentially include a parking study and/or cite examples from other communities to demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed number of spaces. 
 
B.  Required Parking, Downtown Districts. 
1.  Required parking in the Downtown (DN) district and the Downtown Transition (DT) district shall be determined as set out in Table 8.2.1.B, Required Parking, Downtown Districts. 
Table 8.2.1.B 
Required Parking, Downtown Districts 
Land Use 	Required Parking Spaces 
Downtown District 
Loft Apartment 	No parking required (up to four dwelling units). 1 space per dwelling unit starting with the fifth dwelling unit and all additional dwelling units. 
Hotel 	0.5 space per guest room, plus parking at a rate of 1 space per 2,000 GFA for uses such as bars, restaurants, retail, and services open to the general public. 
All Other Nonresidential Uses 	No new/additional parking required for existing square footage. 1 space per 1,000 sf GFA for new or additional square footage. 
Downtown Transition District 
Apartment 	1 space per dwelling unit. 
Loft Apartment 	No parking required (up to two dwelling units). 1 space per dwelling unit starting with the third dwelling unit and all additional dwelling units. 
Hotel 	1 space per guest room. 
All Other Nonresidential Uses 	1 space per 500 sf GFA. 
 
2.  Required parking in the Downtown (DN) district may be achieved through the following: 
a.  Off-street Parking Spaces. Off-street parking spaces may not be located between the building and the right-of-way. If an alley or alley right-of-way is present, any off-street parking spaces that are provided may take direct access from the alley. Off-street parking lots shall be screened from adjacent public streets by either the building or an alternative screening method presented to the Director. Driveways shall take access from a side street or alley. 
b.  On-Street Parking Spaces. Construction of on-street parking spaces is allowed to meet, in part or in full, minimum parking requirements, provided that the spaces are fronting the parcel proposed for development and are improved to the City's downtown parking specifications for on-street parking. The Director shall consider the adequacy of parking on the existing street and whether improvements will be required to fulfill this option. 
c.  Fee-in-Lieu of Parking Spaces. 
i.  For nonresidential uses in the Downtown District, a fee-in-lieu of all or a portion of the required parking spaces may be paid to the City of Marble Falls Downtown Parking Fund. Payments to the fund will be on a per parking space basis and are set out in Appendix C, Master Fee Schedule, of the City Code of Ordinances. Payments to the Downtown Parking Fund will be used for the sole purpose of constructing and improving public parking on public property within the Downtown District including on-street parking, public parking lots, and public parking garages. 
ii.  Residential and hotel uses shall generally not be eligible to pay the fee-in-lieu unless the Director determines that all other off-street and on-street options have been exhausted and circumstances warrant the paying of the fee. 
iii.  The fee in lieu of parking spaces shall be paid in full to the City prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. 
3.  Required parking in the Downtown Transition (DT) district may be achieved through the following: 
a.  Off-street Parking Spaces. Off-street parking spaces may not be located between the building and the right-of-way. If an alley or alley right-of-way is present, any off-street parking spaces that are provided may take direct access from the alley. Off-street parking lots shall be screened from adjacent public streets by either the building or an alternative screening method presented to the Director. 
b.  On-Street Parking Spaces. Construction of on-street parking spaces is allowed to meet, in part or in full, minimum parking requirements, provided that the spaces are fronting the parcel proposed for development and are improved to the City's downtown parking specifications for on-street parking. The Director shall consider the adequacy of parking on the existing street and whether improvements will be required to fulfill this option. 
C.  Parking Spaces Types. Required parking shall be comprised of the following types of spaces as set out in this subsection and per the dimensions set out in Table 8.2.4, Parking Space and Aisle Width Dimensions. 
1.  Standard Parking Spaces. All nonresidential, multifamily, and mixed-use parcels proposed for development shall be comprised of a minimum of 85 percent standard spaces. 
2.  ADA Parking Spaces. As required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), a certain number of required disabled parking spaces are required as part of new development and redevelopment (see Section 4.1.2, Accessible Sites and Exterior Facilities: New Construction, of the Texas Accessibility Standards). Required ADA parking spaces shall not count against the minimum 85 percent standard spaces required. 
3.  Alternative Parking Spaces. The remaining 15 percent can be allocated to the following alternative parking space types, provided that each space type includes clearly identifiable signage and surface markings. 
a.  Compact Spaces. 
b.  Motorcycle Parking. 
c.  Electric Charging Stations. 
4.  Bicycle parking/racks is encouraged but shall not count towards the minimum parking requirements. 
D.  Use of Required Parking Spaces. Required parking spaces shall be available for the temporary stopping or parking of vehicles and shall comply with the following. 
1.  Designated locations for parking shall be used only for such purposes and for no other permanent or temporary use (e.g., display, storage, or repair). Any future reconsideration of these areas shall be approved by the Director on the Site Development Plan. 
2.  Existing off-street parking shall not be reduced for reasons such as change in tenancy, unless the principal building on site is reduced in size or removed, or unless otherwise approved by the Director.  
Section 8.2.2 - Rules for Calculation of Required Parking Spaces 
A.  Generally. The number of required parking spaces is calculated according to the formulas set out in Section 8.2.1, Required Off-Street Parking Spaces, Access, and Use. Alternatives to these standards may be considered by the Director as set out in Section 8.2.3, Alternative Parking Arrangements. 
B.  Terms. Terms used as variables for parking calculations are measured as follows: 
1.  Per Square Foot (sf.) of Gross Floor Area (GFA). The Gross Floor Area represents the interior space of a building, plus (unless otherwise specified) the area of any parts of the parcel proposed for development that are delineated and used in a manner that is comparable in function to the use of the inside of the building (e.g., outdoor dining areas). 
2.  Per Dwelling Unit, Per Guest Room or Per Bedroom (BR). The phrase "per dwelling unit" or "per guest room" or "per bedroom" means that the number of parking spaces is calculated based on either the number of overnight guest rooms, residential dwelling units or, in some cases, the number of bedrooms in the dwelling units. 
C.  Calculations and Rounding. If the final calculation of the number of required parking spaces includes the fraction of less than one-half, the required number of spaces shall be rounded down to the next lower number. A fraction of one-half or more shall be rounded up to the next higher number (e.g., 1.24 = 1 parking space; 1.58 = 2 parking spaces). 
D.  Multiple Uses or Mixed-Uses. If several mixed-use or nonresidential uses occupy a single parcel or building, the off-street parking requirements shall be the cumulative total for all uses set out for individual uses in this Division. 
E.  Unlisted Uses. Required parking spaces for unlisted uses will be determined by the Director using one of the following methods: 
1.  Comparable Determination. The Director shall classify the use using the same standards set out in Subsection 3.1.1.E, Unlisted Uses. 
2.  Parking Study. The Director shall require a parking study by the developer or owner/operator to determine an adequate number of parking spaces. 
3.  Alternate Parking Arrangements. The Director shall determine alternative parking arrangements as set out in Section 8.2.3, Alternative Parking Arrangements.  
Section 8.2.3 - Alternative Parking Arrangements 
A.  Generally. The Director may consider alternative parking arrangements which account for unique circumstances pertaining to the proposed land use or parcel proposed for development. These flexible alternative parking arrangements include: 
1.  Shared parking. Shared parking should be encouraged where complimentary uses have varying peak parking demands and adequate facilities are available. A parking agreement shall be enforced through a written agreement among owners of record to be for periods of five years before renewal. The agreement shall address the size and type of developments, tenants, rate of parking turnover, anticipated peak parking loads, and pedestrian safety. The agreement shall also address maintenance responsibilities. 
2.  Off-site parking. Nonresidential, multifamily, or mixed-use parking spaces may be proposed on a separate lot from the principal use if located within 600 feet from the site and demonstrates adequate pedestrian access ways and lighting. Off-site parking shall require a parking agreement which delineates the dedicated spaces in an off-site public or private parking lot or garage. Off-site parking is not permitted if located across an arterial roadway. 
3.  Reduction in parking spaces. To consider reduced parking, a parking study shall be completed that justifies the reduction. The parking study shall be prepared by a qualified transportation planner or traffic engineer at the applicant's sole expense and shall include ITE-based recommendations on traffic demand. 
4.  On-street parking. In unique circumstances, the Director may consider the allowance and construction of on-street parking spaces if it is determined that there is little or no negative impact on surrounding properties or the function of the public street. 
5.  Alley access. Where alley access is available, parking spaces may be arranged to be directly accessed from the alley without maneuvering space on-site. 
B.  Approval. Approval of alternative parking arrangements shall be concurrent with review and approval of the Site Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.E, 5-21-2019)  
Section 8.2.4 - Parking Dimensions and Parking Lot Design 
A.  Generally. The minimum parking dimensions and standards of this Section are established to ensure durable construction and the safe maneuvering of vehicles and pedestrians as part of new parcels proposed for development. 
B.  Required Dimensions. All off-street parking spaces and drive aisles shall be designed and configured as set out in Table 8.2.4, Parking Space and Aisle Width Dimensions. 
Table 8.2.4 
Parking Space and Aisle Width Dimensions 
	Parking Space 	Aisle Width 
Parking Space Type 	Width 	Length 	Parking Angle 	One-Way 	Two-Way 
Standard 
Compact 	9' 
8' 	18' 
16' 	45 0 	13' 	24' 
			60 0 	16' 	26' 
			90 0 	24' 	26' 
Parallel 	7' 	20' 	— 	13' 	24' 
Motorcycle 	4.5' 	8' 	— 	13' 	24' 
 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  Access to Required Parking Spaces. All off-street parking spaces shall be accessible from a private, on-site drive aisle with maneuvering space outside of the public right-of-way and shall not be permanently obstructed for any reason. 
2.  Surface Materials. All off-street vehicle parking, driveways, drive aisles, loading spaces, and approaches to parking spaces shall be constructed and maintained on an all-weather surface such as asphalt, concrete, or similar approved material to ensure a dust-free condition and provide for long-term durability. The City Engineer may consider permeable pavement, pavers, grasscrete or similar material or other pervious material in certain situations such as overflow parking, tree protection, rural development, or for alternative parking arrangements approved by the Director. Gravel, crushed granite, or grass shall not be used as a surface material. 
3.  Curbs. New parcels proposed for development which include nonresidential, mixed-use, or apartment uses shall provide concrete curbs along the perimeter of all parking lots and driveways and interior islands, unless approved to use LID techniques as set out in Section 5.3.2, Low Impact Development Techniques, for treatment of stormwater runoff. 
4.  Turnarounds. Parking lot drive aisles that exceed 150 feet in length shall have a secondary egress point or an approved fire truck turnaround. 
5.  Pavement Markings and Signage. Parking (including ADA-accessible markings), loading, and fire lanes and associated directional arrows shall be clearly marked on the surface at four-inch widths and frequently maintained to ensure compliance. 
6.  Tree Islands and Landscaping. Interior tree islands, end cap islands, and associated plantings shall be located and maintained as set out in Division 9.2, Landscaping. 
7.  Pedestrian Accessways. New parcels proposed for development shall include parking lot design which provides for a connected, delineated pedestrian accessway between the main entrance of each principal building to all ADA parking spaces and existing/future sidewalks for each abutting right-of-way. 
8.  Vertical Clearance. All parking spaces and drive aisle lanes shall have a vertical clearance of at least 10 feet. 
9.  Solid Waste Enclosures. Solid waste enclosures shall comply with the standards set out in Section 4.6.3, Mechanical Equipment and Solid Waste Receptacles.  
DIVISION 8.3 - OFF-STREET STACKING 
 
Section 8.3.1 - Off-Street Stacking Requirements 
A.  Generally. Off-street vehicle stacking requirements apply to parcels proposed for development which contain drive-through service in order to provide sufficient queuing space for vehicles prior to a transaction taking place, or for areas where the stacking of vehicles could cause imminent danger to the flow of traffic in the public right-of-way. 
B.  Required Stacking Approach Distances. The minimum approach distance for stacking lanes shall be as set out in Table 8.3.1, Vehicle Stacking Approach Requirements. 
Table 8.3.1 
Vehicle Stacking Approach Requirements 
Type of Stacking 	Minimum Stacking Approach Distance 
Controlled Entry/Gated Entrances 	40' 
All Other 	60' 
 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  Stacking Lanes. 
a.  Stacking lanes shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width. 
b.  The number of stacking lanes shall be determined by the developer or owner/operator. 
c.  The minimum linear approach distance for each stacking lane shall be fully located within the parcel proposed for development and not in the public right-of-way. 
d.  The location of stacking lanes may not impede designated pedestrian or vehicular movements including parking spaces, loading zones, or points of ingress/egress to the site. 
e.  Stacking lanes shall not be located between the front façade of the building and the principal street frontage. 
f.  The transaction space (e.g., a service window) can be counted as part of the minimum approach distance. 
2.  By-Pass Lanes. 
a.  A by-pass lane is required on any parcel proposed for development which includes a vehicle stacking lane, provided there is no drive aisle providing for the same vehicular circulation. 
b.  The by-pass lane shall be at least 10 feet in width and shall run parallel to the stacking lane to provide for continual flow of vehicular movement around the site. 
c.  For controlled entry/gated entrances (e.g., a key code kiosk or guard entry station), a turnaround space shall be provided between the kiosk and gate to allow a vehicle to exit the entrance queue.  
DIVISION 8.4 - OFF-STREET LOADING 
 
Section 8.4.1 - Required Loading 
A.  Generally. The minimum loading dimensions and standards of this Section are established to ensure the safe maneuvering of delivery and other vehicles and pedestrians as part of new parcels proposed for development. Off-street loading shall be required where the use or operations of such development necessitates the need for the delivery of bulk materials and loading docks. At no time shall goods or materials be loaded or unloaded from the right-of-way of a public street, nor any part of a parked delivery vehicle be allowed to extend into the right-of-way of a public street, except in the Downtown (DN) or Downtown Transition (DT) districts. 
B.  Required Dimensions. Off-street loading spaces, excluding maneuvering areas, shall be at least 12 feet wide and 20 feet long unless off-street loading will involve the use of semi-tractor trailer combinations or other vehicles in excess of 25 feet in length, in which case the minimum size of a space shall be 12 feet by 54 feet. All off-street loading spaces must have a minimum of vertical clearance of 14 feet. 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  The approach and maneuvering area for off-street loading spaces shall provide for the adequate on-site turning movements of delivery vehicles into and out of the lot or parcel proposed for development so that it does not pose a material threat to public safety, require or force the delivery vehicle, or any part of the delivery vehicle, to extend into right-of-way of a public street, or force the delivery vehicle to travel over infrastructure or landscaping that is not designed for such use. 
2.  The location of off-street loading spaces shall not interfere with any fire exits or emergency access facilities to either a building or site. 
3.  Loading spaces for semi-tractor trailer combinations or other vehicles in excess of 25 feet in length shall be located on the side or rear of the building and shall be buffered from view of public street rights-of-way and abutting properties as set out in Division 9.3, Buffering. 
D.  Use of Required Loading Spaces. Required loading spaces shall be available for the temporary stopping or parking of delivery vehicles and shall comply with the following: 
1.  Designated locations for loading shall be used only for such purposes and for no other permanent or temporary use (e.g., display, storage, or repair). Any future reconsideration of these areas shall be approved by the Director on the Site Development Plan. 
2.  Existing on-site, off-street loading areas shall not be reduced for reasons such as change in tenancy, unless the principal building on site is reduced in size or removed, or unless otherwise approved by the Director.  
DIVISION 8.5 - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 
 
Section 8.5.1 - Outdoor Lighting for Vehicles and Pedestrians 
A.  Generally. The outdoor lighting standards of this Section are established to ensure implementation of lighting best practices which result in glare reduction and reduced light trespass, lower energy usage, improved visibility that fosters a safer environment, improved public and environmental health, and a better view of the beautiful Texas Hill Country night skies. 
B.  Required Outdoor Lighting Standards. 
1.  All roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, and building entrances of nonresidential, multifamily, or mixed-use parcels proposed for development shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and safety of persons using such areas and facilities. Where the proposed improvements are located on private property, the responsibility for lighting such areas shall fall upon the developer or owner/operator. 
2.  The outdoor lighting requirements for individual uses are set out in Table 8.5.1, Required Outdoor Lighting. 
Table 8.5.1 
Required Outdoor Lighting 
Required Lighting 	Standard 
Streets, driveways, and sidewalks 	Lighting for streets, driveways, and sidewalks shall comply with the standards set out in Section 6.3.3, Street Lights. 
Parking lots serving nonresidential, apartment, and mixed-use buildings 	Parking lots serving nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall be lit during nighttime hours of operation. Parking lots serving apartment buildings shall be lit during nighttime hours. 
Entrances and exits in nonresidential, apartment, and mixed-use buildings 	Buildings with a nonresidential, apartment, or mixed principal use shall have adequately lighted entrances and exits to ensure the safety of persons and the security of the building. 
Canopy lighting 	The areas immediately below an outdoor canopy (e.g., over fuel sales, automated bank machines, etc.) shall be illuminated. Canopy light fixtures shall be full cut-off/walled lighting fixtures or recessed into the canopy so that the bottom of each lighting fixture is flush with the ceiling of the canopy. 
 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  All Fixtures. 
a.  No freestanding light fixture shall be greater than 25 feet in height. 
b.  All lighting fixtures that are mounted within 15 feet of a residentially used or zoned property, or public right-of-way, shall be classified as IES Type III or Type F (asymmetric forward throw). These fixtures shall be fitted with a "house side shielding" reflector on the side facing the residentially used or zoned property, or public right-of-way. 
2.  Primary Fixtures. Primary fixtures, for which illumination provides for security of property and safety of persons, shall be "cut-off" fixtures that limit lighting that is visible or measurable at the property line and shall conform with the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America ("IES") criteria for full cut-off fixtures (i.e., 100 percent of light output is below 90 degrees, and 90 percent of light output is below 80 degrees from a vertical line through the fixture). 
3.  Decorative Fixtures. Decorative fixtures, for which illumination is more intended for aesthetic purposes, shall comply with the following: 
a.  Lighting fixtures that illuminate landscape plantings, pedestrian walkways, signage, or product display areas shall also conform to the full cut-off fixture requirement. 
b.  Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall use a narrow cone beam of light that will not extend beyond the illuminated object. 
c.  For upward-directed architectural, landscape, and decorative lighting, direct light emissions shall not be visible above the primary building roofline. 
d.  "No cut-off" fixtures may be used only for decorative purposes, provided they have luminaires that produce no more than 1,500 lumens (approximately equal to a 100-watt incandescent bulb) and they have a maximum height of 15 feet.  
ARTICLE 9 - TREES, LANDSCAPING, AND BUFFERING  
DIVISION 9.1 - TREE PRESERVATION 
 
Section 9.1.1 - Generally 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this Division is to provide for the preservation, protection, and mitigation of existing trees during development of land. Existing trees, particularly native species, add natural beauty and distinct local character, add shade, promote water conservation, provide natural buffering, and increase property values. Preservation of as many existing trees as practicable is the intent of these requirements. 
B.  Applicability. The standards of this Division apply to all development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement within the City limits. Clear-cutting of property or removal of protected or heritage trees is prohibited without approval of a permit denoting compliance with the provisions of this Section. Properties clear-cut for any reason are not eligible for approval of a Preliminary Plat or Site Development Permit for a period of three years. 
C.  Exemptions. The following are exemptions from the standards of this Division: 
1.  Existing single-family lots of record; 
2.  Agricultural vegetation removal; 
3.  Trees that are dead, diseased, or determined to be a safety hazard as determined by the Director or their designee; and 
4.  Street and utility improvements. However, to the extent practicable, all efforts shall be made to preserve trees located within existing and planned street rights-of-way and utility easements.  
Section 9.1.2 - Tree Protection and Mitigation 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  Single-Family, Duplex, and Townhouse Residential. Subdivision plats for single-family and duplex residential development within the City limits shall account for heritage trees within the property in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
2.  All Other Development. All other development, including nonresidential and multifamily, within the City limits shall account for heritage trees and protected trees within the property in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Protected and Heritage Trees Defined. 
1.  Protected Tree. A Live Oak, Post Oak, Shumard Oak, Bur Oak, Chinquapin Oak, Monterey Oak, Bald Cypress, American Elm, Cedar Elm, Pecan, Walnut, Texas Ash, or Southern Magnolia tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of 12 inches or greater. 
2.  Heritage Tree. A Live Oak, Post Oak, Shumard Oak, Bur Oak, Chinquapin Oak, Monterey Oak, Bald Cypress, American Elm, Cedar Elm, Pecan, Walnut, Texas Ash, or Southern Magnolia tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of 24 inches or greater. 
C.  Tree Survey and Tree Preservation Plan. 
1.  Tree Survey. A tree survey and tree preservation plan must be approved prior to any removal of protected or heritage trees. The tree survey shall graphically identify the location, size, and species of any trees required to be protected per Table 9.1.2, Tree Protection and Mitigation Standards. Certain areas of the parcel proposed for development may be designated as no-cut zones on the tree survey. These areas are not required to be surveyed and shall not factor into the minimum preservation percentages and mitigation requirements, provided no trees are removed. 
2.  Tree Preservation Plan. The preservation plan shall identify which trees are to be preserved, which are to be removed, and provide calculations for the mitigation of those removed. Tree surveys shall be performed by a licensed surveyor, landscape architect, or arborist. If there are no protected trees or heritage trees on the site, the licensed surveyor, landscape architect, or arborist shall certify in writing that no such trees exist and a survey is not necessary. 
D.  Tree Protection and Mitigation Standards. Protected and heritage trees meeting the minimum size requirements set out in Table 9.1.2, Tree Protection and Mitigation Standards, shall be protected. 
Table 9.1.2 
Tree Protection and Mitigation Standards 
Protected Tree Type 	Minimum Diameter Breast Height (DBH) 1 	Min. % Preserved of Combined Total Diameter Inches 2 	Mitigation Replacement Ratio 
Protected Tree 	12" or greater 	20% 	1:1 replacement ratio for 50% of the total diameter inches removed (replaced in caliper inches) 
Heritage Tree 	24" or greater 	20% 	2:1 replacement ratio for 100% of the total diameter inches removed (replaced in caliper inches) 
Table Notes: 
1 A tree connected at ground level with multiple trunks at DBH shall be measured by aggregating the total of the three largest trunks that each measure =8 inches at DBH. 
2 This applies to trees located within the limits of construction of the site or subdivision boundary. 
 
E.  Alternative Standards. 
1.  On-Site Preservation Alternative. If 20 percent of the combined total diameter of protected or heritage trees cannot be preserved on site, then removal of those trees shall be limited to the minimum extent possible and mitigated at two times the minimum replacement ratio. 
2.  Fee-In-Lieu Alternative. If replacement tree plantings cannot be fully accommodated on site, then the Director may consider an alternative fee-in-lieu payment to the City of Marble Falls Tree Replacement Fund. Payments to the fund will be on a per inch basis and are set out in Appendix C, Master Fee Schedule, of the City Code of Ordinances. Payments to the Tree Replacement Fund will be used for the sole purpose of planting trees on public property including parks, along streets, and in common open spaces and can also be used for pruning, irrigation, and maintenance of those trees. Replacement trees and fee-in-lieu payment may be combined to satisfy the requirement. 
F.  Tree Credits for Landscaping. Trees that are either preserved or planted on site as mitigation for removal are eligible to be counted towards the landscaping requirements of this Article. 
G.  Tree Protection During Construction. No construction or disturbance shall occur within an area that constitutes more than 50 percent of the total critical root zone (CRZ) and one-half the radial distance of the CRZ for each tree being preserved. During construction, this defined area shall be flagged and encircled with protective fencing and a three-inch layer of mulch spread beneath the drip line. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.F.1, 5-21-2019)  
DIVISION 9.2 - LANDSCAPING 
 
Section 9.2.1 - Generally 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Division is to establish landscaping standards that protect and preserve the appearance and character of the City, improve the compatibility of abutting uses, protect the health and quality of life of the residents through the benefits of trees and landscaping, and conserve scarce water resources by promoting the planting of native and drought-resistant trees and shrubs. 
B.  Applicability of Standards. This Division applies to all new development, redevelopment, and substantial improvements in the City limits, and where specifically indicated, to existing trees and landscaping. The application of this Division may be limited by Article 12, Nonconformities. 
C.  Alternative Landscape Standards. Alternative landscape standards may be proposed and submitted to the Director for approval of an Administrative Exception per Section 11.5.4, Administrative Exception, provided the aesthetic, buffering and environmental intent of the requirements of this Chapter are met. The Director may approve alternatives including but not limited to site design, spacing, locations, numbers and species. The use of above ground architectural planters may contribute toward up to 10% of the fulfillment of landscape requirements, as approved by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.F.2, 5-21-2019)  
Section 9.2.2 - Landscape Plan Required 
A.  Generally. Compliance with the standards of this Division shall be demonstrated by the submittal and approval of a landscape plan. A landscape plan is required as follows: 
1.  Single-Family, Duplex, and Townhouse Residential. Residential bufferyards, common area amenities, and any other area which is used to comply with minimum open space area requirements shall be delineated and submitted with the subdivision's Construction Plans. A landscape plan is not required for landscaping required or provided on an individual single-family, duplex, or townhouse lot. 
2.  All Other Development. Apartment, civic, commercial, industrial, and mixed-use landscaping, open space, and bufferyard requirements shall be delineated and submitted with the Site Development Plan. 
B.  Contents of Landscape Plan. The landscape plan shall include the elements that are set out in this Section and shall be prepared by a landscape design professional. The landscape plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Plan Drawing. A plan view, drawn to scale, depicting: 
a.  The location and species of each plant; 
b.  The location of existing protected and heritage trees for which mitigation replacement is requested; 
c.  The location and dimensions of property lines and easements, building footprints, pervious surfaces, fences/walls, water features and utilities; and 
d.  A schematic irrigation plan. 
2.  Landscape Calculations. A table depicting size and quantity calculations for each tree and shrub as required by this Division. 
3.  Additional Information. The Director is also authorized to require additional information on the landscape plan as needed to administer the requirements of these regulations. 
C.  Installation and On-Going Maintenance. Required landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved plans and as set out below: 
1.  Installation. 
a.  Required landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The Director may grant a temporary Certificate of Occupancy to allow for postponement of the installation of required landscaping during periods of drought or extreme weather conditions. If installation of required landscaping is postponed, the developer shall be required to maintain appropriate erosion control measures. 
b.  On-site construction changes that affect an approved landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Director. 
2.  On-Going Maintenance. 
a.  Landscape areas and plantings required by this Division shall be continuously maintained and all plant materials that become diseased or die shall be replaced by the owner/operator in a reasonably quick manner. Landscaping in common open space areas shall be maintained by a property owners' association that is established pursuant to the requirements of Section 4.1.5, Property Owners' Associations, Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, or other entity acceptable to the City. The maintenance responsibility shall be set out in the approved landscape plan required by this Division. 
b.  The City may inspect each site periodically after issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy to ensure compliance with this Division. 
c.  Trees and plants shall be pruned and cared for in a manner that is most healthful for the particular species. Topping off trees or excessive canopy raising and pruning is prohibited for preserved and replacement trees. Screening and bufferyard plants shall be maintained at the appropriate height and fullness to provide the opacity necessary for its function. Adequate soil, mulch, and proper irrigation shall be maintained for all species throughout their lifespan.  
Section 9.2.3 - General Landscaping Requirements 
A.  Generally. The selection of plant species and materials shall comply with the following: 
1.  Approved Landscape Plants. Only approved plant materials, as set out in the City-published Approved Plant List, shall count towards the landscape requirements of this Section. The City shall make this list available to the public and may make periodic updates to the list as necessary. 
2.  Quality of New Plantings. All landscape material shall be in compliance with the standards of the American Nursery and Landscape Association. 
3.  Minimum Size and Spacing of Plants at Installation. Plant material shall be of the sizes set out in Table 9.2.3, Minimum Size and Spacing of Plants at Installation. 
Table 9.2.3 
Minimum Size and Spacing of Plants at Installation 
Type of Plant Material 	Minimum Size at Installation 	Minimum Permeable Planting Area (unless otherwise specified in this Division) 1 	Min. Spacing between Plantings 
Shade Tree 	3 in. caliper 	64 sf 	30' 
Ornamental Tree 	1.5 in. caliper 	32 sf 	15' 
Large Shrub 	5-gallon container 	N/A 	N/A 
Table Notes: 
1 The minimum permeable planting area is intended to allow for mature tree growth, to prevent damage from vehicles, and to avoid unnecessary maintenance to structures, walks, drives, and parking areas. 
 
4.  Landscape Berms. The slope of either side of a landscape berm shall not exceed 50% or 1:2. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.F.3, 5-21-2019)  
Section 9.2.4 - Single-Family, Duplex and Townhouse Landscaping 
A.  Generally. New landscaping on single-family, duplex, and townhouse parcels proposed for development shall comply with the standards of this Section. Any plants in excess of the minimum required plants may be installed in any location on the lot provided that the additional plantings have adequate room for healthy growth and stability, do not negatively affect drainage of stormwater, and do not restrict sight triangle visibility. 
B.  Shade Trees. Within the front yard setback outside of any utility easement, one shade tree shall be planted for the first 50 feet of frontage and one shade tree for each additional 40 feet of frontage, or fraction thereof. Trees shall be installed prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
C.  Substitution of Trees. Existing trees preserved within the front yard setback may count toward the shade tree requirement if shown to be in a healthful condition and providing shade canopy comparable to a full-grown shade tree. If existing trees are to remain, the tree protection measures of Subsection 9.1.2.G, Tree Protection During Construction, shall apply. 
D.  Landscaped Area. Areas of residential lots that are not covered by buildings, driveways, swimming pools, or other improved hard surfaces that have been disturbed during construction shall be hydro mulched or sodded with a warm-weather grass variety or landscaped with groundcovers, plants, mulch, or pervious rock bed unless they are covered by natural woodlands or other natural areas. Artificial or synthetic turf is permitted only in a rear yard and shall not count as a pervious surface. 
E.  Street Trees. Street trees located in the public right-of-way that are installed with new development shall be maintained by the developer, lot owner, tenant, property owners' association, or other entity having a legal interest in the ownership of the subdivision or lots in the subdivision. The maintenance responsibility shall be set out in the landscape plan that is required by this Division. 
F.  Residential Perimeter Screening. For residential parcels proposed for development consisting of single-family, duplex, or townhouse uses along major collector and arterial streets, perimeter screening shall be required as set out in Section 4.6.4, Fences and Walls.  
Section 9.2.5 - Nonresidential, Mixed-Use, and Apartment Landscaping 
A.  Generally. New landscaping on nonresidential, mixed-use, and apartment parcels proposed for development shall comply with the standards of this Section. Any plants in excess of the minimum required plants may be installed in any location on the lot provided that the additional plantings have adequate room for healthy growth and stability, do not negatively affect drainage of stormwater, and do not restrict sight triangle visibility. 
B.  Shade Trees. Two shade trees, or one shade tree and three ornamental trees, shall be installed for every 50 linear feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof. The shade tree(s) shall be located within the front or street side setback. In the DN and DT districts subject to build-to requirements, the shade tree(s) shall be spaced every 30 linear feet and placed in tree wells located within the street furniture/landscape zone of the public right-of-way adjacent to the street edge and meeting the standards for tree wells per the City's TCSS, provided a 6-foot minimum unhindered pedestrian way is maintained. 
C.  Substitution of Trees. Existing trees preserved within the front yard setback may count toward the shade tree requirement if shown to be in a healthful condition and providing shade canopy comparable to a full-grown shade tree. If existing trees are to remain, the tree protection measures of Subsection 9.1.2.G, Tree Protection During Construction, shall apply. 
D.  Groundcover Materials. Areas that are not covered by buildings, driveways, swimming pools, or other improved hard surfaces that have been disturbed during construction shall be sodded with a warm-weather grass variety or landscaped with groundcovers, plants, mulch, or pervious rock bed unless they are covered by natural woodlands or other natural areas. Artificial or synthetic turf is permitted only in a rear yard and shall not count as a pervious surface. 
E.  Street Yard Landscape Area. A landscaped street edge ensures an aesthetic visual buffer between the street or sidewalk and building or parking area. New nonresidential development shall include a street yard landscaped area 10 feet deep from the lot line along all public streets, except where a build-to requirement conflicts. At the approval of the Director, the 10-foot area may be located within the public right-of-way with the appropriate approvals and/or licenses, or set back further from the lot line to avoid utility conflicts or provide for better site design. All street yard landscaped areas shall provide two shade trees and 10 shrubs for every 500-square feet. of defined street yard landscaped area. 
F.  Perimeter Parking Lot Screening. Screening is required in order to minimize visual impacts of parked vehicles, vehicle lights, and parking lots, and to provide a continuous, appealing buffer area. Parking lots shall be screened along street frontage, access drives, and from abutting properties as follows: 
1.  Minimum Requirements. All parking lot screening shall be a minimum of three feet in height and be achieved through one or more of the following methods: 
a.  A vegetated hedge of an evergreen species; 
b.  A vegetated or grassy berm; 
c.  An opaque or semi-opaque fence or wall meeting the material requirements in Section 4.6.4, Fences and Walls (maximum height 3.5 feet); 
d.  A vegetated climbing wall or screen of an evergreen species (maximum height 3.5 feet); or 
e.  A combination of any of the above. 
2.  Exceptions. Screening shall not be required in the following situations: 
a.  If change in grade or elevation provides an equivalent level of screening for the parking, as determined by the Director. 
b.  Parking spaces provided in a multi-tenant shopping center in conjunction with shared access and/or shared parking between those properties. 
c.  Parking space directly accessed from an alley shall not be required to screen from the alley or adjacent property but shall be required to screen from an adjacent street right-of-way. 
G.  Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking lots are required to be landscaped as follows: 
1.  Each row of parking shall include an interior or endcap island for every 12 parking spaces, which shall include the following landscaping features: 
a.  One shade tree per parking row, provided that no parking space is located further than 50 feet from the trunk of a tree; and 
b.  Groundcover, perennials, native grasses, mulch or accented rock. 
2.  Each interior or endcap tree island, or any tree planting area in or along the perimeter of a parking lot, shall have a minimum non-compacted, pervious area of at least 100 square feet and have a minimum interior dimension of 10 feet wide, exclusive of the curb dimensions. Paving material may be used within the first foot of any interior or endcap tree island to allow people to access their vehicle and to minimize the impact to landscaping. 
3.  Each interior or endcap tree island, or any tree planting area in or along the perimeter of a parking lot, shall be protected by vertical six-inch curbs (or wheel stops when a vehicle directly faces the landscaping) per the specifications of the City Engineer. Curbs may be punctuated to allow for stormwater flows into biological treatment areas, as applicable, pursuant to an approved drainage plan, provided that the punctuations do not interfere with their protective function (see Subsection 9.2.5.H, Use of Islands for Low Impact Development, below). 
4.  Parking lot lighting shall not be located within, or interfere with, the future growth area of shade trees. 
H.  Use of Islands for Low Impact Development. Wherever possible, landscape areas may be used for low impact development (LID) to satisfy stormwater management requirements. These landscape areas may have larger minimum size areas to ensure engineering best management practices (BMPs) are met (see Division 5.4, Low Impact Development). 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.F.4, 5-21-2019)  
DIVISION 9.3 - BUFFERING 
 
Section 9.3.1 - Zoning District Bufferyards 
A.  Generally. Bufferyards are required to ensure compatibility between different areas of use, housing type, or density by providing a landscaped buffer between properties. Bufferyards are open spaces that are generally comprised of pervious surfaces with trees, plants, and other types of screening installed in accordance with this Division. 
B.  Bufferyard Classifications. Bufferyards are classified according to zoning district for properties that are not separated by a public or private street. Table 9.3.1.A, Bufferyard Classifications, establishes the bufferyard which applies to parcels proposed for development based on the abutting land to be buffered. 
Table 9.3.1.A 
Bufferyard Classifications 
Type of 
Development Proposed 	Zoning District of Adjacent Parcel 
	FR, RE, ENZ.1 1 	NR, ENZ.2 1 	DR 1 	TR, ENZ.3, ENZ.5 1 	MR, ENZ.4 1 	NC 	GC 	DN, DT 	BP 	IN 
Single-family development in any district 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Duplex, manufactured home, tiny house, townhouse, triplex, or quadplex development in any district 	A 	A 	A 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Apartment development in a TR, DR, MR, or ENZ.4 district 	B 	B 	B 	B 	A 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Nonresidential development in a residential district 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	— 	— 	— 	— 	— 
Nonresidential development in the NC zoning district 	B 	B 	B 	B 	A 	A 	A 	A 	B 	B 
Nonresidential development in the GC zoning district 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	B 	— 	B 	B 	B 
Nonresidential development in the DN or DT zoning districts 	C 	C 	A 	A 	A 	— 	— 	— 	B 	B 
Nonresidential development in the BP zoning district 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	— 	B 
Nonresidential development in the IN zoning district 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	D 	C 	— 
Table Notes: 
1 Bufferyard requirements may be reduced by the director if the adjacent residentially zoned property is developed with a nonresidential use. 
 
C.  Bufferyard Requirements. Table 9.3.1.B, Bufferyard Requirements, establishes the bufferyard standards to each bufferyard type. 
Table 9.3.1.B 
Bufferyard Requirements 
Bufferyard Type 	Width 	Required Plantings per 100 Linear Feet (number of) 	Opaque Wall or Fence (height) 
		Shade Trees 2 (evergreen variety) 	Ornamental Trees (evergreen variety) 	Large Shrubs (evergreen variety) 	
Type A 	10' 	3 	4 	20 	N/A 1 
Type B 	15' 	4 	6 	20 	N/A 1 
Type C 	25' 	6 	8 	20 	6' 3 
Type D 	40' 	10 	10 	25 	8' 3 
Table Notes: 
1 The six-foot tall opaque wall or fence is not required for Type A and Type B bufferyards but may utilized as a substitute for all of the required Large Shrub plantings. 
2 Existing trees preserved within the bufferyard may count toward the shade tree or ornamental tree requirement if shown to be in a healthful condition and providing shade canopy comparable to a full-grown shade tree. If existing trees are to remain, the tree protection measures of Section 9.1.2.G, Tree Protection During Construction, shall apply. 
3 A berm, at least two feet in height and containing the required plantings may be substituted for a wall or fence. 
  
ARTICLE 11 - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 11.1 - REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY 
 
Section 11.1.1 - Generally 
A.  Generally. This Article establishes the review and decision-making authority for each application for permit or approval as either requiring administrative approval or a public meeting or hearing and approval by an elected or appointed body. This Article establishes how the designated decision-making authority exercises that authority as it relates to decisions required by these regulations. 
B.  No Implied Limitation. The provisions of this Article shall not be a limitation regarding the conduct of the Council, boards, commissions, or City staff where additional responsibilities or authority are set out elsewhere in these regulations, the City's Code of Ordinances, or through policies adopted by the City Council, or a board or commission approved by the City Council. 
C.  Delegation of Duties. Assigned City staff decision-makers may delegate duties to other City staff to perform such functions and duties as may be required by these regulations; provided that such delegation is to other City staff or outside entities which are technically proficient to undertake such duties. Such designation does not relieve the decision-makers of overall responsibility for any final action, report, recommendation or additional duty described in these regulations. 
D.  Recordkeeping. A record of files related to all applications established in this Article shall be kept by City staff for public inspection in a format consistent with open records laws.  
Section 11.1.2 - City Council 
A.  Generally. The City Council shall have all the powers and duties as set out in the City's Home Rule Charter, the City's Code of Ordinances, and the constitution and the laws of the State of Texas. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. As it relates to these regulations, the City Council shall act upon the permits and applications set out in Section 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority. In addition, the City Council may take any other action not delegated to an appointed board, commission, or committee, or City staff, as the City Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of these regulations, the Home Rule Charter, the City's Code of Ordinances, or other policies, rules, ordinances, or regulations established by the City.  
Section 11.1.3 - Planning and Zoning Commission 
A.  Generally. The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized by Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, Article 9, Planning and Zoning, of the City's Home Rule Charter, and Chapter 17, Planning, of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as an advisory board to the City Council. As it relates to these regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall act upon the permits and applications set out in Section 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority. In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise its authority in recommending plans for the physical development and redevelopment of the City and other duties as may be assigned by the City Council. 
C.  Joint Meetings. Any public hearing required by these regulations or state law to be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission may be held jointly with any public hearing required to be held by City Council. Such joint meetings may be held after publication of notice as required by law.  
Section 11.1.4 - Zoning Board of Adjustment 
A.  Generally. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is authorized by Section 211.008, Board of Adjustment, of the Tex. Local Gov't. Code and Chapter 17, Planning, of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is the delegated authority in hearing and deciding Zoning Variances. As it relates to these regulations, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall act upon the applications set out in Section 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority.  
Section 11.1.5 - Reserved  
Section 11.1.6 - Reserved  
Section 11.1.7 - Reserved  
Section 11.1.8 - City Manager 
A.  Generally. The City Manager position and its authority is established in Section 4.01, City Manager, of the City's Home Rule Charter. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City, and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the City. As it relates to these regulations, the City Manager has the authority to assign and appoint the responsibilities to the Director, City Engineer, Building Official, Floodplain Administrator, or any other member of City staff or person acting on behalf of City staff. The City Manager may also choose to establish a development review committee or similar informal body to participate in the technical review and comment of development applications for the City.  
Section 11.1.9 - Director 
A.  Generally. The Director is a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager to be the administrator of these regulations. Such duties may be allocated and reallocated by the City Manager in the exercise of the responsibilities of that office without amendment to these regulations. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. As it relates to these regulations, the Director shall act upon the permits and applications set out in Section 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority.  
Section 11.1.10 - City Engineer 
A.  Generally. The City Engineer is a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager to serve as the official Engineer of the City of Marble Falls and shall perform the duties and responsibilities as described by these regulations and other regulations set out in the City's Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. As it relates to these regulations, the City Engineer shall act upon the permits and applications set out in Section 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority. The City Engineer shall also maintain the City's Technical Criteria and Specification Standards (TCSS) manual and other technical specification manuals as may be necessary to review and implement these regulations.  
Section 11.1.11 - Building Official 
A.  Generally. The Building Official is a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City through ensuring compliance with the City's adopted building codes and other provisions set out in these regulations. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. As it relates to these regulations, the Building Official shall act upon the permits and applications set out in Section 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority.  
Section 11.1.12 - Floodplain Administrator 
A.  Generally. As it relates to these regulations, the Floodplain Administrator is a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager to administer and implement all floodplain management provisions of these regulations and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance—National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
B.  Role and Responsibilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall act upon the permits and applications set out in Section 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Recordkeeping. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Section. 
2.  Permit Review. 
a.  Review permit applications to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
b.  Review, approve or deny all applications for Floodplain Development Permits required by adoption of this Section. 
c.  Review permit applications for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
3.  Interpretation of Boundaries of Areas of Special Flood Hazards. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
4.  Responsibilities Pertaining to Alterations to or Relocations of Watercourses. 
a.  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
5.  Floodplain Information and Determination. 
a.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Subsection 5.2.2.B, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, to administer the provisions of Section 5.2.3, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction, of these regulations. 
b.  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator shall require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
6.  Required Map Provisions. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all the provisions required by [CFR] Section 65.12.  
Section 11.1.13 - Reserved  
Section 11.1.14 - Reserved  
Section 11.1.15 - Reserved  
Section 11.1.16 - Summary of Decision-Making Authority 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the decision authority for each application for permit or approval as either requiring administrative approval, requiring a public meeting or hearing, and/or requiring approval by an elected or appointed body. 
B.  Summary of Decision-Making Authority. The deciding authority for each application for permit or approval required by these regulations is identified in Table 11.1.16, Summary of Decision-Making Authority. 
Table 11.1.16 
Summary of Decision-Making Authority 
Application or Procedure 	Elected and 
Appointed Authorities 	Administrative Authorities 	Section Cross-Reference 
	City Council 	Planning and 
Zoning Commission 	Zoning Board 
of Adjustment 	City Manager 	Director 	City Engineer 	Building Official 	Floodplain 
Administrator 	
D = Decision Maker R= Recommending Body A = Appeal * = Public Hearing Required 
Administrative Exception 	A* 				D 				11.5.5 
Annexation (Voluntary) 	D* 								11.3.1 
Certificate of Occupancy 	A* 						D 		11.5.6 
Conditional Use Permit 	D* 	R* 							11.3.4 
Floodplain Development Permit 	A* 							D 	11.5.3 
Floodplain Development Variance 	D* 								11.3.8 
Land Disturbance Permit 	A* 					D 			11.5.2 
Planned Development District 	D* 	R* 							11.3.3 
Special Exception 	D* 								11.3.7 
Site Development Plan 	A* 				D 				11.5.4 
Subdivision - Amending Plat 					D 				11.4.7 
Subdivision - Development Plat 	D 	R 							11.4.5 
Subdivision - Final Plat 	D 	R 							11.4.3 
Subdivision - Minor Plat 					D 				11.4.4 
Subdivision - Plat Vacation 	D 	R 							11.4.9 
Subdivision - Preliminary Plat 	D 	R 							11.4.2 
Subdivision - Replat 	D* 1 	R* 1 							11.4.6 
Subdivision Waiver and Suspension 	D 	R 							11.4.8 
Text Amendment 	D* 	R* 							11.3.9 
Zoning Variance 			D* 						11.3.6 
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 	D* 	R* 							11.3.2 
Table Notes: 
1 If required by State Law. 
  
DIVISION 11.2 - GENERAL ADMINSTRATION 
 
Section 11.2.1 - General Application Procedures 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes general application procedures and internal review procedures that shall apply to all applications for a permit or approval that are set out in this Article. 
B.  Pre-Application Meeting. 
1.  Generally. Prior to the submission of an application for permit or approval, a pre-application meeting may be required or recommended between a potential applicant and the Director, or a designated representative of either party, and any other pertinent representatives or staff. The pre-application meeting is intended for the City and potential applicant to exchange non-binding information to promote an efficient development review process. The Director shall determine and publish which application types require a pre-application meeting. 
2.  Pre-Application Forms and Materials. The Director may determine and publish forms or documents that include information requirements, materials checklist, contact information, and any other information necessary to sufficiently describe the potential application. 
3.  Vesting Rights. Neither a pre-application meeting, nor any forms, materials, and information submitted for a pre-application meeting, shall be considered a vesting instrument, nor shall it vest a permit, application, or any type of approval. 
C.  Application Forms. 
1.  Generally. Every application for approval or permit required by these regulations shall be submitted on forms prepared by the Director, along with supporting materials and application fee. 
2.  Forms. In addition to the requirements outlined herein for each type of development application, the City is hereby authorized to prepare application forms to collect information and materials necessary to process each type of application. 
a.  Application forms shall include specific information including, but not limited to, information requirements, checklists, architectural or engineering drawing sizes, language blocks for plats, applicant contact information, materials and any other information necessary to facilitate the review of the application for compliance with and administration of these regulations, as prepared by the Director. 
b.  The forms and paperwork are available in paper or digital format at the City office where applications are submitted and/or reviewed. 
c.  The Director shall periodically review and may revise forms for each type of application from time to time. 
d.  It is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, these policies and procedures. 
D.  Fees. 
1.  Generally. Every application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees set forth in Appendix C, Master Fee Schedule, of the Code of Ordinances. The City shall not accept an application for review without the required application fee. The adopted fees may be revised from time to time by the City Council and shall not require amendment of these regulations. 
2.  Payable. All required fees shall be made payable to "The City of Marble Falls." 
3.  Required for Administrative Completeness. All applications shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees to be considered administratively complete. 
4.  Fee Refunds. 
a.  Withdrawn Applications. Withdrawn applications that have not been determined to be administratively complete may be refunded 50 percent of the application fee. 
b.  Administratively Complete Applications. Once an application has been determined to be administratively complete, the prescribed fees shall not be refundable, except when submitted in error. 
E.  Determination of Administrative Completeness. 
1.  Generally. An application shall not be considered as officially submitted, accepted for review, or filed until it has been determined by the Director to be administratively complete. 
2.  Considerations for Determination of Administrative Completeness. The Director, or designee, shall review each submitted application to determine if the minimum items needed for proper review of such application are present. An application must be determined to be administratively complete in order to begin the review process. 
a.  A submitted application shall not be determined to be administratively complete until, at a minimum, the following has been received by the City: 
i.  Completed application form; 
ii.  Payment of all applicable fees; and 
iii.  All the application requirements and supplemental information indicated as required per the application form for the specific type of application. 
b.  A submitted application shall not be determined to be administratively complete until, at a minimum, the following has been completed by the applicant: 
i.  Pre-application meeting with staff has been held (if required); and 
ii.  All required preceding approvals (e.g., proper zoning, approved plats, etc.) have been acquired. 
3.  Timeframe for Administrative Completeness Review. No more than ten business days after the receipt of an application by the City, the Director shall review the application for administrative completeness. Failure by the Director to make a determination of administrative completeness or to provide notice of administrative incompleteness, as set out in Subsection 11.2.1.E.4, Administratively Incomplete Applications, below, within this time frame shall result in the application being deemed administratively complete on the eleventh business day following receipt. 
4.  Administratively Incomplete Applications. Applications that do not include all required information and materials shall be considered administratively incomplete. 
a.  The Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the determination and shall provide a written explanation of missing or incomplete items that are necessary to complete the application. 
b.  The Director may elect to extend the time period of determination of administrative completeness for the applicant to submit the missing or incomplete items. The Director shall provide, in writing, a specified timeframe to the applicant for the incomplete item(s) to be resubmitted. If the item(s) is not resubmitted within this time period, the application shall be deemed rejected and shall not be reviewed for technical completeness, shall not be considered filed, and shall be returned to the applicant. 
c.  The applicant may request an additional meeting for explanation of the missing or incomplete items. 
d.  After an application has been determined to be administratively incomplete and rejected, a new application and fee shall be required for any future submittals. 
5.  Administratively Complete Applications. Administratively complete applications shall be processed according to the applicable development approval procedures of this Article. The determination of an administratively complete application does not constitute a determination of technical completeness or compliance with applicable regulations nor imply that the application successfully meets any review criteria. 
F.  Determination of Technical Completeness. 
1.  Generally. Upon receipt of an administratively complete application, the City shall commence technical compliance review of the submitted application. This may include review by a development review committee, which may be designated by the City Manager. 
2.  Determination of Technical Completeness. An application shall not be deemed to be technically complete until staff has determined the application and any supporting documents meet all applicable requirements of these regulations and are in compliance with any other applicable City or State requirements. 
3.  Technically Incomplete Applications. Applications that do not include all required information and materials shall be considered technically incomplete. 
a.  The Director shall notify the applicant in writing of any revisions deemed necessary for the application to be determined to be technically complete. The applicant may request a meeting for explanation of the missing or incomplete items. 
b.  The applicant shall submit any necessary corrections to the City no later than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the public meeting at which it is scheduled to be considered, if applicable. 
c.  An application presented to the Commission and/or City Council prior to determination of technical completeness may be subject to denial. 
4.  Technically Complete Applications. Technically complete applications shall be processed according to the applicable development approval procedures of this Article. The determination of a technically complete application by City staff does not constitute or imply an approval by the decision-making authority. 
G.  Proof of Land Ownership. 
1.  Generally. Except as provided by these regulations, any application for permit or approval shall be initiated only by the property owner or owner of an interest in the land. A property owner may authorize a representative to submit an application for permit or approval provided that the application includes a signed statement from the property owner authorizing the representative to file the application on the owner's behalf. 
2.  Written Verification Required. Along with the application, the applicant shall provide written verification of land ownership of the subject land parcel or parcels, provided to the City at the time of submittal. The Director shall have the authority to determine what document(s) the City will require to prove ownership, such as one of the following: 
a.  General warranty deed; 
b.  Special warranty deed; 
c.  Title policy; or 
d.  Certified copy of a tax certificate from Burnet Central Appraisal District. 
H.  Payment of All Indebtedness Attributable to a Specific Property. 
1.  Generally. No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent fees, delinquent paving assessments, or any other delinquent debts or obligations to the City of Marble Falls, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property, shall be allowed to proceed forward to final permit or approval for said property until the taxes, assessments, debts or obligations directly attributable to said property have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement satisfactory to the City Manager (or designee) has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. 
2.  Applicant's Responsibility. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, assessments, debts or obligations have been paid at the time of submission for any application for approval under these regulations. 
I.  Concurrent Applications. 
1.  Generally. An applicant may concurrently submit different applications related to the same development within each of the following application groups. Approval of all relevant applications within each group must be obtained prior to submission of an application in the subsequent group. 
a.  Policy Applications; 
b.  Annexation (Voluntary); 
c.  Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning); 
d.  Conditional Use Permit; 
e.  Variance; 
f.  Special Exception; 
g.  Preliminary Plat; 
h.  Development Applications; 
i.  Final Plat; 
j.  Site Development Plan; 
k.  Building Permit. 
2.  Fees. The applicant is subject to the fees for each application. 
3.  Consideration for Concurrent Applications. Consideration for each application shall remain in the appropriate sequence of development. Any application submitted concurrently is subject to the approval of all related applications. Denial or disapproval of any individual application from a group of concurrently submitted applications shall stop consideration of all subsequent applications, if such approval is necessary for the subsequent applications to proceed. 
4.  Withdrawal of Individual Applications. An applicant may withdraw an individual application from a group of concurrently submitted applications. A withdrawal may stop consideration of subsequent applications if such application requires the approval of the withdrawn application. 
J.  Application Continuances. 
1.  Generally. An applicant may request a continuance of the application in writing prior to a public meeting, or on the record during the meeting prior to when a recommendation or decision is made. The Director may approve a continuance request if the request is made prior to the public posting of the public meeting or may choose to defer the decision of the continuance request to the administering body. A request for a continuance by an applicant after the public meeting has been posted or at the public meeting itself may be granted by the administering body upon a motion and decision of the body to table the agenda item. 
2.  Costs Associated with Continuance. If the continuance was requested by the applicant, the applicant shall pay all additional costs associated with rescheduling and/or for re-notice of the proceeding. 
K.  Expired and Stale Applications. 
1.  Generally. Applications that become stale as set out in this Article shall be deemed expired and become immediately null and void and the City will subsequently close the application file. An expired application will end all claims to vesting pertaining to the expired application. 
2.  Stale Applications. Applications for development approval must be diligently pursued by the applicant to remain active or otherwise face expiration for inactivity. An accepted application for which there has been no action taken by an applicant for a period of six months or more from the date of the last action shall be determined to be stale and processed as withdrawn by the applicant, causing the file to be closed. The Director shall notify the applicant in writing 30 days in advance of the pending closure and may allow the applicant additional time to act to continue pursuit of approval. 
L.  Limit on Reapplications. 
1.  Generally. If any application for permit or approval is denied by the final deciding authority, a substantially identical application shall not be filed within six months from the date of the denial, except as provided herein. 
2.  Allowed Successive Reapplications. The decision-making body that rendered the final decision to deny may allow a successive reapplication within the six-month timeframe if the applicant can demonstrate: 
a.  There are substantial changes to the circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered during review of the prior application, or new or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review of the prior application, that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's review of the application; 
b.  The new application is substantially different than the prior application and has corrected any defects or substantive issues or addresses concerns or issues that were significant to the decision to deny the prior application; or 
c.  The final decision on the application was based on a material mistake of fact. 
3.  Successive Reapplication Procedures. An allowed successive reapplication shall be considered a new application and is subject to the application procedures and fees for a new application. Successive reapplications shall establish grounds warranting reconsideration of the application, including demonstrating how the new, additional, or changed information affects review of the application.  
Section 11.2.2 - Public Hearings 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes general procedures for applications for permits or approvals that require a public hearing by the City Council or a City board or commission established in Division 11.1, Review and Decision-Making Authority. Procedures for each type of application requiring a public hearing are set out in the following sections of this Article. 
B.  Public Hearings. 
1.  Required Public Hearings. Applications that require a public hearing in accordance with state law or these regulations are identified in Table 11.2.2, Required Public Hearings, below: 
Table 11.2.2.B 
Required Public Hearings 
	Meeting Body 
Application Procedure 	City Council 	Planning and Zoning Commission 	Zoning Board of Adjustment 
Annexation (Voluntary) 	X 		
Appeal 	X 		
Conditional Use Permit 	X 	X 	
Floodplain Development Variance 	X 		
Planned Development District 	X 	X 	
Special Exception 	X 		
Subdivision - Replat 	X 1 	X 1 	
Text Amendment 	X 	X 	
Zoning Variance 			X 
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 	X 	X 	
Table Notes: 
1 If required by state law. 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.G.1, 5-21-2019)  
Section 11.2.3 - Public Notice 
A.  Generally. Public notice required by these regulations shall be provided pursuant to the requirements of this Section and applicable requirements of state law. The provisions herein are in addition to open meeting notice requirements established by state law and shall not exempt the City from meeting the notice requirements of all public meetings and hearings as required by the Home Rule Charter and Chapter 551, Open Meetings, of the Tex. Gov't Code. 
B.  Required Public Notice. With regards to applications for permit or approval, notice of all public meetings and public hearings required by these regulations shall be provided as prescribed in Table 11.2.3, Required Public Notice, below: 
Table 11.2.3 
Required Public Notice 
Application Procedure 	Published Notice 	Mailed Notice 
Annexation (Voluntary) 	X 	
Appeal 	X 	
Conditional Use Permit 	X 	X 
Floodplain Development Variance 	X 	
Subdivision - Replat 1 	X 	X 
Special Exception 	X 	X 
Text Amendment 	X 	
Variance 	X 	X 
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 	X 	X 
Table Notes: 
1 If public hearing required by state law. 
 
C.  Responsibility of Required Public Notice. The Director shall determine responsible parties for all published and mailed notices as required by these regulations. 
D.  Timing of Required Public Notice. 
1.  Notice of a public meeting shall be posted in a place readily accessible to the general public at all times for at least 72 hours before the scheduled time of the meeting, except as provided by state law. 
2.  Unless otherwise noted, public notices of a public hearing shall be published or mailed as required by these regulations at least 15 days in advance of the public hearing. 
3.  If the notice requirement is not met in the required time frame, then the public hearing item shall be delayed until the notice requirement is met. 
E.  Published Notice. 
1.  A public notice shall be published at least once in the public newspaper of general circulation within the City, as designated by the City Manager. 
2.  The notice shall contain information pursuant to Subsection 11.2.3.G, Content of Published and Mailed Notices, below. 
F.  Mailed Notice. 
1.  A written notice shall be sent to owners of record of real property within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject property. 
2.  Measurements shall be taken from the boundary of the subject property or properties, inclusive of public streets. 
3.  Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the municipal tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, with the United States Postal Service (USPS). 
4.  The notice shall contain information pursuant to Subsection 11.2.3.G, Content of Published and Mailed Notices, below. 
G.  Content of Published and Mailed Notices. Published and mailed public notices shall include the following specific information: 
1.  The general location of land that is the subject of the application; 
2.  The legal description or street address; 
3.  The type of application sought, including the specific nature or intent of the application; 
4.  The time, date, and location of the public hearing; 
5.  A phone number and email address to contact the City; and 
6.  A statement that interested parties may appear at the public hearing.  
DIVISION 11.3 - PERMITS AND APPROVALS 
 
Section 11.3.1 - Annexation (Voluntary) 
A.  Generally. The City Council may, by ordinance, annex land into the City limits pursuant to the various processes of Chapter 43, Municipal Annexations, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code and the Home Rule Charter. This Section describes annexation proceedings deemed to be voluntary on the part of a property owner. 
B.  Initiation of Voluntary Annexation. Voluntary annexation of land may be initiated by the submittal of an annexation petition application by the property owner(s) or their authorized representative. 
C.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for City Council to render an informed decision. 
D.  Procedures. All proposed voluntary annexations shall follow the procedure set out in this Section. 
1.  Staff Review. For each annexation application, the City Manager or designee shall review the application and prepare a findings report, which shall be presented to the City Council at a public meeting. 
2.  City Council Review. 
a.  In accordance with the annexation procedures prescribed by Chapter 43, Municipal Annexations, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the City Council shall hold the required public meetings. Notice of required public hearing shall be provided pursuant to Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice. 
b.  After reviewing the annexation petition and holding the requisite public meetings, the City Council shall take final action by an affirmative vote of a majority of the body, to: 
i.  Approve the annexation; or 
ii.  Deny the annexation. 
E.  Initial Zoning. Land brought into the City Limits through an annexation process shall be initially zoned to the Farm and Ranch (FR) district effective upon annexation, as set out in Section 2.1.3, Zoning of Annexed Land. It is intended that further rezoning of the land from the initial zoning district will be acted upon using the guidance of the Future Land Use Plan set out in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
F.  Effect of Approval. An affirmative approval of a voluntary annexation by the City Council, following the procedures set out in this Section, shall be in effect in the manner provided by the Home Rule Charter or state law.  
Section 11.3.2 - Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 
A.  Generally. The City Council may, by ordinance, amend or change the boundaries of the existing zoning districts or change the district classification (rezone) of a property pursuant to this Section. 
B.  Initiation of a Zoning Map Amendment. A Zoning Map Amendment may be initiated in one of the following ways: 
1.  Application by the property owner(s); 
2.  Motion and affirmative majority vote of the City Council; or 
3.  Motion and affirmative majority vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
C.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1., General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for City Council to render an informed decision. 
1.  If the Zoning Map Amendment is related to another application, additional information and maps shall be submitted as required by those applicable regulations. 
2.  If the Zoning Map Amendment is a proposed Planned Development District, a concept plan pursuant to Section 11.3.5, Concept Plan, a written development plan and exhibits, and other supplemental information shall be submitted as required in the submittal forms. Planned Development Districts shall meet the requirements set out in Division 4.4, Master Planned Communities and Planned Development Districts. 
3.  For a Zoning Map Amendment initiated by the City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission, the application submittal shall be prepared by the Director pursuant to the intention of the motion, and no fee shall be required. 
D.  Procedures. All proposed Zoning Map Amendment requests shall follow the procedures set out in this Section. 
1.  Staff Review. For each Zoning Map Amendment request, the Director shall review the application considering the approval criteria established in Subsection 11.3.2.E, Review Criteria, below, and may refer the application to other departments as deemed necessary. The Director shall prepare a findings report, which shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council at the same public meeting as the public hearing and may also provide a recommendation. 
2.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review. 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice, on any Zoning Map Amendment prior to making its recommendation to City Council. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may table its recommendation on the Zoning Map Amendment to continue a public hearing; to obtain additional information; or for further consideration. Such postponement of the final recommendation of a Zoning Map Amendment by the Planning and Zoning Commission may not exceed the second scheduled public meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission following the initial decision to table. 
c.  Following a public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final recommendation to the City Council by an affirmative vote of a majority of the body to: 
i.  Approve the Zoning Map Amendment; or 
ii.  Deny the Zoning Map Amendment. 
d.  The recommendation to the City Council shall be considered the final report as required by Section 211.007(b) of the Tex. Local Gov't Code. Failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to make a recommendation and final report to the City Council shall be considered a recommendation for denial. 
3.  City Council Review. 
a.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice on any Zoning Map Amendment prior to making its decision. 
b.  The City Council may refer the proposed Zoning Map Amendment back to Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration; continue a public hearing; or table the action. A continuance, or postponement, of the final decision of a Zoning Map Amendment may not exceed 90 days. 
c.  Following a public hearing, the City Council shall take final action by an affirmative vote of a majority of the elected body, to: 
i.  Approve the Zoning Map Amendment; or 
ii.  Deny the Zoning Map Amendment. 
E.  Review Criteria—Zoning Map Amendments. In the review and consideration of a proposed Zoning Map Amendment, the Director, Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. The proposed zoning promotes the goals, objectives, and policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan and is consistent with the Future Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, and Sidewalk and Trail Corridor Opportunities Plan; 
2.  Promotion of Public Health and Safety. The proposed zoning promotes the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe orderly, and healthful development of the City; 
3.  Suitability of the District's Land Uses. The subject property is suitable for uses allowed by the proposed zoning district, and the allowed uses and development regulations of the proposed zoning are compatible with the development and conforming uses of nearby property and with the character of the neighborhood; 
4.  Development Adequacy of the Property. The dimensions of the subject property are sufficient to comply with the development regulations of the proposed zoning district to reasonably accommodate the uses and development allowed by the proposed zoning district; and 
5.  Adequate Infrastructure. The proposed zoning is consistent with the existing or planned provisions for streets, water, wastewater, and other public utilities or services to the subject property or area in which the subject property is located. 
F.  Protests. 
1.  Eligible Protests. For a legal protest against a proposed Zoning Map Amendment, a written instrument shall be filed with the City prior to the close of the public hearing that includes signatures from either: 
a.  Persons owning 20 percent or more of the land area adjoining and within 200 feet of the area proposed for Zoning Map Amendment, but excluding land outside the City or the City's extra-territorial jurisdiction; or 
b.  Persons owning 20 percent or more of the land area included within the proposed Zoning Map Amendment related to modifications to an approved Planned Development District. 
2.  Effect on Decision. If an eligible protest against a proposed amendment is confirmed by the City prior to the close of the public hearing of the proposed Zoning Map Amendment, then approval of the Zoning Map Amendment shall require a three-fourths majority vote of the City Council. 
G.  Effect of Approval. An affirmative approval of a Zoning Map Amendment by the City Council, following the procedures set out in this Section, shall be in effect in the manner provided by the Home Rule Charter or state law.  
Section 11.3.3 - Planned Development District Zoning 
A.  Generally. The City Council may, by ordinance, create a Planned Development District as identified in Section 4.4.3, Planned Development Districts, and pursuant to the Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) requirements established in Section 11.3.2, Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) and the supplemental standards and procedures established herein. 
B.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for City Council to render an informed decision. The Director may require the submission of additional information as needed to meet the objectives of these requirements. 
C.  Planned Development Regulating Documents. The ordinance adopting a Planned Development District becomes the regulating document and as such the following elements shall be required with an application for a Planned Development District in order to be considered complete: 
1.  Statement of Purpose of Planned Development District. The ordinance granting a Planned Development District shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the Planned Development District granted therein. 
2.  Development Plan. The ordinance granting a Planned Development District shall include a Development Plan identifying the terms and standards necessary for the development of the property, and shall contain at a minimum the following: 
a.  The combination of permitted uses and associated special development standards within the district, including, but not limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, project phasing or scheduling, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate. 
b.  In the case where a base zoning district is identified as being modified, a specific list of modifications and reason for modification shall be cited. 
c.  Graphical and narrative descriptions of use and design integration and compatibility should be utilized to facilitate understanding of the proposed regulations. 
d.  One conventional zoning district as a base zoning district shall be selected to apply to all uses and development regulations wherever the proposed Planned Development District is silent or does not apply. Multiple base zoning districts may be selected to accommodate a mixture of land uses in different geographic areas. 
3.  Conceptual Plan or Site Development Plan. In order to facilitate understanding of the proposed Planned Development District during the review and public hearing process, applications shall include either a Concept Plan for Conceptual Planned Developments, as set out in Section 11.3.5, Concept Plan, or Site Development Plan for Detailed Planned Developments, as set out in Section 11.5.3, Site Development Plan. The plans shall graphically demonstrate the applicant's intent for the development of the proposed Planned Development and compliance with this Section and Section 4.4.3, Planned Development Districts. These plans, if approved, shall be a component of the ordinance and regulate future development of the district. The Director shall clearly describe and publish such required information in a form or checklist. 
D.  Procedures. 
1.  The creation of a Planned Development District shall be considered a Zoning Map Amendment request and shall follow the regular procedures set out in Subsection 11.3.2.D, Procedures. 
2.  Creation of lots for development of a Planned Development or property within a Planned Development shall follow the applicable procedures established in Division 11.4, Subdivision Permits and Approvals. 
E.  Review Criteria. In the review and consideration of a proposed Planned Development District, the Director, Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council shall consider that the Development Plan and Concept Plan for the district provide a framework for an enhanced land design and integration of uses and ensure that the proposal clearly exceeds the minimum standards of these regulations. As part of the consideration, the applicant shall provide the reason(s) as to why the proposed development cannot be accommodated by these regulations. 
1.  Compliance with Applicable Criteria of Planned Development Districts. The Planned Development District shall comply with the criteria established in Section 4.4.3, Planned Development Districts. 
2.  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. As the intent of the Planned Development District is to provide for use as well as design flexibility, any combination of uses may be considered for the district as long as each use is specifically identified along with any appropriate conditions or limitations of each. The elements of the proposed Planned Development District shall be consistent with and promote the goals of the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  Enhanced Project Design. It is the intent of these regulations to encourage outstanding project design for Planned Development Districts in order to implement the policies contained in the City's Comprehensive Plan. In exchange for greater flexibility in development of a project, Planned Development Districts are expected to develop to a standard that is greater than the regulatory standards applicable to non-Planned Development Districts. The following standards will be used to evaluate project design: 
a.  The arrangement of all uses and improvements should reflect the natural capabilities and limitations of the site as well as the characteristics and limitations of adjacent property. 
b.  Development must be compatible with the immediate environment of the site and neighborhood relative to architectural design; scale, bulk and building height; historical character; and disposition and orientation of buildings on the lot. 
c.  Buildings, transportation improvements, and open space areas, must be arranged on the site so that activities are compatible with the neighborhood. 
d.  Buildings, transportation improvements, open space, and landscaping, must be designed and arranged to produce an efficient, functionally organized, and cohesive development. 
e.  Buildings, transportation improvements, open space and landscaping, must be in favorable relationship to the existing natural topography, natural vegetation and creeks, exposure to sunlight and wind, and long or scenic views. 
f.  The project should preserve and enhance the natural character of the site and should be designed to reflect the existing topography and natural systems. Vegetative communities located in floodplains, existing tree stands and along steep slopes should be maintained as open areas and wildlife habitat. Creeks and streams should be preserved and enhanced as amenities. 
g.  The project should preserve historic elements of the site, including features such as farm structures and dwellings, stone wells, entry features, windmills, or other features that illustrate the historic resources of the site. 
h.  The project should be integrated with the City's open space network as described in the Parks and Open Space Plan of the Comprehensive Plan, including provision of a trail that would connect to the overall trail system of the City. Public or common uses and open space should be connected together to promote pedestrian usage. Utilization of open space should be enhanced through provision of amenities. 
4.  Compatibility with Nearby Uses. The Planned Development District shall be compatible with nearby uses. Impacts to adjoining property shall be mitigated and where the development does not meet ordinance requirements, the application shall describe the mitigation measures being utilized to offset the requirements of the ordinance that are not being met. 
5.  Impact on Traffic. The Planned Development District shall not create undue traffic congestion or a traffic hazard. At the time of the application for a Planned Development District, the City Engineer may require a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA), pursuant to Subsection 6.2.1.D, Traffic Impact Analysis, to identify potential traffic impacts generated by the proposed Planned Development District. Such TIA must be approved by the City Council prior to or concurrently with the approval by the City Council of the Planned Development District. The TIA shall not be considered part of the Planned Development District Concept Plan or the Planned Development District ordinance, but may be used to condition the traffic circulation and controls, density or intensity of uses, or the timing, sequence, or phasing of development within the district based upon the existence of a supporting roadway network adequate to accommodate the traffic expected to be generated. The TIA shall be updated with each development within the Planned Development District at time of Site Development Plan submittal. 
F.  Effect of Approval. An affirmative approval of a Planned Development District by the City Council, following the procedures set out in this Section, is considered a Zoning Map Amendment and shall be in effect in the manner provided by the Home Rule Charter or state law. 
G.  Development of or in a Planned Development District. An approved Planned Development District shall regulate the use and development of property within the district boundaries, and all building permits and development requests shall be in accordance with the approved Planned Development District until it is amended by the City Council. 
1.  No development shall begin and no building permit shall be issued for any land within a Planned Development District until a Site Development Plan is approved that is consistent with the Planned Development District ordinance, Concept Plan and associated development standards. 
2.  The Planned Development District shall not modify the procedures of the application or approval process for development or building within the Planned Development District. Such processes shall follow and adhere to the normal procedures and requirements established by these regulations. 
H.  Modifications and Amendments to Planned Development Districts. Revisions or modifications to adopted regulating documents of a Planned Development District shall be as follows: 
1.  Concept Plan. Revisions or modifications to an approved Concept Plan shall be pursuant to Section 11.3.5, Concept Plans. 
2.  Site Development Plan. Revisions or modifications to an approved Site Development Plan shall be pursuant to Section 11.5.3, Site Development Plan. 
3.  Development Plan. Revisions or modifications to an approved Development Plan shall be pursuant to this Section. 
I.  Expiration of Approved Planned Development Districts. Approval of a Planned Development District, including any Concept Plan, Site Development Plan, and development standards, shall expire if no progress toward completion of the project is made within 10 years following issuance of such approval by the City Council. Expiration of a particular approval or permit, or of the project as a whole will be determined in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
J.  Revocation of Approved Planned Development Districts. 
1.  Generally. The City Council may hear and consider an application to nullify an approved Planned Development District and any associated regulating documents. 
2.  Property Owner Requests. The property owner may nullify an approved Planned Development District and any associated regulating documents by making an application for rezoning to the zoning district in place prior to the approval of the Planned Development District or to a new zoning district classification. 
3.  City Initiated Revocations. The City may initiate a revocation by rezoning the property to the zoning district in place prior to the approval of the Planned Development District if it is determined that: 
a.  The project has expired pursuant to Subsection 11.3.3.I, Expiration of Approved Planned Development Districts, above; 
b.  The applicant misrepresented any material fact on the application or supporting materials; 
c.  The project fails or ceases to comply with the applicable standards, criteria, or conditions of the Planned Development District ordinance; 
d.  The Planned Development District violates its reversionary clause; 
e.  The Planned Development District violates any statute, law, or regulation; or 
f.  The Planned Development District constitutes a real or potential threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public.  
Section 11.3.4 - Conditional Use Permit 
A.  Generally. A Conditional Use Permit is required to allow conditional uses as identified in Division 3.1, Land Uses by Zoning District. 
B.  Initiation of Application. An application for a Conditional Use Permit may be filed by the property owner(s), or a person having a contractual interest in the subject property. 
C.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for City Council to render an informed decision. 
D.  Procedures. All applications for a Conditional Use Permit shall follow the procedure set out in this Section. 
1.  Staff Review. For each Conditional Use Permit request, the Director shall review the application considering the approval criteria established in Subsection 11.3.4.E, Review Criteria, below, and may refer the application to other departments as deemed necessary. The Director shall prepare a findings report, which shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council at the same public meeting as the public hearing and may also provide a recommendation. 
2.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review. 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice, on an application for a Conditional Use Permit prior to making its recommendation to City Council. 
b.  Following a public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final recommendation to the City Council by an affirmative vote of a majority of the body to: 
i.  Approve the Conditional Use Permit; 
ii.  Approve with conditions, pursuant to Subsection 11.3.4.F, Conditions of Approval, below; or 
iii.  Deny the Conditional Use Permit. 
f.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may table its recommendation to continue a public hearing; to obtain additional information; or for further consideration. Such postponement of the final recommendation of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning and Zoning Commission may not exceed 40 days following the closing of a public hearing on the Conditional Use Permit. 
g.  Failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to make a recommendation to the City Council shall be considered a recommendation for denial. 
3.  City Council Review. 
a.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice, on any Conditional Use Permit prior to making its decision. 
b.  The City Council may refer the application back to Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration; continue a public hearing; or table the action. A continuance, or postponement, of the final decision of a Conditional Use Permit may not exceed 90 days. 
c.  Following a public hearing, the City Council shall take final action by an affirmative vote of a majority of the body, to: 
i.  Approve the Conditional Use Permit; 
ii.  Approve with conditions; or 
iii.  Deny the Conditional Use Permit. 
E.  Review Criteria. In the review and consideration of a Conditional Use Permit, the Director, Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Compliance with Zoning District Regulations. The conditional use shall comply with the purpose and intent and all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
2.  Compliance with Applicable Criteria of the Conditional Use. The conditional use shall comply with the applicable criteria established in Section 3.2.1, Restricted and Conditional Uses. 
3.  Impact on Public. The conditional use shall not endanger, be detrimental, or otherwise adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
4.  Operation of Existing or Permitted Uses. The conditional use shall not impair the operation of existing or permitted uses on the subject property or on abutting properties or be injurious to property or improvements in the immediate area. 
5.  Compatibility with Nearby Uses. The conditional use shall be compatible with nearby uses in the immediate area with respect to building height, bulk and scale, setbacks, open spaces, landscaping, site development, and access and circulation features. 
6.  Provision of Public Infrastructure. The conditional use shall ensure adequate provision of streets, water, wastewater, and other public infrastructure and utilities. 
7.  Consideration of Site Development. The site development of a conditional use shall effectively mitigate impacts of the conditional use on the surrounding area and abutting properties. This includes consideration of, but not limited to, drainage, landscaping, buffering and screening, traffic control, pedestrian and vehicle access and circulation, parking, loading areas, lighting, and any other impacts the use may have on the surrounding area. 
F.  Conditions of Approval. Upon consideration of the review criteria, the Director and Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may establish, conditions of approval as deemed necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, and to promote compliance with the review criteria set out in Subsection 11.3.4.E, Review Criteria, above. 
G.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  An affirmative approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the City Council, following the procedures set out in this Section, shall be in effect in the manner provided by the Home Rule Charter or state law. 
2.  A Conditional Use Permit granted pursuant to these provisions that has not expired, shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the Conditional Use Permit application. 
H.  Modifications to Approved Conditional Use Permits. Once a Conditional Use Permit is approved, the project shall be built and operate in the manner specified as part of the Conditional Use Permit approval. Any modification shall require the submittal of a revised application for approval. 
I.  Expiration of Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  Expiration. An approved Conditional Use Permit shall expire if construction has not commenced or a Site Development Plan, building permit, or Certificate of Occupancy, as required, is not issued and construction begun within two (2) years of the approval of the Conditional Use Permit or submittal date of the most recently dated application for permit or approval. 
2.  Extension. A Conditional Use Permit subject to expire may be extended by the Director for a period not to exceed one year, provided that the extension is requested prior to the expiration date. 
3.  Discontinuance. A Conditional Use Permit shall expire one year following the discontinuation of the use for which the permit was approved and issued. Any legally established pre-existing conditional use that is not being used at the effective date of these regulations shall expire one (1) year following the effective date of these regulations, if at the expiration date the conditional use remains inactive. 
J.  Revocation of Approved Conditional Use Permit. The City Council may revoke approval of a Conditional Use Permit if it is determined that: 
1.  The applicant misrepresented any material fact on the application or supporting materials; 
2.  The conditional use fails or ceases to comply with the applicable standards, criteria, or conditions for issuance of the permit; 
3.  The operation of the conditional use violates any statute, law, or regulation; or 
4.  The operation of the conditional use constitutes a real or potential threat to health, safety, or welfare to the public.  
Section 11.3.5 - Concept Plan 
A.  Generally. A Concept Plan is a general plan for the development of property which demonstrates the nature of the parcel proposed for development to evaluate the impacts of the development on abutting uses and compliance with the City's long-range plans. A Concept Plan is not an individual application type but rather a required component of the following applications: 
1.  Conditional Use Permit; 
2.  Planned Development District; and 
3.  Master Planned Community. 
B.  Initiation of Concept Plan. A Concept Plan may be filed as a component of one of the application types in Subsection 11.3.5.A above by the property owner(s), a person having a contractual interest in the subject property, or their authorized representative. 
C.  Concept Plan Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application for which the Concept Plan is a component has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for City Council to render an informed decision. In addition to the requirements necessary for review of the associated application, a Concept Plan must also include the following: 
1.  Concept Plan Components. Concept Plans themselves are a component of an application intended to demonstrate compliance. As such, the Concept Plan shall include plans and documents that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of that application. This may include, but is not limited to, conceptual layout of the property, proposed layout of streets, blocks, drainage, general utilities, and other improvements and uses. The Director shall clearly describe and publish such required information for each application type in a form or checklist. 
2.  Site Development Plan in lieu of Concept Plan. A Site Development Plan may be submitted with an application in lieu of a Concept Plan if the Director determines that the Site Development Plan demonstrates the intent of a Concept Plan. 
D.  Review Criteria. In the review and consideration of a proposed Concept Plan, the Director, Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council shall consider the following criteria: 
1.  Consistency with the City's Comprehensive Plan, Future Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Sidewalk and Trail Corridor Opportunities Plan, and other applicable adopted City plans, regulations, policies, and technical manuals. 
2.  Compliance with any approved and valid plat, zoning, and other agreement or ordinance applicable to the subject property. 
3.  The impact of the development relating to the preservation and conservation of existing natural resources on the site and the impact on the natural resources of the abutting properties and neighborhood, including trees, environmentally-sensitive areas, watercourses and areas subject to flooding. 
4.  The relationship of the development to abutting properties in terms of harmonious design, facade treatment, setbacks, building materials, maintenance of property values, and any possible negative impacts. 
5.  The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, consistent with the Thoroughfare Plan and Sidewalk and Trail Corridor Opportunities Plan of the City and providing access for public safety. 
6.  The location, size, accessibility, and configuration of open space areas to ensure that such areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses. 
7.  The adequacy of water, sewer, drainage, solid waste disposal, and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and occupants. 
E.  Effect of Approval. Any proposed use or development depicted on the Concept Plan shall not be deemed as formally authorized or approved by the City until a final Site Development Plan is approved for the development. The Concept Plan approval is a general acknowledgment by the City that the proposed development conforms to the City's zoning regulations and that it can be adequately served by required public facilities or services. The City's approval of a particular Concept Plan is approval of a specific project. Once a project is constructed in accordance with the Concept Plan, any use permitted in the zoning district (but not including conditional uses) is an authorized use within the project, unless such use or uses are expressly prohibited in the zoning ordinance approving the project. 
F.  Amendments to Approved Concept Plans. Modifications to an approved Concept Plan shall be processed in the same manner as an amendment for the associated application for which the Concept Plan is a component. 
G.  Expiration of Approved Concept Plans. Concept Plan approval shall expire as follows: 
1.  The approval of a Concept Plan shall expire five (5) years after the approval date of the Concept Plan or five (5) years from the date of any subsequent approval in connection with the project if no progress towards completion of the project has occurred. Any Concept Plan that has an approval date that is prior to May 11, 2000 and that does not have an expiration date, and for which no progress has been made toward completion of the project as of May 11, 2000, is hereby deemed to have expired as of May 11, 2004 and shall no longer be considered as a valid project. Any other Concept Plan approval that does not have an expiration date, and where no progress towards completion of the project has occurred shall have expired on December 18, 2017. 
2.  Extension Procedure. 
a.  Prior to the expiration of an approved Concept Plan, the applicant may petition the City, in writing, to extend the plan approval. Such petition shall be considered at public meetings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council and an extension may be granted by the City Council. Any such extension must be approved prior to the expiration of the approval and if not approved then the Concept Plan will expire as set out in Subsection 11.3.5.G.1 above, unless the applicant demonstrates that progress toward completion of the project has occurred as set out in herein. 
b.  In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the City Council shall take into account the requirements of Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code and the reasons for the lapse, and the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval. The City Council shall either extend the approval of the Concept Plan or deny the request. The City Council may extend the approval subject to additional conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with the original conditions of approval and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The City Council may also specify a shorter time for extension of the approval than the original approval period.  
Section 11.3.6 - Zoning Variance 
A.  Generally. In accordance with Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning, and Chapter 213, Municipal Comprehensive Plans, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to hear and grant requests for a variance from zoning requirements of these regulations in accordance with the procedures established in this Section. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Generally. The Zoning Variance is intended to provide relief from the terms of the zoning regulations when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, the strict application of the zoning regulations deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity under identical zoning classification to ensure that any adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity in the district in which such property is situated. A Zoning Variance shall only be authorized for relief of zoning regulations that directly impact the undue hardship, such as setback dimensions, lot dimensions, floor area, structure height, building coverage, and lot coverage. 
2.  Insufficient Grounds for Zoning Variance. The following conditions do not constitute sufficient grounds for granting a Zoning Variance: 
a.  That the property be used for its highest and best use; 
b.  A financial or economic hardship, if the property can be used within the requirements of these regulations; 
c.  Self-created hardships; or 
d.  That the development regulations are an inconvenience. 
C.  Initiation of Application. An application for a Zoning Variance may be filed by the property owner(s), or a person having a contractual interest in the subject property, or their authorized representative. 
D.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for Zoning Board of Adjustment to render an informed decision. 
E.  Procedures. 
1.  Staff Review. For each Zoning Variance request, the Director shall review the application considering the approval criteria established in Subsection 11.3.5.E, Review Criteria, below, and may refer the application to other departments as deemed necessary. The Director shall prepare a findings report, which shall be presented to the Zoning Board of Adjustment at the same public meeting as the public hearing and may also provide a recommendation. 
2.  Zoning Board of Adjustment Review. 
a.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice, on an application for a Zoning Variance prior to making its decision. 
b.  After reviewing the Zoning Variance application and following a public hearing, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take final action by an affirmative vote of a three-fourths majority of the appointed body to: 
i.  Approve the Zoning Variance; 
ii.  Approve the Zoning Variance with conditions; or 
iii.  Deny the Zoning Variance. 
c.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment may table its recommendation to continue a public hearing; to obtain additional information; or for further consideration. Such postponement of the final decision of a Zoning Variance by Zoning Board of Adjustment may not exceed 40 days following the closing of a public hearing. 
d.  Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to make a decision shall deem the Zoning Variance denied. 
F.  Review Criteria. In the review and consideration of a Zoning Variance application, the following criteria shall be considered: 
1.  Hardship Shall Exist. The applicant shall show that, due to unique conditions of the property, compliance with the requirements of these regulations will create an undue hardship and will effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property. Such hardship shall be unique conditions of the property (e.g., size, shape, or topography) and not be self-created by the owner/operator. 
2.  Compatibility of the Zoning Variance. The Zoning Variance shall be compatible with the City's Comprehensive Plan, the City's other long-range plans, abutting land uses, and the purpose and intent of these regulations. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take into account the nature of the existing or proposed use of the subject property, existing uses in the surrounding vicinity of the subject property, and the probable effect the Zoning Variance will have upon traffic conditions and upon health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
3.  Limitations on Permitted Zoning Variance. The requested Zoning Variance shall focus on only what is necessary to relieve the undue hardship. The Zoning Variance shall not: 
a.  Allow a use not otherwise permitted in the zoning district; 
b.  Modify provisions of a restricted use or conditional use; 
c.  Increase density above that which is permitted in the zoning district; 
d.  Extend a nonconforming use of land; or 
e.  Change the zoning boundaries of the Official Zoning Map. 
4.  Impact on the Public. The Zoning Variance shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare or injurious to other property in the area or to the City. 
G.  Conditions of Approval. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may establish conditions of approval as deemed necessary to ensure compatibility with abutting uses and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, and to promote compliance with the review criteria set out in Subsection 11.3.5.E, Review Criteria, above. 
H.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  A decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment on a Zoning Variance shall become effective immediately. 
2.  An affirmative decision on a Zoning Variance shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure to which it applies. 
3.  In the case where a Zoning Variance is submitted in conjunction with another application, approval of the other application may be a condition of approval of the Zoning Variance. 
I.  Expiration of Zoning Variance. 
1.  Expiration. An approved Zoning Variance shall expire if construction has not commenced or a Site Development Plan, building permit, or Certificate of Occupancy, as required, is not issued and construction begun within one year of the approval of the Zoning Variance or submittal date of the most recently dated application for permit or approval. 
2.  Extension. A Zoning Variance subject to expire may be extended by the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a period not to exceed 90 days, provided that the extension is requested prior to the expiration date. 
J.  Revocation of Zoning Variance Approval. Upon violation of any applicable provision of the Zoning Variance approval, or if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may suspend or revoke a Zoning Variance upon notification to the applicant of the use of property subject to the Zoning Variance.  
Section 11.3.7 - Special Exception 
A.  Generally. The city council shall have the authority to hear and grant requests for a Special Exception from certain provisions of nonconformities in accordance with the procedures established in this Section and in Article 12, Nonconformities. 
B.  Applicability. Special Exceptions shall not be contrary to the public interest and the spirit of these regulations. No Special Exception shall be granted unless the city council finds the specific criteria identified in these regulations are met. The only Special Exception that may be granted by the city council are the following: 
1.  Extension of the time period for determining abandonment of a nonconforming situation (Subsection 12.1.5.C). 
2.  Expansion or enlargement of a legally nonconforming use (Section 12.2.3). 
3.  The right to continue to operate a legally nonconforming use if the value of damage or destruction is 50 percent or more of the market value of the structure on the date of the damage (Section 12.2.4). 
4.  The right to operate, occupy or maintain a legally nonconforming structure if the value of damage or destruction is 50 percent or more of the market value of the structure on the date of the damage (Section 12.3.3). 
5.  Expansion of enlargement of nonconforming building or structures (Section 12.3.5). 
6.  Expansion of nonconforming sites (Section 12.5.4). 
7.  Continuation of nonconforming setbacks of site improvements (Section 12.5.5). 
C.  Initiation of Application. An application for a Special Exception may be filed by the property owner(s), or a person having a contractual interest in the subject property, or their authorized representative. 
D.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for city council to render an informed decision. 
E.  Procedures. 
1.  Staff Review. For each Special Exception request, the Director shall review the application considering the approval criteria established in Subsection 11.3.7.F, Review Criteria, below, and may refer the application to other departments as deemed necessary. The Director shall prepare a findings report, which shall be presented to the city council at the same public meeting as the public hearing and may also provide a recommendation. 
2.  City Council Review. 
a.  The city council shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice, on an application for a Special Exception prior to making its decision. 
b.  After reviewing the Special Exception application and following a public hearing, the city council shall take final action by an affirmative vote of a three-fourths majority of the appointed body to: 
i.  Approve the Special Exception; 
ii.  Approve the Special Exception with conditions; or 
iii.  Deny the Special Exception. 
c.  The city council may table its recommendation to continue a public hearing; to obtain additional information; or for further consideration. Such postponement of the final decision of a Special Exception by city council may not exceed 40 days following the closing of a public hearing on a Special Exception. 
d.  Failure of the city council to make a decision shall deem the Special Exception denied. 
F.  Review Criteria. The city council shall review the application pursuant to the criteria for the applicable Special Exception established in Article 12, Nonconformities. 
G.  Conditions of Approval. The city council may establish conditions of approval as deemed necessary to ensure compatibility with abutting uses and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, and to promote compliance with these regulations. 
H.  Effect of Approval. 
1.  A decision of the city council on a Special Exception shall become effective immediately. 
2.  An affirmative decision on a Special Exception shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure to which it applies. 
3.  In the case where a Special Exception is submitted in conjunction with another application, approval of the other application may be a condition of approval of the Special Exception. 
I.  Expiration of Special Exception. 
1.  Expiration. An approved Special Exception shall expire if construction has not commenced or a Site Development Plan, building permit, or Certificate of Occupancy, as required, is not issued and construction begun within one year of the approval of the Special Exception or submittal date of the most recently dated application for permit or approval. 
2.  Extension. A Special Exception subject to expire may be extended by the city council for a period not to exceed 90 days, provided that the extension is requested prior to the expiration date. 
J.  Revocation of Special Exception Approval. Upon violation of any applicable provision of the Special Exception approval, or if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, the city council may suspend or revoke a Special Exception upon notification to the applicant of the use of property subject to the Special Exception. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.G.2, 5-21-2019)  
Section 11.3.8 - Floodplain Development Variance 
A.  Generally. The City Council shall hear and render judgment on variances from the requirements of Division 5.2, Flood Damage Prevention. 
B.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for City Council to render an informed decision. 
C.  Applicability. The applicability of this Section is subject to the following exceptions and limitations: 
1.  The City Council shall hear and render judgment on a Floodplain Development Variance only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of these regulations. 
2.  Floodplain Development Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Section. 
3.  Floodplain Development Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the historic structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the Floodplain Development Variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
4.  Floodplain Development Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Prerequisites for Granting Floodplain Development Variances. 
1.  Floodplain Development Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the Floodplain Development Variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
2.  Floodplain Development Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the Floodplain Development Variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a Floodplain Development Variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Floodplain Development Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in Division 5.2, Flood Damage Prevention, are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
E.  Review Criteria. Floodplain Development Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the prerequisites in Subsection 11.3.8.D, Prerequisites for Granting Floodplain Development Variances, have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the Floodplain Development Variance increases. 
F.  Conditions of Approval. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Article, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of Floodplain Development Variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of Division 5.2, Flood Damage Prevention. 
G.  Notification. Any application to which a Floodplain Development Variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
H.  Annotation and Recordkeeping. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report Floodplain Development Variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.  
Section 11.3.9 - Text Amendment 
A.  Generally. The City Council may, by ordinance, amend, supplement, or change the text of these regulations pursuant to this Section. 
B.  Initiation of a Text Amendment. 
1.  Generally. A text amendment may be initiated by the City Council by an affirmative vote of the majority of the body. 
2.  Petitions and Recommendations. 
a.  The Director may recommend to the City Council an initiation of a text amendment. 
b.  A citizen or property owner may petition the City Council to consider the initiation of a text amendment. 
C.  Procedures. All proposed text amendments shall follow the procedures set out in this Section. 
1.  Staff Review. For each text amendment, the Director shall prepare final draft language of the proposed text amendment that meets the approval criteria established in Subsection 11.3.9.D, Review Criteria, below, and may refer the application to other departments as deemed necessary. The Director shall prepare a findings report, which shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council at the same public meeting as the public hearing and may also provide a recommendation. 
2.  Planning and Zoning Commission Review. 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice, on any text amendment prior to making its recommendation to City Council. 
b.  After reviewing the text amendment and following a public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final recommendation to the City Council by an affirmative vote of a majority of the appointed body to: 
i.  Approve the text amendment; 
ii.  Approve the text amendment with stated modifications; or 
iii.  Deny the text amendment. 
c.  The recommendation to City Council shall be considered the final report as required by Section 211.007(b) of the Tex. Local Gov't Code. Failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to make a recommendation and final report to the City Council, shall be deemed to be a recommendation of denial. 
3.  City Council Review. 
a.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the requirements set out in Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, and Section 11.2.3, Public Notice on any text amendment prior to making its decision. 
b.  The City Council may refer the proposed amendment back to Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration; continue a public hearing; or table the action. 
c.  Following a public hearing, the City Council shall take final action by an affirmative vote of a majority of the body, to: 
i.  Approve the text amendment; 
ii.  Approve the text amendment with stated modifications; or 
iii.  Deny the text amendment. 
D.  Review Criteria. In the review and consideration of a proposed text amendment, the Director, Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council shall consider the following criteria. 
1.  Whether the proposed text amendment promotes the health, safety, and welfare of the City; 
2.  Whether the proposed text amendment promotes the safe, orderly, and healthful development of the City; and 
3.  Whether the proposed text amendment is consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and other long-range plans of the City. 
E.  Effect of Approval. An affirmative approval of a text amendment by the City Council shall amend the text of these regulations in the manner provided by the Home Rule Charter or state law.  
DIVISION 11.4 - SUBDIVISION PERMITS AND APPROVALS 
 
Section 11.4.1 - General Procedures 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for all subdivision-related applications. 
B.  Statutory Procedures. 
1.  Approval Required. Before any land is filed for record with the county clerk, the property owner shall apply for and secure City Council approval of the required subdivision plat, in accordance with the following procedures, unless otherwise provided within these regulations. 
a.  Minor subdivisions may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties. Minor Plat approval by the City Manager (or designee) requires the submission of a Final Plat drawing and other submission materials required by Section 11.4.4, Minor Plat. Lots may be conveyed or sold only when the plat has been approved by the City Manager and the plat has been filed with the appropriate county. 
b.  Major subdivisions may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties. The procedure for approval of a major subdivision typically involves two (2) steps: Preliminary Plat and a Final Plat. Section 11.4.2, Preliminary Plat, and Section 11.4.3, Final Plat, provide the requirements for each. Major plat approval shall be in accordance with Section 11.4.2, Preliminary Plat, and Section 11.4.3, Final Plat. Upon completion of the required public improvements, or upon submission and City approval of the appropriate surety for public improvements, the property owner may submit the Final Plat for approval. All major subdivision plats shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council, pursuant to the applicable plat approval procedures established by these regulations. Lots may be sold only when the Final Plat has been approved and filed with the appropriate county. If the land is required to be platted, no conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may occur until the Final Plat is approved and filed with the appropriate county. 
2.  Zoning Requirements. A property within the City's corporate limits that is being proposed for platting or development shall be properly zoned by the City prior to submission of an application for approval of any plat. 
a.  The proposed development layout or subdivision design shown on the proposed plat shall be in conformance with all standards and requirements prescribed in the City's zoning ordinance and these regulations. 
b.  Noncompliance with the requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is located, or lack of the proper zoning, shall constitute grounds for denial of the plat. 
c.  In situations where the zoning on a particular piece of property cannot be ascertained by the City, the burden of proof regarding the property's zoning shall rest with the property owner. Proof of proper zoning shall consist of appropriate documentation, such as a copy of the ordinance establishing the zoning, which shall be reviewed by City officials as to its validity and authenticity. 
3.  Comprehensive Plan. A plat submitted for a property located within the City's corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan, including all adopted water, sewer, storm drainage, future land use, park, recreation, open space and thoroughfare plans. 
4.  All plats shall be prepared by a licensed or registered professional land surveyor. 
5.  Submission Procedures and City Review Process for All Types of Plats. 
a.  Submission Timing. 
i.  For the purpose of these regulations, the official "filed" date for any type of plat shall be the date upon which an application is determined to be administratively complete in accordance with Subsection 11.2.1.E, Determination of Administrative Completeness, after which the statutory period required for approval or disapproval of the plat shall commence. Plat applications which do not include all required information and materials required by the application form will be considered administratively incomplete, will not be accepted as "filed" by the City, and will not be scheduled on a Commission agenda until the proper information is provided to City officials. 
ii.  An administratively complete plat application shall be received by the City at least twenty-four (24) calendar days, but no more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the Commission meeting at which it is to be considered, unless the applicant waives the thirty-day requirement for action on the plat in writing. Due to state-mandated notification requirements, any residential Replat that requires public notification (see Section 11.4.6, Replat) shall be received by the City at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the Commission meeting at which it is to be considered. Such Replat application shall also be accompanied by a written waiver of the thirty-day requirement for action on the plat due to timing constraints imposed by publication of the required notice in the City's official newspaper. 
b.  Submission Materials. The Director shall ensure that an administratively complete application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for City Council to render an informed decision. 
c.  Technical Review. 
i.  Upon receipt of an administratively complete application, the City shall commence technical compliance review of the submitted plat. This may include a review by a development review committee, which may be designated by the City Manager. 
ii.  Following technical review of the plat and supporting documents, City staff shall inform the applicant of any revisions deemed necessary for the plat to be determined to be technically complete, including the kind and extent of improvements to be installed. 
iii.  The applicant shall submit a corrected version of the plat (and Construction Plans, if applicable) to the City no later than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the Commission meeting for which it is scheduled. Failure to submit the corrected plat to the City at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the Commission meeting shall cause the plat application to be forwarded to the Commission as is without the necessary corrections. 
iv.  A plat application shall not be deemed to be technically complete until staff has determined the plat and any supporting documents meet all applicable requirements of these regulations, are in compliance with any other applicable City or State requirements, and contain all required elements mandated by the Texas Local Government Code, Section 212.004(b). A plat application presented to the Commission prior to staff determining the plat to be technically complete shall be subject to denial. 
v.  The applicant may request, in writing, a waiver of the thirty-day approval requirement in order to allow him or her more time to correct deficiencies, address concerns, or otherwise improve the plat pursuant to the City's regulations at any time prior to the Commission meeting at which the plat is scheduled for consideration. After receipt of the request, the City may delay action on the plat beyond thirty (30) calendar days following the date the application is deemed administratively complete. 
d.  Action by the Commission and City Council. 
i.  All subdivision plat applications (except Minor Plats and Amending Plats) shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council if in complete conformance with the provisions of these regulations and with all other applicable regulations of the City. 
ii.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review each plat application and shall take action to either recommend approval of the plat application, recommend approval of the plat application subject to certain conditions, or recommend denial of the plat application, within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the application was deemed administratively complete unless the applicant has submitted a written waiver of the thirty-day review/approval time pursuant to Subsection 11.4.1.B.5.c, Technical Review, above. 
iii.  The City Council shall review and take action on the plat application within thirty (30) calendar days following the Commission's action. Affirmation of, or minor modifications to, the Commission's recommendation shall require a simple majority vote of the City Council members present and voting. 
6.  Simultaneous Submission of Plats. In the event that an applicant submits Preliminary and Final Plat applications simultaneously, as provided in Subsection 11.2.1.I, Concurrent Applications, the City Manager (or designee) shall schedule both plat applications for action by the Commission within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the applications are deemed administratively complete, unless the applicant has executed a written waiver of the thirty-day review period for one or both plats. If the Preliminary Plat has not received a recommendation of approval by the Commission prior to consideration of the Final Plat by the Commission, then the Commission shall deny the Final Plat application (unless withdrawn by the applicant) and such denial shall be final unless appealed to the City Council. The City Council shall take action on either one (1) or both plat applications, as applicable, within thirty (30) calendar days following the Commission's action. Affirmation of, or minor modifications to, the Commission's recommendation to approve the plat(s) shall require a simple majority vote of the City Council members present and voting. 
7.  Lapse of Plat Approval. The approval of any type of plat shall be effective for a period of two hundred and seventy (270) calendar days beyond the date that the plat was approved by the City Council, except as otherwise provided herein. By 12:01 a.m. on the two hundred seventieth day following City Council approval of the plat, the applicant shall have completed the next City-required "progress benchmark" as set forth below. If this is not accomplished, then the approved plat shall be deemed to have expired and shall become null and void and a new plat application (along with all other required paperwork, plans, fees, etc.) shall be submitted, reviewed and approved by the City in order to proceed with development of the property. The series of "progress benchmarks" for a project, pursuant to the provisions of this Section, are as follows in Table 11.4.1, Progress Benchmarks of Approved Plats or Plans, below: 
Table 11.4.1 
Progress Benchmarks of Approved Plats or Plans 
Approved Plat or Plan 	Next "Progress Benchmark" 
Preliminary Plat 	All of the following shall occur within one hundred and eighty-three (183) calendar days following Preliminary Plat approval: 
	a) City Engineer's approval of Construction Plans for all proposed public improvements; and 
	b) Payment of all applicable Site Development related fees that are traditionally collected prior to release for site construction. 
	In addition to the above, an application for approval of the Final Plat shall also be submitted to the City within three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar days following actual commencement of site construction in order to avoid lapse of the approved Preliminary Plat (unless such is extended or reinstated pursuant to provisions in these regulations). 
Final Plat 	Final Plat reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council but not yet filed with the county: Submission of the plat mylars, filing fees and other materials necessary to file the plat at the county shall be submitted to the City within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of Final Plat approval. The Final Plat shall be recorded with the appropriate county within two hundred and seventy (270) calendar days following the date of Final Plat approval in order to avoid lapse of the approved Final Plat unless such approval is extended or reinstated pursuant to provisions in these regulations. 
  
Final Plat that has been filed with the county: Valid in perpetuity unless the filed plat is properly amended or vacated pursuant to the provisions of these regulations. 
 
8.  Extension Procedure. 
a.  Prior to the lapse of approval for a plat, the property owner may request in writing to the City to extend the plat approval. Such petition shall be considered at a public meeting before the Commission, which shall recommend approval or denial of the petition. The petition shall then be considered by the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting (if possible), and an extension may be granted by the City Council at such meeting. If no petition for extension of plat approval is submitted by the property owner prior to the expiration date, then the plat shall be deemed to have expired and shall become null and void. 
b.  In considering whether to grant a request for extension, the Commission, and ultimately City Council, shall take into account the reasons for lapse, the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, and the extent to which newly adopted subdivision regulations would apply to the plat at that point in time. The City Council shall either extend the plat (either with or without conditions) or shall deny the request, in which instance the originally approved plat shall be deemed to be null and void. The property owner shall thereafter submit a new plat application for approval and shall conform to the subdivision regulations then in effect. 
c.  The City Council may extend the plat approval subject to additional conditions based upon newly enacted city regulations or state legislation, or such as are necessary to ensure compliance with the original conditions of approval or to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The City Council may also specify a shorter time for extension of the plat than the original two hundred seventy-day approval period. 
9.  Lapse of Approval of Construction Plans. The approved Construction Plans shall be valid for a period of three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar days following approval by the City Engineer. The City council may, upon written request by the applicant, grant an extension of up to an additional three hundred and sixty-five (365) calendar days, after which the Construction Plans shall be subject to re-approval by the City Engineer if no construction has occurred. Construction Plans may be submitted after Preliminary Plat approval only with approval of the Director, but in no case shall be submitted later than one hundred eighty-three (183) calendar days of that approval.  
Section 11.4.2 - Preliminary Plat 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for Preliminary Plats. 
B.  Procedures. 
1.  Generally. Following the pre-application meeting (as described in Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures) regarding the overall general development strategy for the property, the applicant shall prepare a Preliminary Plat for the construction of the subdivision and all associated public improvements and other supplementary materials, as required by these regulations or by the City. 
2.  Preliminary Plat Area. 
a.  The Preliminary Plat shall constitute only that portion of the property or subdivision which the applicant proposes to construct and record provided, however, that such portion conforms to all the requirements of these regulations and with any other applicable regulations and codes of the City. 
b.  A Preliminary Plat, shall include all contiguous property under the ownership or control of the applicant unless otherwise approved by the City Manager (or designee) and the Director. It may contain more than one (1) phase which, if so, shall be clearly identified. 
3.  Concurrent Submittals Allowed. The applicant may choose to submit a Final Plat for review concurrently with the Preliminary Plat. In such case, the City may schedule concurrent review of both plats, provided that all required information and other items are submitted for both plats, including full Construction Plans and the appropriate assurances for the completion of all improvements, as per Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls, and provided that adequate review can be achieved by the City. If the City, due to staff resources or other factors, cannot complete its review of both plats, and other associated materials, prior to the applicable Commission and City Council meetings, then only the Preliminary Plat shall be considered for approval and the Final Plat shall be denied unless the thirty-day review requirement is waived in writing by the applicant. 
4.  Effect of Approval. Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the City Council shall be deemed general approval of the street and lot layout shown on the Preliminary Plat (approval for construction of the necessary streets, water lines, sewer lines, and other required improvements and utilities shall be authorized only through the City Engineer's approval of the Construction Plans), and to the preparation of the engineering drawings and Final Plat when construction of all required public improvements is nearing completion (or when appropriate surety for completion is provided to the City). Except as provided for herein, approval of the Preliminary Plat shall constitute conditional approval of the Final Plat when all conditions of approval and when all procedural requirements set forth in these regulations have been met, and when the Construction Plans have been approved and construction of all improvements (or surety provided) are satisfactorily completed. 
5.  Standards for Approval. No Preliminary Plat shall be approved by the City Council unless the following standards have been met: 
a.  The plat substantially conforms to other studies and plans, as applicable; 
b.  The layouts and Construction Plans for required public improvements and City utilities have been submitted by the applicant for approval by the City Engineer (whether specifically stated or not, Preliminary Plat approval shall always be subject to any additions or alterations to the Construction Plans as deemed necessary by the City Engineer, as needed, to ensure the safe, efficient and proper construction of public improvements within the subdivision); and 
c.  The plat conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and to applicable zoning and other City regulations. 
6.  Approval Required for Construction. No construction work shall begin on the proposed improvements in the proposed subdivision prior to approval of the Preliminary Plat and Construction Plans by the City, nor prior to issuance of all appropriate construction permits by the City and other appropriate entities or agencies. The applicant shall also provide copies of letters from applicable local utility companies stating that each utility company has reviewed the Preliminary Plat and stating any requirements, including easements, they may have. This requirement may be deferred until the Final Plat is submitted if such deferral request is submitted to the City in writing and approved by the Director prior to the Commission meeting at which the Preliminary Plat will be considered. No excavation, grading, tree removal or site clearing activities shall occur prior to approval of the Preliminary Plat and the Construction Plans. However, removal or clearing of brush, undergrowth or man-induced debris, may be authorized by the Director, at his or her discretion, if such request is submitted in writing by the property owner or developer, if such activities are in conformance with all applicable City ordinances and codes, and if such activities will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
7.  Construction Plans. 
a.  With submittal of the Preliminary Plat application, the applicant shall submit the required number of sets of the complete Construction Plans for all streets, alleys (if any), storm sewers and drainage structures, water and sanitary sewer facilities, screening and retaining walls, landscaping and irrigation, and any other required public improvements for the area covered by the Preliminary Plat. 
b.  The Construction Plans shall also contain any plans deemed necessary to show or document compliance with the City's ordinances pertaining to nonpoint source pollution control, and any other applicable codes and ordinances of the City that are related to development of a land parcel. 
c.  Cost estimates for the completion of all public improvements shall also be submitted with the Construction Plans for review (and approval, if necessary) by the City Engineer. 
d.  For the purposes of these regulations, complete sets of Construction Plans shall include those items listed on a form provided by the Director, as well as any additional plans or sheets deemed necessary and requested by the City Engineer. 
e.  The applicant shall have the Construction Plans prepared by their own professional engineer(s), subject to approval of the Construction Plans by the City Engineer. The City Engineer (or designee) shall review, or cause to be reviewed, the Construction Plans and specifications and if approved, shall mark them "approved" and provide an approved copy to the applicant for use during construction. If not approved, then the deficiencies shall be noted (on the plans themselves and/or in memo format, a copy of which shall also be retained by the city) and returned to the applicant for correction, whereupon the applicant's engineer shall correct the plans as requested and shall resubmit them back to the City Engineer for re-review. A full set of the City-approved and stamped Construction Plans shall be available for inspection on the job site at all times. 
f.  After approval of the Preliminary Plat by the City Council, approval of the Construction Plans by the City Engineer, and following procurement of all applicable permits from other appropriate agencies (such as TxDOT, TCEQ, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, FEMA and/or Burnet County), the applicant shall cause a contractor(s) to install or construct the public improvements in accordance with the approved plans and the City's standard specifications, and at the applicant's expense (also see Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls). The applicant shall employ engineers, surveyors or other professionals as necessary to design, stake, supervise, perform and complete the construction of such improvements, and shall cause his or her contractor to construct the said improvements in accordance with these regulations and with the City's and any other applicable agency's design standards. If the project will require a FEMA map revision, then the proposed plans shall also be reviewed for compliance with the City's Flood Damage Prevention Code (Division 5.2, Flood Damage Prevention, as amended) prior to approval of the Preliminary Plat and prior to any construction activities (including but not limited to grading, clearing, grubbing, brush removal, etc.) on the site. 
g.  Construction Plans shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas, as required by state law governing such professions and in accordance with these regulations and the City's Technical Construction Standards and Specifications (TCSS). All Construction Plans submitted for City review shall be dated and shall bear the responsible engineer's registration number, his or her designation of "professional engineer" or "P.E.", and the engineer's seal. Construction Plans shall be approved by the City Engineer only when such plans meet all of the requirements of these regulations and the TCSS. 
h.  As part of the Construction Plans, a drainage plan showing how the drainage of each lot relates to the overall drainage plan for the plat under consideration shall be submitted. The drainage plan shall be made available to each builder within the proposed subdivision and all builders shall comply with the drainage plan. 
8.  Effect of Approval. Approval of a Preliminary Plat authorizes the property owner, upon fulfillment of all requirements and conditions of approval and upon construction of all required improvements (or submission of the proper assurances for construction of same, per Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls), to submit an application for Final Plat approval (see Section 11.4.3, Final Plat). 
9.  Revisions to Approved Preliminary Plat. It is generally recognized that minor revisions to the Preliminary Plat will probably be needed before the Final Plat is approved and filed at the county. Such minor revisions as slight enlargement or shifting of easements or lot lines, addition of private or franchise utility easements, correction of bearings or distances, correction of minor labeling errors, addition of erroneously omitted informational items and labels, etc. may occur on the Final Plat without having to re-approve the Preliminary Plat. Determination of whether or not revisions are "minor" in nature is subject to the judgment of the Director and City Engineer. Major revisions, such as obvious reconfiguration of lot lines or easements, relocation of driveways or access easements or fire lanes, any modification to the perimeter or boundary of the property, and relocation or addition or deletion of any public improvement (including corresponding easement), shall necessitate re-submission and re-approval of the plat as a "revised Preliminary Plat" unless otherwise approved by the Director and the City Engineer, as applicable. The procedures for such re-approval shall be the same as for a Preliminary Plat, and such re-approval shall constitute a new project thus necessitating submission of a new application form, payment of new fees, compliance with amendments to these regulations which occurred since original Preliminary Plat approval, and other requirements.  
Section 11.4.3 - Final Plat 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for Final Plats. 
B.  Accordance with Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat shall be in accordance with the Preliminary Plat, as approved, and shall incorporate all applicable conditions, changes, directions and additions imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council upon the Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat shall not be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council until all utilities, infrastructure, and other required improvements have been constructed in conformance with City standards and the Construction Plans, as approved by the City Engineer, unless provisions are made for the completion of the improvements in accordance with Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls. The Final Plat shall not be submitted prior to approval of the Preliminary Plat (see Subsection 11.4.1.B.6, Simultaneous Submission of Plats, for exception). 
C.  Determination of Completion. Final Plat applications which do not include the required data, completed application form, submission fee, number of copies of the plat, record drawings, "Letter of Satisfactory Completion" (of the public improvements) from the City, and other required information, including documentation that all required public improvements have been constructed and installed in accordance with City standards, letters from utility companies verifying their easements, and submission of the proper assurances or escrow funds for the completion of the improvements (per Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls) will be considered incomplete, and shall not be accepted for submission by the City, and shall not be scheduled on a Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council agenda until the proper information is provided to City staff. 
D.  Standards for Approval. No Final Plat shall be approved by the City Council unless the following standards have been met: 
1.  The plat substantially conforms with the approved Preliminary Plat and other studies and plans, as applicable; 
2.  The construction and installation of required public improvements and City utilities has been completed and the improvements have been accepted by the City as conforming to the City's regulations and design standards (or the proper assurances for construction of the improvements have been submitted and approved by the City, per Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls); and 
3.  The plat conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and to applicable zoning, subdivision and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City that are related to development of a land parcel. 
E.  Letter and Certification of Compliance. When all of the improvements are found to be constructed and completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and with the City's standards, and upon receipt by the City of Marble Falls of a maintenance bond or certificate of deposit in accordance with Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls, of this Division from each contractor, three (3) sealed Sets of "As Built" (or "Record Drawing") plans and one (1) sealed set of "As-Built" or "Record Drawing" mylars and a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the City) shall be submitted with a letter stating the contractor's compliance with these regulations, and bearing sealed certification by the design engineer that all public improvements have been constructed in substantial compliance with all City construction standards set forth in the TCSS and other applicable City design documents. After such letter and certification are received, the City Council shall receive and accept for the City of Marble Falls the title, use and maintenance of the improvements according to Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls. The Final Plat shall not be approved or filed at the county prior to receipt of the above letter and certification and any other required items, nor prior to acceptance of the improvements by the City, except as provided for in this Division. 
F.  Timing of Public Improvements. 
1.  The City Council may permit all or some of the public improvements to be installed, offered for dedication, or accepted by the City after approval of the Final Plat by the City Council if there exists a compelling reason that is consistent with the public health, safety or welfare to do so (also see Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls) and proper assurance is provided. 
2.  The City Council may permit or require the deferral of the construction of public improvements if, in its judgment, deferring the construction would not result in any harm to the public or would offer significant advantage in coordinating the site's development with adjacent properties and off-site public improvements. The deferred construction of any required public improvement(s) shall be approved by the City Council at the time of Preliminary Plat approval, and the necessary assurances for completion of the improvements, in accordance with Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls, shall be a stipulation, or condition, of approval of the Preliminary or Final Plat, as appropriate. 
3.  If the City Council does not require that all public improvements be installed, offered for dedication, or accepted by the City prior to approval of the Final Plat, the applicant shall provide assurances or security for the completion of the improvements or escrowed funds, as provided in Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls. 
G.  Effect of Approval. Approval of a Final Plat authorizes the property owner, upon fulfillment of all requirements and conditions of approval and upon completion of construction of all required improvements (or submission of the proper assurances for construction of same, per Division 6.4, Requirements for Acceptance of Subdivisions by the City of Marble Falls), to submit the final copies, or mylars, of the plat for filing at the appropriate county. Lots may be sold only when the Final Plat has been approved by the City Council and the plat has been filed with the county. No conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may occur until after the Final Plat is approved by the City Council and filed at the county. 
H.  Revisions to Approved Final Plat Prior to Filing at the County. Occasionally, minor revisions are needed before the Final Plat can be filed at the county. Such minor revisions as correction of bearings or distances, correction of minor labeling errors, addition of erroneously omitted informational items and labels, etc. may occur on the Final Plat prior to filing it without the City Council having to re-approve the Final Plat. Determination of whether or not revisions are "minor" in nature is subject to the judgment of the Director and City Engineer. Major revisions, such as obvious corrections or reconfiguration of lot lines or easements, relocation of driveways or access easements or fire lanes, any modification to the perimeter or boundary of the property, and relocation or addition or deletion of any public improvement (including corresponding easement), shall necessitate re-submission and re-approval of the plat as a "revised Final Plat" unless otherwise approved by the Director and the City Engineer, as applicable. The procedures for such re-approval shall be the same as for a Final Plat, and such re-approval may constitute a new project thus necessitating submission of a new application form, payment of new fees, compliance with amendments to these regulations which occurred since original Final Plat approval, and other requirements. 
I.  Filing the Final Plat at the County. Subsequent to Final Plat approval by the City Council, the applicant shall return copies of the Final Plat, as approved, along with any other required documents and necessary fees, to the Director within thirty (30) calendar days following approval, in accordance with requirements established by the City. All easements shall be included on the Final Plat, including the recording information for those easements that are filed or recorded as separate instruments, as required by utility companies and the City of Marble Falls prior to filing the Final Plat, and a copy of letters from each applicable utility company shall be submitted to the City Manager (or designee), and a copy of same shall be submitted to the Director and the City Engineer, stating that the plat contains the proper easements. All necessary filing materials as required by the county clerk of the appropriate county, in addition to the appropriate number of mylar copies and a digital copy of the plat file(s) required by the City Manager (or designee), shall be returned to the Director with the required filing fees. If the required copies and materials are not returned to the City within the specified thirty-day time frame, the approval of the Final Plat shall be null and void unless an extension is granted by the City Council. The City secretary shall cause the Final Plat to be filed at the office of the county clerk within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of all filing materials, including filing fees.  
Section 11.4.4 - Minor Plat 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for Minor Plats. 
B.  Application and Procedural Requirements. A Minor Plat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a Final Plat, and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee (per the City's current fee schedule), and a certificate or some other acceptable form of verification from the appropriate appraisal district showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with Subsection 11.2.1.H, Payment of All Indebtedness Attributable to a Specific Property. A copy of all application materials for a Minor Plat shall be submitted to the Director for review in the same manner as for a Final Plat, or the application shall be deemed incomplete. 
C.  Criteria for Approval. The Director may approve a Minor Plat, or may, for any reason, elect to present the Minor Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and approval. Any decision made on the Minor Plat by the Director shall be approval of the plat. Should the City Manager (or designee) refuse to approve the Minor Plat, then the plat shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and City Council for approval within the time period required by state law. 
D.  Notice and Public Hearing Not Required for Minor Plat. Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval a Minor Plat. 
E.  Document Title. The Minor Plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is a "Minor Plat." 
F.  Filing Minor Plats at the County. The Minor Plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a Final Plat, and approval of a Minor Plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the City and if the plat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a Final Plat.  
Section 11.4.5 - Development Plat 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for Development Plats. 
B.  Authority. This Section is adopted pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212, Subchapter B, and Sections 212.041 through 212.050, as amended. 
C.  Applicability. For purposes of this Section, the term "development" means the construction of any building, structure or improvement of any nature (residential or nonresidential), or the enlargement of any external dimension thereof. This Section shall apply to any land lying within the City or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction in the following circumstances: 
1.  The development of any tract of land which has not been platted or replatted prior to the effective date of these regulations, unless expressly exempted herein; or 
2.  The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from the City's subdivision ordinance, including requirements to Replat, which exemption is not expressly provided for in such regulations; or 
3.  The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement or street; or 
4.  The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five (5) acres in size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated or constructed. 
D.  Exceptions. No Development Plat shall be required, where the land to be developed has received Final Plat or Replat approval prior to the effective date of these regulations. The City Council may, from time to time, exempt other development or land divisions from the requirements of this Section. 
E.  Prohibition on Development. No development shall commence, nor shall any Building Permit, utility connection permit, electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued, for any development or land division subject to this Section, until a Development Plat has been approved by the City Council and submitted to the City for filing at the county. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the City shall not require Building Permits or otherwise enforce the City's building code in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction in relation to any Development Plat required by this subdivision ordinance. 
F.  Standards of Approval. The Development Plat shall not be approved until the following standards have been satisfied: 
1.  The proposed development conforms to all City plans, including but not limited to, the Comprehensive Plan, utility plans and applicable capital improvements plans; 
2.  The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the zoning (if located within the City's corporate limits) and subdivision regulations of this Code; 
3.  The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and services, parks and open space in conformance with City regulations; 
4.  The proposed development will not create a safety hazard on a public roadway (such as by not providing adequate on-site parking or vehicle maneuvering space for a restricted-access/gated entrance); 
5.  Appropriate agreements for acceptance and use of public dedications to serve the development have been tendered; and 
6.  The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement standards contained in these regulations and in the City's TCSS, and to any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City that are related to development of a land parcel. 
G.  Conditions. The City Council may impose such conditions on the approval of the Development Plat as are necessary to assure compliance with the standards in Subsection 11.4.5.F, Standards of Approval, above. 
H.  Approval Procedure. The application for a Development Plat shall be submitted to the City in the same manner as a Final Plat (see Section 11.4.2, Preliminary Plat, and Section 11.4.3, Final Plat), and shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the City Council in a similar manner as a Final Plat. Upon approval, the Development Plat shall be filed at the county by the Director in the same manner as prescribed for a Final Plat (see Section 11.4.3, Final Plat), and approval of a Development Plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the City Manager (or designee) and if the plat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a Final Plat. 
I.  Submittal Requirements. 
1.  In addition to all information that is required to be shown on a Final Plat, a Development Plat shall: 
a.  Be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor; 
b.  Clearly show the boundary of the Development Plat; 
c.  Be accompanied by a Site Development Plan showing each existing or proposed building, structure or improvement or proposed modification of the external configuration of the building, structure or improvement involving a change therein (the Site Development Plan shall also show all other Site Development Plan items as required by these regulations for informational purposes); 
d.  Show all easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the Development Plat; and 
e.  Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee (per the City's current fee schedule), and a certificate or some other form of verification from the appropriate appraisal district showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with Subsection 11.2.1.H, Payment of All Indebtedness Attributable to a Specific Property. 
2.  A copy of all application materials for a Development Plat shall be simultaneously submitted to the Director for review in the same manner as for a Final Plat, or the application shall be deemed incomplete.  
Section 11.4.6 - Replat 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for a Replat. 
B.  Replat Required. Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a property owner who proposes to replat any portion of an already approved and filed Final Plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat, shall first obtain approval for the Replat under the same standards and by the same procedures prescribed for the Final Platting of land by this Division. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the same requirements as for a construction or Final Plat, as provided herein. 
C.  Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat. A Replat of a Final Plat or portion of a Final Plat may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the Replat: 
1.  Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
2.  Is approved, after a public hearing (if required by state law) on the matter at which parties in interest and citizens have an opportunity to be heard, by the Planning and Zoning Commission and by the City Council; and 
3.  Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the Final Plat. 
D.  Previous Requirements or Conditions of Approval Which are Still Valid. In addition to compliance with Subsection 11.4.6.C, Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat, above, a Replat without vacation of the preceding plat shall conform to the requirements of this Section if: 
1.  During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or 
2.  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot. 
E.  Notice of Public Hearing. Notice of the public hearing required under Subsection 11.4.6.C, Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat, above shall be given before the fifteenth calendar day before the date of the hearing by publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in Burnet County. Notice of the public hearing shall also be given by written notice before the fifteenth calendar day before the date of the hearing, with a copy or description of any requested waivers/suspensions, sent to the property owners, as documented on the most recently approved ad valorem tax roll of the City, of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within two hundred (200) feet of the lot(s) to be replatted. In the case of a subdivision in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the most recently approved county tax roll shall be used. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with appropriate postage paid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the City. 
F.  Protest of Replatting. If the property owner(s) of twenty (20) percent or more of the total land area of lots to whom notice is required to be given under Subsection 11.4.6.C, Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat, above file with the City a written protest of the replatting before or at the public hearing, or if the Replat requires a waiver/suspension as defined in Section 11.4.8, Subdivision Waiver and Suspension, then approval of the Replat will require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (¾) of the full City Council. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of the total land area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed Replat and extending two hundred (200) feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, shall be filed with the City prior to the close of the public hearing. In computing the percentage of land area subject to the "20% rule" described above, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
G.  Exception. Compliance with Subsection 11.4.6.D, Previous Requirements or Conditions of Approval Which are Still Valid, above is not required for approval of a Replat for any part of a preceding plat if the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than single- or two-family (i.e., duplex) residential use by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to the plat. For example, for a Replat involving nonresidential property, a public hearing shall be held, pursuant to Subsection 11.4.6.C, Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat, above, but notice of the hearing does not have to appear in the newspaper and written notices do not have to be mailed to individual property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property. 
H.  Requirement to Include Original Subdivision and Lot Boundaries. Any Replat which adds or deletes lots shall include the original subdivision and lot boundaries. If a Replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the Replat shall reference the previous subdivision name and recording information and shall state on the Replat the specific lots which have changed along with a detailed "purpose for Replat" statement. 
I.  Public Hearing Not Required for Replat of Vacated Plat. If the previous plat is vacated as prescribed in Section 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and as provided in Section 11.4.9, Plat Vacation, a public hearing is not required for a Replat of the area vacated. It would, instead, be submitted as a "Final Plat" and reviewed accordingly. 
J.  Replat of Subdivisions. The Replat of the subdivision shall meet all the requirements for a Final Plat for a new subdivision that may be pertinent, as provided for herein. 
K.  Document Title. The title shall identify the document as a "Final Plat" of the "_______ Addition, Block _______, Lot(s) _______, Being a Replat of Block _______, Lot(s) _______ of the ______________ Addition, an addition to the City of Marble Falls, Texas, as recorded in Volume/Cabinet _______, Page/Slide _______ of the Plat Records of Burnet County, Texas". 
L.  Application Submittal. 
1.  An application submittal for a Replat shall be the same as for a Final Plat and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee (per the City's current fee schedule), and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with Subsection 11.2.1.H, Payment of All Indebtedness Attributable to a Specific Property. 
2.  A copy of all application materials for a Replat shall be simultaneously submitted to the Director for review in the same manner as for a Final Plat, or the application shall be deemed incomplete. 
M.  Filing Replat at the County. The Replat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a Final Plat, and approval of a Replat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the Director, and if the Replat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a Final Plat.  
Section 11.4.7 - Amending Plat 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for Amending Plats. 
B.  Submission and Procedural Requirements. Other than noted, the procedure for approval of plat amendment(s) shall be the same as in Section 11.4.3, Final Plat. An Amending Plat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a Final Plat, and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the required submission fee (per the City's current fee schedule), and a certificate or some other acceptable form of verification from the appropriate appraisal district showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property in accordance with Subsection 11.2.1.H, Payment of All Indebtedness Attributable to a Specific Property. A copy of all application materials for an Amending Plat shall be submitted to the Director for review in the same manner as for a Final Plat, or the application shall be deemed incomplete. 
C.  Criteria for Approval. The Director may approve an Amending Plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding or Final Plat without vacation of that plat if the Amending Plat is signed by the applicants only and if the Amending Plat is for one (1) or more of the purposes set forth in this Section. The procedures for Amending Plats shall apply only if the sole purpose of the Amending Plat is to: 
1.  Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; 
2.  Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; 
3.  Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat; 
4.  Indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments; 
5.  Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; 
6.  Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
7.  Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if: 
a.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  Neither lot is abolished; 
c.  The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions or easements; and 
d.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the owners in the plat; 
8.  Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement; 
9.  Relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for Amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions or easements; and 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; or 
10.  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
a.  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the City; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove or modify recorded covenants or restrictions or easements; and 
c.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the City Council has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area. 
D.  Consideration by Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. The City Manager (or designee) may, at his or her discretion and for any reason, elect to present the Amending Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council for consideration and approval. Any decision made on the Amending Plat by the Director shall be approval of the plat. Should the City Manager (or designee) refuse to approve the Amending Plat, then the plat shall be referred to the Commission for review and the City Council for approval, within the time period required by state law. 
E.  Notice and Public Hearing Not Required for Amending Plat. Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an Amending Plat. 
F.  Document Title. The Amending Plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is an "Amending Plat". It shall also state the specific lots affected or changed as a result of the Amending Plat and shall include the original subdivision plat boundary. All references to "Final Plat" or "Replat" shall be removed. 
G.  Filing Amending Plats at the County. The Amending Plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a Final Plat, and approval of an Amending Plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the City, and if the plat is not filed at the county within the time periods specified for a Final Plat.  
Section 11.4.8 - Subdivision Waiver and Suspension 
A.  General. Where the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends (also see Subsection 11.4.8.C, Procedures, below), and the City Council finds, that undue hardships will result from strict compliance with a certain provision(s) of these regulations, or where the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, the Commission and City Council may approve a waiver/suspension from any portion of the subdivision regulations as prescribed in Article 6, Subdivision Design and Land Development, so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured, provided that the waiver/suspension shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations, and further provided that the City Council shall not approve a waiver/suspension unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
1.  Granting the waiver/suspension will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, and will not be injurious to other property or to the owners of other property, and the waiver/suspension will not prevent the orderly subdivision of other property in the vicinity; 
2.  The conditions upon which the request for a waiver/suspension is based are unique to the property for which the waiver/suspension is sought, and are not applicable generally to other property; 
3.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape and/or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the property owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out; 
4.  The waiver/suspension will not in any manner vary the provisions of the zoning regulations or Comprehensive Plan or any other adopted plan(s) or ordinance(s) of the City; 
5.  An alternate design will generally achieve the same result or intent as the standards and regulations prescribed herein. 
B.  Criteria for Waivers/Suspensions from Development Exactions. Where the City Council finds that the imposition of any development exaction pursuant to the regulations prescribed in Article 6, Subdivision Design and Land Development, exceeds reasonable benefit to the property owner, or is so excessive as to constitute confiscation of the tract to be platted, it may approve a full or partial, at its discretion, waiver/suspension to such requirements, so as to prevent such excess. 
C.  Procedures. 
1.  A petition for a waiver/suspension shall be submitted in writing by the property owner before the plat is submitted for the consideration of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application, and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
2.  Where a hardship is identified during Preliminary Plat plan review pursuant to these regulations which requires issuance of a waiver/suspension from a provision in these regulations, the Commission may recommend a conditional (or temporary) waiver/suspension from that provision in conjunction with the Preliminary Plat approval by the City Council. All waivers/suspensions shall have final approval or disapproval by the City Council. Any waiver or suspension recommended for denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require a three-fourths (¾) majority for approval by the City Council. 
3.  Such findings of the City Council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the City Council meeting at which a waiver/suspension is considered. A waiver/suspension from any provision of these regulations may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these regulations so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the property owner or developer, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
D.  Criteria for Waivers/Suspensions for Street Exactions. Where the City Council finds that the imposition of any dedication or construction requirement for streets pursuant to these regulations exceeds reasonable benefit to the property to be platted, it may approve waivers/suspensions for such requirements so as to prevent such excess. In order to qualify for a waiver/suspension under this Section, the property owner shall demonstrate that the costs of right-of-way dedication and construction of other than streets classified as local streets imposed pursuant to these regulations substantially exceeds the incremental costs of providing land and transportation improvements necessary to offset the additional traffic impacts generated by, or attributable to, the development upon the transportation network serving the property, including that which may be generated by or attributed to other phases to be platted in the future. 
E.  Conditions. In approving a waiver/suspension, the City Council may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the purposes described in Section 6.1.1, Subdivision of Property.  
Section 11.4.9 - Plat Vacation 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the procedures and application requirements for vacating a plat. 
B.  By Property Owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may vacate, upon review by the Commission and approval by the City Council, the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat (instrument language is available from the City, upon request). 
C.  By All Lot Owners. If some or all of the lots covered by the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
D.  Criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review, and the City Council may approve, the petition for vacation on such terms and conditions as are in accordance with Section 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code (as amended), and as are reasonable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. As a condition of vacation of the plat, the City Council may direct the petitioners to prepare and seek approval of a revised Final Plat in accordance with these regulations such that the property does not become "unplatted". 
E.  Effect of Action. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat shall have no effect. Regardless of the Commission's and City Council's action on the petition, the property owner will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the City nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the City except as may have previously been agreed to by the Commission and City Council. 
F.  City-Initiated Plat Vacation. 
1.  General Conditions. The City Council, on its motion, may vacate the plat of an approved subdivision or addition when: 
a.  No lots within the approved plat have been sold within five (5) years following the date that the plat was signed by the City; 
b.  The property owner has breached an improvement agreement and the City is unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of public improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by property owner or its successor; or 
c.  The plat has been of record for more than five (5) years and the City determines that the further sale of lots within the subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety or welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successors. 
2.  Procedure. The Commission shall recommend approval, and the City Council shall approve, the Plat Vacation only if the criteria and conditions cited above are satisfied. 
3.  Record of Plat Vacation. If the City Council approves vacating a plat, the Director shall cause a copy of the Plat Vacation instrument to be recorded in the office of the county clerk along with an exhibit showing a drawing of the area or plat vacated. The county clerk shall write legibly on the vacated plat the word "vacated" and shall enter on the plat a reference to the volume and page at which the vacating instrument is recorded. If the City Council vacates only a portion of a plat, it shall cause a revised Final Plat drawing to also be recorded which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not been vacated. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument the vacated plat (or the vacated portion of the plat) has no effect.  
DIVISION 11.5 - ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS AND APPROVALS 
 
Section 11.5.1 - Land Disturbance Permit 
A.  Generally. A Land Disturbance Permit is intended to control erosion and sedimentation runoff and protect the natural topography and vegetation of land, including natural drainage conditions, protected trees, and significant tree stands. 
B.  Applicability. A Land Disturbance Permit is required for parcels proposed for development in the City limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction when any of the following, but not limited to the following, exist: 
1.  Any excavation, fill, or land disturbing activity greater than two feet in depth. 
2.  Construction, paving, or re-paving of any driveway, private street, parking lot, sidewalk, or path. 
3.  Construction of any paved or improved hard surface larger than 1,000 square feet in area. 
4.  Construction or installation of any sewer pipe, swale, or ditch for drainage purposes, except footing tiles or roof drainage interior to a structure. 
C.  Exceptions. Except as required by nonpoint source pollution control plan review, a Land Disturbance Permit is not required for the following: 
1.  A single-family detached or duplex dwelling unit located on an individually platted lot in an improved subdivision; 
2.  Farm and ranch uses; or 
3.  Development that has an approved Site Development Plan and the land disturbance is in compliance with the plan. 
D.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for the City Engineer to render an informed decision. 
E.  Review Criteria. A Land Disturbance Permit shall be issued if the City Engineer finds that: 
1.  All applicable requirements of this Section and these regulations have been met; and 
2.  Any required state or federal approvals have been granted. 
F.  Conditions of Permit. All Land Disturbance Permits shall be issued upon the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant shall install and maintain all erosion control measures; 
2.  The applicant shall maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems, and other facilities; 
3.  The applicant shall remove sediment resulting from land disturbing activities from abutting surfaces or drainage courses; 
4.  The applicant shall allow the designated City staff to enter the site to verify compliance or to perform any work necessary to bring the site to compliance with approved permit; and 
5.  The applicant shall submit a revised Land Disturbance Permit for approval if the nature of the project changes from that proposed under the approved permit.  
Section 11.5.2 - Floodplain Development Permit 
A.  Generally. Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her. 
B.  Applicability. A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required for development that encroaches in the floodplain. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
1.  A completed application pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures. 
2.  Applications for a Floodplain Development Permit may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement, if applicable) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood-proofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure shall meet the flood-proofing criteria of Section 5.2.3, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated because of proposed development; and 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Subsection 11.1.12.B.1, Recordkeeping. 
D.  Review Criteria. The Floodplain Administrator shall decide to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Floodplain Development Permit based on all applicable provisions of Division 5.2, Flood Damage Prevention, and the following relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
9.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the City's Comprehensive Plan for that area.  
Section 11.5.3 - Site Development Plan 
A.  Generally. A Site Development Plan is intended to demonstrate compliance with the development standards and other requirements, as applicable, of these regulations. Approval of the Site Development Plan shall be the basis for site development and issuance of a Building Permit but does not release the applicant of the responsibility to submit plans for a Building Permit. A Site Development Plan may be submitted concurrently to or with application for a Building Permit. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Approval of a Site Development Plan shall be required for the development of any property within the City limits, except as identified in Subsection 11.5.3.C, Exceptions, below. 
2.  For property located in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, approval of a Site Development Plan may be required in accordance with Chapter 28, Nonpoint Source Pollution Control, of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
C.  Exceptions. Other than nonpoint source pollution control plan review, a Site Development Plan shall not be required for: 
1.  A single-family detached or duplex dwelling unit located on an individually platted lot in an improved subdivision; or 
2.  A change of use on a property that requires no required site upgrades pursuant to Division 12.5, Nonconforming Sites. 
D.  Application Requirements. 
1.  Generally. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary for the Director to render an informed decision. 
2.  Plan Components. A completed Site Development Plan application shall be comprised of the following components, unless determined by the Director ahead of the application to not be applicable to a particular site. The details of each component shall be further described in forms approved by the Director and made publicly available. Compliance plans for architecture, lighting, and signage (if necessary) may be deferred to the submission of the Building Permit. 
a.  Cover sheet; 
b.  Dimensional site plan; 
c.  Utility plan; 
d.  Architecture plan; 
e.  Tree preservation plan; 
f.  Landscape plan; 
g.  Lighting plan; 
h.  Grading and drainage plan; 
i.  Flood study; and 
j.  Phasing plan. 
E.  Site Development Plan Review. 
1.  Review Criteria. The Director shall approve the Site Development Plan as long as it is determined that the plan is in compliance with these regulations, the City's Comprehensive Plan, and any other adopted City plans, regulations, policies, and technical manuals. 
2.  Site Development Plan review and evaluation shall be performed with respect to the following: 
a.  The impact of the development to natural resources and the environment; 
b.  A safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system; 
c.  The location and configuration of parks and open space areas; and 
d.  The adequacy of public utilities essential for occupants of the site. 
F.  Effect of Approval. The approval of the Site Development Plan shall be considered authorization to proceed to the application for a Building Permit and other applicable construction permits. 
G.  Expiration of Approved Site Development Plans. 
1.  Generally. 
a.  Site Development Plan approval shall expire two years after the date of approval of the Site Development Plan. If the Site Development Plan includes a phasing plan, each phase shall expire two years from the approval of the prior phase and in no case shall the overall phasing plan exceed 10 years. 
b.  Any existing Site Plan that has an approval date that is prior to May 11, 2000 and that does not have an expiration date, and for which no progress has been made toward completion of the project as of May 11, 2000, is hereby deemed to have expired as of May 11, 2004 and shall no longer be considered as a valid project. Any other Site Plan approval that does not have an expiration date, and for which no progress has been made toward completion of the project has occurred shall have expired on December 18, 2014. 
2.  Extension of Approved Site Development Plan. 
a.  Prior to the expiration of an approved Site Development Plan, an applicant may petition the City, in writing, for a one-time extension of the Site Development Plan approval for a period of one year. 
b.  The extension shall be considered and approved in the same manner and under the same approval authority as that of the original Site Development Plan (Site Plan) approval. 
c.  In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the Director or City Council shall take into account the requirements of Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code and the reasons for the lapse, and the ability of the property owner to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval and ensure that the extension will have no negative impacts on the property, abutting uses, nearby public infrastructure, and will not be contrary to the public interest. 
d.  Additional conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with the original conditions of approval and to protect the public health, safety and welfare may be applied to the extension. 
e.  Any such extension must be approved prior to the expiration of the approval, and if not approved then the Site Development Plan (Site Plan) will expire as set out in Subsection 11.5.3.G.1 above, unless the applicant demonstrates that progress toward completion of the project has occurred as set out in herein. 
H.  Amendments to Approved Site Development Plans. 
1.  Minor Amendments. Minor amendments to approved Site Development Plans do not require further applications and may be administratively approved provided that such amendments do not substantially change the design or nature of the original Site Development Plan, have an adverse impact on the public, abutting properties, or persons who would occupy or use the property, and would not otherwise result in a violation of these regulations, or other adopted City regulations, policies, and technical manuals. The Director shall determine whether an amendment is considered minor but shall generally be limited as follows: 
a.  Minor adjustments to the location or configuration of roadways, sidewalks, utilities, parking areas, buildings, landscape features, ponds and any other improvements depicted on the Site Development Plan; 
b.  Adjustments of 25 percent or less of total building square footage from the approved Site Development Plan; 
c.  Adjustments of 25 percent or less of the total square footage of any landscape areas on the Site Development Plan; 
d.  The proposed adjustments do not increase the site's overall parking lot area; and 
e.  The proposed adjustments do not increase the site's approved lot cover. 
2.  Other Amendments. All other amendments to an approved Site Development Plan shall require the submission of a new Site Development Plan application. Approval of a new Site Development Plan shall void the previously approved Site Development Plan. 
I.  Revocation of Approved Site Development Plan. The Director may revoke approval of a Site Development Plan if the Director determines that: 
1.  The conditions of the approval have not been met; 
2.  The plan contains, or is based upon, incorrect information or if it is determined that it was obtained using fraud or deceit; or 
3.  The site is developed in a manner that adversely affects the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working on or in proximity to the site in a way that is detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements.  
Section 11.5.4 - Administrative Exception 
A.  Generally. In order to provide a method, to correct human error, allow for minor numerical adjustments, or consider alternative design schemes for particular development standards of these regulations, specified deviations from the applicable development standards may be permitted through an Administrative Exception. 
B.  Permitted Administrative Exceptions. The Director shall have the authority to determine an Administrative Exception for the following situations: 
1.  That the language of a particular standard in these regulations is incorrect, unclear, or in error and to authorize an adjustment or interpretation to correct such error. 
2.  Adjustments of up to 10 percent of any numerical standard set forth in these regulations, except for the following: 
a.  A request for an increase in the number of units permitted on a lot or parcel; 
b.  Any numerical standard established by other processes, including Conditional Use Permit, Variance, Planned Development District, a previous Administrative Exception adjustment, other similar process, or by action of City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, or Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
c.  Any numerical adjustment greater than 10 percent shall require a request for a Zoning Variance, per the requirements set out in Section 11.3.6, Zoning Variance. 
3.  Alternative design or compliance plan(s) for the following situations: 
a.  Alternative Building Design (per Section 4.3.4); and 
b.  Alternative Landscaping (per subsection 9.2.1.C) 
C.  Initiation of Application. An application for an Administrative Exception may be filed by the property owner, or a person having a contractual interest in the subject property, or their authorized representative. 
D.  Application Requirements. The Director shall ensure that a completed application has been submitted by the applicant pursuant to Section 11.2.1., General Application Procedures, and includes the information and materials necessary to render an informed decision. 
E.  Review Criteria. The Director shall consider the Administrative Exception and may seek the review and approval of other City staff as deemed necessary. The Director shall then approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for Administrative Exception based on the following criteria: 
1.  The Administrative Exception serves an obvious and needed purpose; 
2.  The Administrative Exception will not materially or adversely affect abutting land uses and the physical character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the subject property. 
3.  The Administrative Exception ensures an equal or better level of design or land use compatibility as the otherwise applicable standards. 
4.  The Administrative Exception will be consistent with the purposes and intent of these regulations. 
F.  Conditions of Approval of Administrative Exception. The Director may impose conditions on the approval of an Administrative Exception as are necessary to protect abutting property owners and to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare. 
G.  Compliance with All Other Provisions. The property owner or applicant shall comply with all other provisions of these regulations not specifically relieved by the Administrative Exception. 
H.  Deferral of Administrative Exception. The Director may decide to defer the consideration of an Administrative Exception to the Zoning Board of Adjustment if the proposed exception does not meet the spirit and intent of these regulations or if the Director determines that the proposed exception should be considered in a public meeting. A deferred Administrative Exception shall be subsequently designated as a Zoning Variance application, at no additional cost to the applicant, and shall follow the process set out in Section 11.3.6, Zoning Variance. 
I.  Expiration of Approved Administrative Exceptions. 
1.  An approved Administrative Exception shall expire if the companion application expires, according to the specified expiration in this Article. 
2.  If the Administrative Exception is a stand-alone application, the approval will expire in two years if the exception is not utilized in a manner consistent with the approval. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.G.3, 5-21-2019)  
Section 11.5.5 - Building Permits 
A.  Generally. No Building Permit shall be issued for a lot, building site, building or use unless the lot or building site has been officially recorded by a Final Plat approved by the City Council and filed for record at the appropriate County, and unless all public improvements, as required by these regulations for Final Plat approval, have been completed, except as otherwise provided for within these regulations. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  A building "foundation only" permit may be issued for a nonresidential or multifamily development provided that a Preliminary Plat has been approved by the City Council, and provided that the Construction Plans have been released by the City Engineer. However, the Building Permit shall not be issued and building construction shall not be allowed to surpass the construction of fire protection improvements. In other words, the building shall not proceed above the slab level until all required fire lanes have been completed, and until all water lines serving fire hydrants have been completed, inspected and tested. 
2.  The City Building Official may release some residential Building Permits for not more than ten (10) percent of the lots within a new residential subdivision, provided that a Preliminary Plat has been approved by the City Council and the Construction Plans have been approved by the City Engineer, and provided that all public improvements have been completed for that portion of the development including, but not limited to, those required for fire and emergency protection, such as streets providing at least two (2) points of emergency access, alleys, water lines serving fire hydrants, and other similar, required public safety improvements. No lot may be sold nor title conveyed until the Final Plat has been approved by the City Council and recorded at the County. 
3.  No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a building or the use of property unless all subdivision improvements have been completed and a Final Plat has been approved by the City Council and recorded at the County. Notwithstanding the above, the City Manager (or designee) may authorize the conditional occupancy of a structure provided that an agreement providing cash escrow, a letter of credit, or other sufficient surety is approved by the City Manager (or designee) for the completion of all remaining public improvements, and provided that the structure is safely habitable in accordance with the City's building codes.  
Section 11.5.6 - Certificate of Occupancy 
A.  Generally. No existing building and no building erected or structurally altered, shall be occupied, used or changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. 
B.  Purpose of Certificate of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy states that the building and proposed use of building or land complies with these regulations, all other applicable building and health laws and ordinances, and all other ordinances relating to electrical and plumbing installation. 
C.  Applicability. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for the following: 
1.  A newly constructed building; 
2.  An altered building; or 
3.  Any change of use. 
D.  Application Requirements. Applications for a Certificate of Occupancy shall include a completed application and corresponding materials pursuant to Section 11.2.1, General Application Procedures and forms established by the Director. 
E.  Review Criteria. The Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the Building Official finds that the building and proposed use of building or land complies with all provisions of these regulations and other applicable building, electrical, plumbing, fire, and health codes and ordinances. 
F.  Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Pending the issuance of a permanent Certificate of Occupancy, the Building Official may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy to allow for the completion of alterations or for partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary occupancy will not jeopardize life or property. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be required to be accompanied by fiscal surety and shall not exceed six months in duration. Such temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owners relating to the use or occupancy of the premises.  
DIVISION 11.6 - APPEALS 
 
Section 11.6.1 - Appeals of Administrative Decision 
A.  Generally. Pursuant to the authority granted to the City by Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, any person, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by a decision of an administrative official acting in the enforcement of these regulations may appeal to the City Council. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Appeals of Decisions. Decisions or the failure to act by an administrative official are subject to appeal that shall be heard and decided upon by the City Council. 
2.  Matters Not Subject to Appeal. 
a.  Recommendations by an administrative body are not subject to appeal. 
b.  A denial of a continuance is not subject to appeal. 
c.  A determination that an application is not complete is not subject to appeal. 
d.  The decisions of an appeal are not subject to further review by the City Council. An appeal of the decision of an appeal shall be processed pursuant to Section 11.6.2, Appeals to District Court. 
C.  Appeal Procedures. Pursuant to Chapter 211.010, Appeal to Board, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the procedures of an appeal are as follows: 
1.  Timing. A notice to appeal shall be filed with the City within 10 calendar days from the date of the decision or action. 
2.  Notice of Appeal Content and Application Fee. 
a.  The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds of the appeal. 
b.  The applicant shall pay an application fee at the time the notice of appeal is filed. 
3.  Transmission of Record. The deciding administrative official shall transmit to the City Council the whole record from which the action appealed is being taken. 
D.  Public Hearing. The City Council shall schedule a public hearing, pursuant to Section 11.2.2, Public Hearings, no later than 30 calendar days after the date the appeal was filed. 
E.  Appeal Review Criteria. The City Council will make its decision on an appeal based on the requirements of these regulations and the information presented to the City Council by the applicant and City staff. 
1.  Burden of Proof. The decision of the administrative official is assumed to be valid and the applicant has the burden of proof to present sufficient evidence to justify a reversal in the action or decision being appealed. The deciding administrative official may bring evidence and argument to the contrary. 
2.  Findings. All findings necessary to the permit or appeal decision shall be based upon reliable evidence. Competent evidence (evidence admissible in a court of law) shall be preferred whenever reasonably available, and in no case, may findings be based solely upon incompetent evidence unless competent evidence is not reasonably available, the evidence in question appears to be particularly reliable, and the matter at issue is not seriously disputed. 
F.  Decision on Appeal. The City Council shall review the appeal, conduct a public hearing, and take final action on the appeal. 
1.  In exercising its powers set out in this Section, the City Council may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations and state law, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination. 
2.  A concurring vote of three-fourths of the full City Council shall be required to overturn the decision of the administrative official. 
3.  Failure of the City Council to act on the appeal within the appropriated timeframe shall be considered a denial of the appeal.  
DIVISION 11.7 - VESTED RIGHTS 
 
Section 11.7.1 - Chapter 245 Determination 
A.  Application for Establishment of Chapter 245 Rights. The provisions of this Section shall apply to any application for a permit or any other approval of a project for which an applicant desires to establish development rights under Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. There are two basic types of Chapter 245 determinations. 
1.  The first type of Chapter 245 determination involves a demonstration by the applicant that a project is vested with Chapter 245 development rights because the original application for a permit gave the City Fair Notice of the project and of the nature of the permit being sought and neither a permit nor the project have expired. 
2.  The second type of Chapter 245 determination involves a demonstration by the applicant that a project or permit is entitled to be reviewed in accordance with the regulations of the City in effect on the date that the original application for the first permit in the series of permits was filed because progress toward the completion of the project has been made by the applicant even though the permit and/or project time limits have expired. 
3.  An applicant, in order to establish development rights for a particular project, may need to demonstrate both Fair Notice of the project and that progress toward completion of the project has been made. 
B.  Expiration of Existing Permits. Any Site Development Plan (Site Plan) or Concept Plan or other land development approval that has an approval date that is prior to May 11, 2000 and that does not have an expiration date, and for which no progress has been made toward completion of the project as of May 11, 2000, is hereby deemed to have expired as of May 11, 2004 and shall no longer be considered as a valid project. Any Concept Plan that has an approval date that is after May 11, 2000 and before December 18, 2012 and that does not have an expiration date, and where no progress towards completion of the project has occurred shall have expired on December 18, 2017 and shall no longer be considered valid. Any Site Development Plan (Site Plan) or other land use approval that has an approval date after May 11, 2000 and before December 18, 2012 shall have expired on December 18, 2014 and shall no longer be considered valid. Any Concept Plan with an approval date after December 18, 2012 and that does not have an expiration date shall expire five years after the approval date where no progress towards completion of the project has occurred. Any Site Development Plan (Site Plan) or other land use approval with an approval date after December 18, 2012 shall expire two years from the date of the approval unless extended prior to the expiration date. 
C.  Applications for Chapter 245 Determination. 
1.  An application related to a demonstration that the City has Fair Notice of the project shall be submitted in a form prescribed by the City and shall be initially reviewed for completeness to ensure that all required items are available for technical review purposes. The application shall state the proposed date of applicable rules for the first permit in the series of permits, and the applicant shall supply documentation in support of the request. The burden of proof is on the applicant to provide sufficient written information to substantiate a claim under this Section. One or all of the following items may be considered as part of the Fair Notice Documentation: 
a.  Any of the documentation described in Subsection 11.7.1.C.3 below. 
b.  Documentation that clearly shows specific land uses, densities and intensities. 
c.  Documentation that shows the layout of streets, public easements, parking areas and building footprints. 
d.  Any other documentation that the applicant believes provides evidence of Fair Notice. 
2.  Chapter 245 development rights shall only apply to the specified land uses, densities and intensities set forth in the Fair Notice Documentation provided by the applicant. Any modification of the land uses, densities or intensities from those set out in the Fair Notice Documentation shall be considered a new project subject to current City ordinances. 
3.  An application related to a demonstration that a permit or project has not expired because progress has been made toward completion of the project shall be submitted in a form prescribed by the City and shall be initially reviewed for completeness to ensure that all required items are available for technical review purposes. The application shall state the proposed date of applicable rules for the first permit in the series of permits and shall clearly describe each permit that has been issued and the date of approval for each subsequent permit. The applicant shall provide a statement in narrative form that describes the efforts that have been undertaken toward completion of the project and shall supply documentation in support of the request. The burden of proof is on the applicant to provide sufficient written information to substantiate a claim under this Section. One or all of the following items may be considered: 
a.  Copy of an application for a Final Plat or plan that was previously submitted to a regulatory agency; 
b.  Proof that a good-faith attempt was previously made to file with a regulatory agency an application for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project; 
c.  Documentation of costs that have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located; 
d.  Documentation of fiscal security posted with a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation required by the regulatory agency; or 
e.  Documentation of utility connection fees or impact fees for the project paid to a regulatory agency. 
4.  The provisions of Subsection 11.7.1.C.3 above shall only apply to the project and specified land uses, densities and intensities set forth in the permits that have been previously approved by the City. Any modification of the land uses, densities or intensities shall be considered a new project and subject to current City regulations. 
5.  Any application for a Chapter 245 determination that is not deemed complete by the City shall be rejected, and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the missing or incomplete items within 10 working days of the submission of the application. An incomplete application shall expire if the missing or incomplete items are not provided by the applicant within 45 days of the date of initial submission of the application. 
6.  Each application shall be reviewed by the City Manager, in consultation with the City Attorney. The application may be denied in whole, granted in whole or denied in part and granted in part. Where the documentation submitted by the applicant is adequate to confirm a determination that rights exist under Chapter 245, then the regulations in place at the time such rights vested shall be applied in the further review and processing of permits for the project as applicable to the portion of the application that was granted. 
7.  The City Manager shall provide his or her decision on the application within 45 days of the date of the receipt of a complete application. 
8.  The applicant may appeal a final determination by the City Manager under this Section to the City Council within 10 calendar days of the date of the City Manager's decision on the application. 
9.  The City may enter into a consent agreement with the applicant that is intended to resolve a good-faith dispute concerning Chapter 245 development rights and applicable regulations in order to avoid the cost and uncertainty of litigation to both parties.  
ARTICLE 12 - NONCONFORMITIES  
DIVISION 12.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 12.1.1 - Purpose 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of Article 12, Nonconformities, is to ensure reasonable opportunity of use, maintenance, and improvement of legally created lots, structures or other improvements, parking and landscape areas, and uses that do not meet the current requirements of these regulations; to establish limitations on the continuation and expansion of nonconforming uses; and to encourage eventual replacement of nonconforming uses having potentially undesirable impacts on surrounding conforming uses. 
B.  Authority. The provisions of this Article are written pursuant to Chapter 43, Municipal Annexation, Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority, and Chapter 212, Municipal Regulation of Subdivisions and Property Development, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, and are applicable to areas of the City limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction that do not conform to the provisions of these regulations.  
Section 12.1.2 - Establishment of Nonconforming Status 
A.  Determination of Status. The Director shall determine the nonconforming status. The burden of demonstrating that any nonconformity is a legal nonconformity shall be borne by the owner or proponent of such nonconformity. 
B.  Legal Nonconformities. 
1.  Legal Nonconformities. 
a.  Generally. A structure, lot, site, or use which was legally established on the effective date of these regulations or any effective date of any amendment hereto, and has been in regular and continuous use, but which does not conform to the current requirements of these regulations, shall be granted legal nonconforming status, except as specifically exempted or prohibited by other sections of this Article. 
b.  Governmental Action Serving a Public Purpose. A lawful structure, lot, site, or use that is made noncompliant regarding any requirement of these regulations due to the acquisition of right-of-way by eminent domain, or purchase by a City, county, state, or federal agency shall be deemed legal nonconforming. Such exemption shall apply only to noncompliance that is a direct result of the acquisition of right-of-way. This does not apply to right-of-way dedication or other such public conveyance of land required by the City's subdivision process or through other such routine permits or development approval processes. 
2.  Continuance and Alteration. A legal nonconforming structure, lot, site, or use may remain, continue, or be altered, subsequent to the effective date of these regulations and any amendments thereto, provided that such continuance or alteration is in accordance with the provisions of this Article and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the City. 
3.  Conflicts. Where a structure, lot, site, or use is in compliance, legal nonconforming status does not preempt such structure, lot, site, sign, or use to maintain compliance with the provisions of these regulations. In the event of any conflict, the most restrictive regulations shall apply. 
4.  Termination for Violation. A legal nonconforming structure, lot, site, or use may have its legal nonconforming status and right to operate terminated by the City Council on recommendation of the Director if found to be in violation of any of the following provisions: 
a.  Constructing, maintaining, or operating a use conducted in or associated with a building or structure erected without a permit from the City; 
b.  Operating a use or occupying a building or structure without a valid Certificate of Occupancy from the City; 
c.  Operating a use in violation of a valid Certificate of Occupancy; 
d.  Subdividing a nonconforming lot without complying with these regulations; 
e.  Unlawful expansion of a nonconforming use, site, or structure; or 
f.  Any other violation of these regulations as determined by the Director. 
C.  Annexed Lands. After annexation of an area, a person may continue to use the land in the newly annexed area in the same manner in which the land was used on the date annexation proceedings were instituted if the land use was legal at the time. This includes any beginning use of land in the newly annexed area in the manner that was planned for the land before the 90th day before the effective date of annexation if: 
1.  One or more licenses, certificates, permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were required by law for the planned use; and 
2.  A completed application for the initial authorization was filed with the governmental entity before the date the annexation proceedings were instituted, as described in Section 43.002(a)(2), Continuation of Land Use, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code. 
D.  Unlawful Nonconformity. Any structure, lot, site, or use that is in violation of the requirements of these regulations and was not legally established on the effective date of these regulations or was built, used, or operated in violation of any previous zoning or land development regulations, shall be considered illegal nonconforming. The owner and/or operator of an illegal nonconforming structure, lot, site, or use shall be subject to actions and penalties specified by these regulations and all other applicable City codes and ordinances and shall be required to correct the nonconforming situation to come into conformance with all applicable standards of these regulations and all other applicable City codes and ordinances.  
Section 12.1.3 - Exemptions 
A.  Prior Plans and Approvals in Progress. Plans approved or submitted and determined to be complete prior to the effective date of these regulations are subject to the standards set out in Section 1.2.1, Relationship to Existing Applications and Development. 
B.  Prior Approval Granted. Any structure, lot, site, or use that was granted approval through a Variance, Special Exception, or Administrative Exception shall conform to the terms and processes of their approval, even when in conflict with the provisions of this Article.  
Section 12.1.4 - Types of Nonconformities 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the types of nonconforming situations governed by these regulations. 
B.  Types of Nonconformities. Set out in Table 12.1.4, Types of Nonconformities, are the types of nonconformities governed by these regulations and the cross-reference to the appropriate Division that contains the regulatory provisions. 
Table 12.1.4 
Types of Nonconformities 
Type 	Division 
Nonconforming use 	12.2 
Nonconforming building or structure 	12.3 
Nonconforming lot 	12.4 
Nonconforming site 	12.5 
  
Section 12.1.5 - Abandonment of Nonconforming Situation 
A.  Generally. Abandonment of a legal nonconforming situation shall result in the loss of the existing legal nonconforming status previously granted. All use of the premises shall cease and any future use of the premises may only occur as provided for in this Division. 
B.  Determination of Abandonment. The Director shall make the determination of abandonment of a nonconforming situation based on the criteria established in Table 12.1.5, Determination of Abandonment of Nonconforming Situation, below: 
Table 12.1.5 
Determination of Abandonment of Nonconforming Situation 
Nonconforming Situation 	Terms to Determine Abandonment 1 
Nonconforming use 	The nonconforming use has not occupied the building or site for a period of 18 months. 
Nonconforming building or structure 	The building or structure has been vacant for a period of 18 months. 
Nonconforming site 	The site has been vacant for a period of 18 months. 
Table Notes: 
1 For the purposes of determining abandonment, occurrence of one or more of the following shall be an indication of vacancy or lack of occupancy: 
 a. The building, structure, activity or land has been unoccupied or out of use; 
 b. One or more utility accounts have been discontinued; 
 c. Utility meters are removed; 
 d. A nonconforming structure has been removed from the premises; 
 e. The occupant or owner/operator has allowed any taxes to not be paid thereon; 
 f. The site or structure has not been maintained; 
 g. The unit has not been made available for occupancy; 
 h. The characteristic equipment and furnishings of a nonconforming use have been removed from the premises; or 
 i. A nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use. 
 
C.  Time Period for Determining Abandonment of a Nonconforming Situation. 
1.  Exclusion for Government Action. The time period for determining abandonment of a nonconforming situation shall exclude any period of discontinuance of use caused by government actions impeding access to the premises without any contributing cause by the owner/operator of the legal nonconforming use, site, building or structure. 
2.  Administrative Extension. The Director may approve an extension of the time period for determining abandonment of a legal nonconforming use, site, building, or structure to a maximum of three years if the property has been consistently maintained and the owner of the land, building, or structure can prove to the satisfaction of the Director that they have been actively and continuously marketing the land, building, or structure for sale or lease or have otherwise engaged in activities that would affirmatively prove there was no intent to abandon. 
3.  Special Exception. The City Council may approve a Special Exception allowing the extension of the time period for determining abandonment of a legally nonconforming use, site, building, or structure to a maximum of four years provided that the property has been consistently maintained; the structure has not been altered to serve other uses; the structure has not housed other conforming or nonconforming uses; and the owner/operator can prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that they have been actively and continuously marketing the land, building, or structure for sale or lease to such a use. 
D.  Site Area Considered for Determining Abandonment. All of the buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are generally to be considered as a whole for the purposes of determining abandonment of a nonconforming situation. A multi-tenant site, building or shopping center shall be considered occupied for the purposes of this Article, provided it remains at least 30 percent occupied. The failure to rent one space in a nonconforming building or on a nonconforming site shall not result in a loss of the right to rent space thereafter so long as the building or site as a whole is continuously maintained and at least 30 percent of the units remain rented. 
E.  Written Notification of Determination. Upon request, the Director shall provide written notification of determination to the owner/operator in writing of the determination that the nonconforming building, structure, lot, site, or use has been abandoned, and state on what terms the determination has been made. An appeal of such determination can be considered by the City Council, pursuant to Division 11.8, Appeals.  
Section 12.1.6 - Termination of Legally Nonconforming Situation 
A.  Generally. The right to operate or maintain a nonconforming situation may be terminated by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
B.  Appeal. An appeal of the termination of nonconforming rights under this Article shall be made to a court of competent jurisdiction.  
DIVISION 12.2 - NONCONFORMING USES 
 
Section 12.2.1 - Nonconforming Uses, Generally 
A.  Generally. A nonconforming use is a use that is not permitted within the zoning district of the subject property upon which the use is located. Those uses that do not meet the specific use restrictions of the zoning district or lack a required Conditional Use Permit or are operating outside the restrictions of an approved Conditional Use Permit are also considering nonconforming. 
B.  Legal Nonconformities. 
1.  Nonconforming uses that were lawfully located and in operation on the subject property on the effective date of these regulations and subsequent amendments thereto, shall be considered legally nonconforming uses. 
2.  A use that legally received prior approval as a conditional use or restricted use under the previous regulations, but is not a permitted, conditional, or restricted use in the district in which it is located under these regulations is a legally nonconforming use and is subject to the provisions of this Article, in addition to any conditions of the approval of the Conditional Use Permit. 
C.  Abandonment. In the event that a nonconforming use is determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 12.1.5, Abandonment of Nonconforming Situation, the building, structure, or site which encompassed the nonconforming use shall thereafter only be occupied in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.  
Section 12.2.2 - Changes in Nonconforming Uses 
A.  Generally. 
1.  Continuance. A legally nonconforming use may continue with a change of ownership, provided that the use is replaced by the same specific use and does not expand or change its operation except to be more conforming. 
2.  Increase to or Addition of Nonconformities Prohibited. In no event may a nonconforming use change to a use that is more nonconforming or its operation change in a manner that is more nonconforming than the original nonconforming situation. 
3.  Approval of Less Nonconforming Uses. The Director may approve the change of a legally nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, provided that the new nonconforming use is more conforming to the current regulations than the previous nonconforming use. 
B.  Considerations for Determination. When determining the function, intensity, and level of impact of the nonconforming use, the Director may consider hours of operation, number of employees, parking requirements, target consumer, traffic generation, deliveries, noise, lighting, compatibility to surrounding uses, and benefit to the surrounding area.  
Section 12.2.3 - Expansion of Nonconforming Uses 
A.  Generally. The City Council may approve a Special Exception for the expansion or enlargement of a legally nonconforming use, pursuant to Section 11.3.7, Special Exception, except as follows: 
1.  The Director may administratively approve the expansion or enlargement if it is determined that such expansion or enlargement of the use, accessory use, or site modification would make the use more conforming to these regulations (e.g., more compliant with regard to minimum parking requirements); or 
2.  The expansion or enlargement is required by City ordinance or state or federal law. 
B.  Considerations for Determination. A legally nonconforming use shall be considered enlarged or expanded by one or more of the following: 
1.  Increase of square footage of the building or structure encompassing the nonconforming use; 
2.  Expanding the square footage occupied by a nonconforming use within an existing building or structure; 
3.  Occupying a greater portion of the tract on which the nonconforming use is located; 
4.  Construction of additional buildings or structures associated with the nonconforming use; or 
5.  Increasing the scope, volume, or intensity of the nonconforming use in a significant way. 
C.  Creation of New Nonconformity Prohibited. The expansion or enlargement of any legally nonconforming use shall not create any new nonconformity.  
Section 12.2.4 - Damage or Destruction of Buildings or Structures Containing Nonconforming Uses 
A.  Generally. Damage to or destruction of buildings and structures of nonconforming uses shall be governed as set out in this Section and other applicable sections of this Article. 
B.  Natural or Accidental Causes. If a building or structure that encompasses a legally nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by natural or accidental causes, the use may be allowed to reconstruct and continue operation as set out in Table 12.2.4, Determination of Reconstruction of Nonconforming Use Building and Structures. 
Table 12.2.4 
Determination of Reconstruction of Nonconforming Use Buildings and Structures 
Extent of Damage or Destruction 1 	Determination of Reconstruction 
Value of damage or destruction is less than 50 percent of the market value of the structure on the date of the damage. 	The legally nonconforming use shall be allowed to continue and the structure may be rebuilt upon issuance of a Building Permit. 
Value of damage or destruction is 50 percent or more of the market value of the structure on the date of the damage. 	The right to continue to operate the legally nonconforming use on the property ceases to exist. The owner/operator of the use may apply for a Special Exception from the City Council to be allowed to reestablish the nonconforming use in the reconstructed building. 
Table Notes: 
1 The market value shall be determined by the most recent Burnet Central Appraisal District valuation. The value of the damage or destruction shall be provided to the Director by an executive general insurance adjuster within a reasonable timeframe to determine the extent of the damage. 
 
1.  Timeframe for Reconstruction. Permitting for any allowed reconstruction must commence within six months following the date of the damaging event, and reconstruction shall be completed and a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within 18 months of the damaging event. The Director may approve an extension of these timeframes for show of good cause, provided there is no adverse impact on the community. 
2.  Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. If the building or structure that was destroyed or damaged was a legally nonconforming building or structure, reconstruction of the building or structure shall comply with the regulations set out in Division 12.3, Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. 
C.  Intentional Destruction. A legally nonconforming use terminates when the structure that encompasses such use is destroyed by the intentional act of the owner/operator.  
Section 12.2.5 - Removing Legally Nonconforming Use Status 
A.  Generally. The owner of a legally nonconforming use may remove the nonconforming use status through one of the processes listed below, as they may apply to the situation. 
1.  Rezone to a district where the use would conform; 
2.  Apply for a Conditional Use Permit which would remove the nonconforming status; or 
3.  Comply with the use restrictions for the zoning district. 
B.  No Guaranteed Approval. Compliance with Subsections 12.2.5.A.1 through 12.2.5.A.3, above, does not guarantee the approval of the application by the decision-making body.  
DIVISION 12.3 - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 
 
Section 12.3.1 - Nonconforming Buildings or Structures, Generally 
A.  Generally. A nonconforming building or structure is any building or structure that does not meet the requirements of these regulations, such as building placement, setback requirements, height limitations, material requirements or articulation, or does not meet any other local ordinances or technical manuals. Nonconforming buildings or structures that were lawfully constructed and existing on the effective date of these regulations or subsequent amendments thereto, shall be considered legally nonconforming buildings or structures. 
B.  Applicability. For the purposes of this Section, the term building or structure applies to anything constructed or erected on the ground or which is attached to something located on the ground, except signs. This includes, but is not limited to, buildings, telecommunications towers, utility improvements, and sheds and is applicable to all buildings or structures regardless of whether they are deemed principal or accessory. 
C.  Abandonment. In the event that a nonconforming building or structure is determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 12.1.5, Abandonment of Nonconforming Situations, the building, structure, or site which encompassed the building or structure shall thereafter only be occupied in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.  
Section 12.3.2 - Repair, Maintenance, and Reconstruction of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures 
A.  Generally. A legally nonconforming building or structure shall be maintained in accordance with the codes in effect when the building or structure was constructed or as deemed necessary by the Building Official for the general safety and welfare of the occupant and the public. The repairs required by the Building Official shall not be construed as to allow an addition to, or expansion of, a nonconforming building or structure. Except as otherwise provided for in this Article, no repair or maintenance may result in the expansion of any existing nonconformity or the creation of any new nonconformity. 
B.  Unsafe Structures. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to permit the continued use of a building or structure found to be in violation of building, basic life safety, or health codes of the City, or to prohibit the strengthening or repair of any part of any nonconforming building or structure declared unsafe by the Building Official. 
1.  Right of Continuance. The right to continue any nonconformity shall be subject to all applicable housing, building, health, and other applicable life safety codes. 
2.  Public Health and Safety. The Building Official may order an unsafe noncomplying building or structure to be restored to a safe condition. If the costs of such repairs exceed 50 percent of the value of the building or structure, the right to operate, occupy or maintain such building or structure may be terminated by action of the City Council and such building or structure shall be demolished. The value of the building or structure and the percent value lost due to any destruction shall be determined by an appraisal submitted to the Building Official. 
C.  Interior Alterations of a Nonconforming Building or Structure. Interior remodeling of legally nonconforming buildings or structures is permitted and will not result in loss of legal nonconforming status regardless of the cost or extent of the interior remodel, as long as no exterior remodeling is involved. If exterior alteration in conjunction with interior remodeling is involved, loss of legal nonconforming status will be determined pursuant to the provisions set forth in this Article related to such alteration.  
Section 12.3.3 - Damage or Destruction of a Nonconforming Building or Structure 
A.  Generally. The reconstruction of a damaged or destroyed nonconforming building or structure may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Natural or Accident Causes. A legal nonconforming building or structure that is damaged or destroyed by natural or accidental causes may only be reconstructed in accordance with Table 12.3.3, Determination of Reconstruction of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. 
Table 12.3.3 
Determination of Reconstruction of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures 
Extent of Damage or Destruction 1 	Determination of Reconstruction 
Value of damage or destruction is less than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure on the date of the damage. 	The legally nonconforming structure may be rebuilt upon issuance of a Building Permit. 
Value of damage or destruction is fifty (50) percent or more of the market value of the structure on the date of the damage. 	The right to operate, occupy or maintain the legally nonconforming structure ceases to exist. Owner of the building or structure may apply for a Special Exception from the City Council to be allowed to reconstruct the building in the configuration it existed in prior to the damage or destruction. 
Table Notes: 
1 The market value shall be determined by the most recent Burnet Central Appraisal District valuation. The value of the damage or destruction shall be provided to the Director by an executive general insurance adjuster within a reasonable timeframe to determine the extent of the damage. 
 
1.  Timeframe for Reconstruction. Permitting for any allowed reconstruction must commence within six months following the date of the damaging event, and reconstruction shall be completed and a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued within 18 months of the damaging event. The Director may approve an extension of these timeframes for show of good cause, provided there is no adverse impact on the community. 
2.  Increase in Nonconformity Prohibited. A structure restored under this subsection shall not have increased gross floor area, building footprint, or height as compared to the damaged or destroyed structure. 
C.  Historic Structures. A nonconforming building or structure designated as a state or national historic building or structure shall be allowed to be restored in the same location, design, and configuration immediately preceding any damage or destruction from natural or accidental causes. Permitting for such reconstruction must commence within 18 months of the damaging event and be completed, as determined by issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, within three years of the event. 
1.  Timeframe for Reconstruction. The timeframes herein may be extended for good cause as proven to the Director, provided there is no adverse effect on the community. 
2.  Burden of Proof. The property owner has the burden of proof to establish the details of the building or structure immediately prior to the damage or destruction. 
D.  Intentional Causes. A legally nonconforming building or structure that is damaged or destroyed by the intentional act of the owner/operator shall not be restored or reconstructed as it was before such act.  
Section 12.3.4 - Moving a Nonconforming Building or Structure 
A.  Generally. The movement of a nonconforming building or structure may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Compliance Required. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved to another location on the same lot or any other lot unless the entire building or structure is thereafter made to conform to all requirements of these regulations applicable to the property to which the building or structure will be moved. 
C.  Site Clearance and Clean-up. Within 30 days of the re-location of the nonconforming building or structure, the site of its former location shall be cleared of any remaining above-ground building components including any structural elements, foundation, utility pipes, etc. unless such components will be reused for another structure that is subject to a submitted Building Permit. 
D.  Exceptions. Historic buildings or structures shall not be required to conform to building material and design requirements. Compliance with site, lot, and use requirements shall be required.  
Section 12.3.5 - Expansion or Enlargement of a Nonconforming Building or Structure 
A.  Generally. The expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming building or structure may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
1.  Degree of Expansion or Enlargement. If such expansion or enlargement is in excess of 100 percent of the size of the existing building or structure, all provisions of these regulations shall be applicable to the existing building(s) or structure(s) as well as any new construction on the lot or parcel. For the existing building or structure, where it is determined that all provisions of these regulations cannot be reasonably met or conformance with all requirements of these regulations will cause the expansion or creation of another nonconformity, the applicant may request approval of a Special Exception by the City Council, pursuant to Section 11.3.7, Special Exception. 
2.  Considerations for Determination. For purposes of determining the expansion or enlargement of a legally nonconforming building or structure, the square footage of all previous expansions under this subsection shall be cumulative and the square footage of the original building or structure shall be the initial size for purposes of the calculation. 
3.  Compliance Required. All expansion or enlargement of buildings or structures under this subsection shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which such building or structure is located. 
4.  Creation of New Nonconformity Prohibited. In no event may the expansion or enlargement result in the increase of any existing nonconformity or the creation of any new nonconformity.  
Section 12.3.6 - Removing Legally Nonconforming Building or Structure Status 
A.  Generally. The owner of a legally nonconforming building or structure may remove the nonconforming use status through one of the processes listed below: 
1.  Modify the building or structure to conform to the current standards; 
2.  Apply for a Zoning Variance to allow the building or structure as built, pursuant to Section 11.3.6, Zoning Variances; or 
3.  Rezone to a district where the building or structure would conform. 
B.  No Guaranteed Approval. Compliance with Subsections 12.3.6.A.1 through 12.3.6.A.3, above, does not guarantee the approval of the application by the decision-making body.  
DIVISION 12.4 - NONCONFORMING LOTS 
 
Section 12.4.1 - Nonconforming Lots, Generally 
A.  Generally. A nonconforming lot is a lot of record that does not meet the minimum area or dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. Nonconforming lots that lawfully existed on the effective date of these regulations or subsequent amendments thereto shall be considered legal nonconforming lots. 
B.  Use of a Legally Nonconforming Lot. A legal nonconforming lot may continue to exist indefinitely and may be developed and used as if it were a conforming lot, provided the proposed use is permitted and all development standards of the applicable zoning district of these regulations are met. 
C.  Creation of New Nonconformity Prohibited. No new division of a legally nonconforming lot shall be made which increases the existing level of nonconformity, leaves any lot, parcel, or remnant width or area below the requirements stated in these regulations, or creates any new nonconforming situation.  
Section 12.4.2 - Removing Legally Nonconforming Lot Status 
A.  Generally. The owner of a legally nonconforming lot may remove the nonconforming status through one of the processes listed below. This list does not guarantee the approval of the application or the decision of the deciding body. 
1.  Combine the lot with an adjacent property to conform to current standards through a subdivision process, as set out in Division 11.4, Subdivision Permits and Approvals; or 
2.  Apply for a Zoning Variance, pursuant to Section 11.3.6, Zoning Variances; or 
3.  Rezone to a district where the lot standards would conform. 
B.  No Guaranteed Approval. Compliance with Subsections 12.4.2.A.1 through 12.4.2.A.3, above, does not guarantee the approval of the application by the decision-making body.  
DIVISION 12.5 - NONCONFORMING SITES 
 
Section 12.5.1 - Nonconforming Sites, Generally 
A.  Generally. A nonconforming site is one where one or more existing site improvements, including but not limited to parking, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks, fencing, and landscaping, do not conform to one or more of the requirements of these regulations applicable to the property. Nonconforming sites that lawfully existed on the effective date or applicability of these regulations or any amendment thereto shall be considered legal nonconforming sites. 
B.  Use of a Legally Nonconforming Site. A legal nonconforming site may continue to exist indefinitely provided that proposed improvements comply with all development standards of the applicable zoning district of these regulations are met, or as otherwise set out in this Article. A change in the owner/operator of a legally nonconforming site does not change the legal nonconforming status of the site, provided that the site is of the same use as the previous use. 
C.  Abandonment. In the event that a nonconforming site is determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 12.1.5, Abandonment of Nonconforming Situations, the site shall be modified to conform to all applicable requirements of these regulations, as provided in Section 12.5.5, Required Site Improvement Compliance, prior to re-occupancy.  
Section 12.5.2 - Repair and Maintenance of Legally Nonconforming Sites 
A.  Generally. A legally nonconforming site shall be maintained in accordance with the regulations in effect when the site was constructed or as deemed necessary by the Director for the general safety and welfare of the occupant and the public. 
B.  Repairs and Maintenance. Any repairs or maintenance required by the Director shall not be construed as to allow an addition to or expansion of a nonconforming site. Except as otherwise provided for in this Division, no repair or maintenance may result in the expansion of any existing nonconformity or the creation of any new nonconformity. Maintenance of a site may include, but is not limited to, maintenance of landscaping, pavement, lighting, or detention ponds.  
Section 12.5.3 - Change in Use of a Legally Nonconforming Site 
A.  Generally. A change in the use of a legally nonconforming site shall not cause the site to lose its legal nonconforming status. Nonconforming uses are subject to the provisions of Division 12.2, Nonconforming Uses. 
B.  Similar or Less Intense Use. A new use of a legally nonconforming site that is a similar function and intensity or one that is less intense than the previous use, as determined by the Director, may be allowed without any required changes to the legally nonconforming site, provided that the following criteria are met: 
1.  Parking. The new use shall have a parking requirement that is equal to or less than the parking requirement of the previous use. 
2.  Outdoor Storage or Activities. The new use shall not increase the amount of outdoor storage or outdoor activities than the previous use. 
3.  Trip Generation. The average daily vehicle trips generated by the new use shall be equal to or less than the previous use. 
4.  Nuisance. The new use shall not produce more noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes, glare, or smoke than the previous use. 
5.  Maintenance of Site. The site shall be maintained and in conformance with any site plan or regulations in effect when the site was established or last improved. This includes, but is not limited to, the replacement of any dead plants or trees, the re-striping of parking spaces, and the repaving of deteriorated pavement. 
6.  Compliance with Regulations. The new use shall meet all limitations or requirements of these regulations for such use without alteration to the site. 
C.  Different Use. Any change in use of a legally nonconforming site to a use that is not considered a similar use or less intense use as identified above, shall be considered a change to a different use. A change in use of a legally nonconforming site to a different use shall require the following alterations to a nonconforming site: 
1.  Parking. Additional parking spaces will be required based on the parking regulations for the new use, pursuant to Division 8.2, Off-Street Parking. If the previous use was deficient in required parking spaces, the new use may carry over the deficiency. If the additional parking spaces cannot be met on site, the applicant may request the requirement be met off-site or through alternatives to required parking pursuant to Section 8.2.3, Alternative Parking Arrangements. 
2.  Driveways. Driveways shall be brought into compliance as set out in Section 12.5.5, Required Site Improvement Compliance. 
3.  Maintenance of Site. The site shall be maintained and in conformance with any site plan or regulations in effect when the site was established or last improved. This includes, but is not limited to, the replacement of any dead plants or trees, the re-striping of parking spaces, and the repaving of deteriorated pavement. 
4.  Compliance with Regulations. The new use shall meet all specific use restrictions and district requirements of these regulations including, but not limited to, setback requirements, buffer and screening.  
Section 12.5.4 - Expansion of Nonconforming Sites 
A.  Generally. A legally nonconforming site or a use, building or structure on a legally nonconforming site may be expanded or enlarged pursuant to the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Considerations for Determination. 
1.  The following shall be considered an expansion or enlargement of a legally nonconforming site: 
a.  Occupying a greater portion of the tract; 
b.  Construction of additional buildings; or 
c.  Construction of any additional improvements on a portion of the tract that was not previously developed. 
2.  For the purposes of identifying the expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming site, the square footage of all previous expansions under this subsection shall be cumulative and the square footage of the original site shall be the initial size for purposes of the calculation. 
C.  Standards of Expansion of Nonconforming Sites. Table 12.5.4, Standards of Expansion of Nonconforming Sites, establishes the standards and conditions for expansions or enlargements of nonconforming sites. 
Table 12.5.4 
Standards of Expansion of Nonconforming Sites 
Extent of Expansion or Enlargement 	City Council Approval Required 	Exceptions and Conditions of Approval 
Up to 25 percent of the initial size 	None 	All areas of expansion or enlargement shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of these regulations. Modification to existing nonconforming site elements that are incidental in the expansion or enlargement shall conform to the current site development standards. 
In excess of 25 percent of the initial size, but not more than 50 percent of the initial size 	Special Exception 	1. All areas of expansion or enlargement shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of these regulations. Modification to existing nonconforming site elements that are incidental in the expansion or enlargement shall conform to the current site development standards. 
		2. The City Council may condition the approval of a Special Exception for expansion or enlargement on bringing existing legally nonconforming site elements under conformance with existing regulations. 
In excess of 50 percent of the initial size 	Special Exception 	The expanded or enlarged site area as well as the existing nonconforming site area shall be brought into compliance with all provisions of these regulations. Where it is determined that all provisions of these regulations cannot be reasonably met, or conformance with all requirements of these regulations will cause the expansion or creation of another nonconformity, the applicant may request approval of a Special Exception by the City Council. 
 
D.  Creation of New Nonconformity Prohibited. All expansion or enlargement of sites shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of these regulations. In no event may the expansion or enlargement result in the increase of any existing nonconformity or the creation of any new nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.H, 5-21-2019)  
Section 12.5.5 - Required Site Improvement Compliance 
A.  Generally. Site improvements required by the events identified in this Section shall comply with all applicable provisions of these regulations and as provided in this Section. 
B.  Review of Required Improvements. Site improvements that are required to meet the provisions of this Division shall be reviewed pursuant to the standard processes and procedures. 
C.  Timing of Required Improvements. Required site improvements shall be made as part of the event that triggers the improvements. An applicant may phase the construction of the required site improvements, at the approval of the Director. Any required parking that is triggered, however, shall be constructed as part of the first phase. 
D.  Site Improvement Compliance Requirements. Table 12.5.5, Site Improvement Compliance Requirements, establishes the requirements for site improvements based on the event triggering such improvements. 
Table 12.5.5 
Site Improvement Compliance Requirements 
SITE IMPROVEMENTS 	CROSS- 
REFERENCE 	TRIGGER EVENT 	NOTES 
		Change in Use to 
More Intense Use 	Expansion or 
Enlargement 	Re-occupancy of 
Abandoned Site 	
Parking Requirements and Parking Lot Design 	Division 8.2, Off-Street Parking 	X 	X 1 	X 	1. If the additional parking spaces cannot be met on site, the applicant may request the requirement be met through an alternative means pursuant to Section 8.2.3, Alternative Parking Arrangements. 
					2. All deteriorated pavement, as determined by the City Engineer, shall be repaved in accordance with these regulations or the TCSS of the City. 
Driveways 	Division 7.1, Access 	X 	X 1 	X 	All driveways accessing the site shall conform to the requirements of these regulations. Any driveways not conforming to the number, spacing, or width of these regulations shall be altered in a manner that is conforming. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the removal of all driveway access to the property. 
Landscaping 	Division 9.2, 
Landscaping 		X 1 	X 	1. The City may consider usage of areas within the public right-of-way to satisfy landscaping requirements. 
					2. Where landscaping in accordance with the landscaping provisions of these regulations cannot be reasonably met, the applicant may propose an alternative plan for consideration of the Director that meets the intent of the requirements. 
Buffers 	Division 9.3, Buffering 	X 	X 1 	X 	Where bufferyards in accordance with the provisions of these regulations cannot be reasonably met, the applicant may propose an alternative plan for consideration of the Director that meets the intent of the requirements. 
Setback of Site Improvements 	Article 4, 
General 
Development 
Regulations 		X 1 	X 	A Special Exception may be granted by the City Council, pursuant to Section 11.3.7, Special Exception, if it is determined that conformance with all setback requirements will cause the expansion or creation of a nonconformity or where it is determined that all provisions of these regulations cannot be reasonably met. 
Lot Coverage 	Article 4, 
General 
Development 
Regulations 		X 1 	X 	Lot coverage that exceeds the allowance for the zoning district and lot size is not required to be removed in order to meet the lot coverage requirements of these regulations. However, the lot coverage of the tract shall not be increased except as provided by these regulations. 
Incidental Site Features 		X 	X 1 	X 	All incidental site features including, but not limited to, fences, dumpsters, lighting and mechanical equipment shall be altered to conform to the provisions of these regulations. 
Table Notes: 
1 Expansions in excess of 25 percent of the initial size shall require the approval of the City Council, which may identify which standards of the regulations the existing development shall comply with. Expansions in excess of 50 percent shall require the approval of the City Council and all site improvements on the existing site and expanded area shall comply with the provisions of these regulations. See Section 12.5.4, Expansion of Nonconforming Sites. 
  
Section 12.5.6 - Removing Legally Nonconforming Site Status 
A.  Generally. The owner of a legally nonconforming site may remove the nonconforming use status through one of the processes listed below. This list does not guarantee the approval of the application or the decision of the deciding body. 
1.  Modify the site to conform to the current regulations; 
2.  Apply for a Zoning Variance, pursuant to Section 11.3.6, Zoning Variances; or 
3.  Rezone to a district where the site would conform to the standards. 
B.  No Guaranteed Approval. Compliance with Subsections 12.5.6.A.1 through 12.5.6.A.3 does not guarantee the approval of the application by the decision-making body.  
ARTICLE 13 - ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 13.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES 
 
Section 13.1.1 - Purpose and Applicability 
A.  Generally. This Article sets out the powers, remedies, and procedures of the City to enforce the provisions of these regulations prior to and in a court of competent jurisdiction. This Article shall not limit the powers of the City to pursue multiple or alternative actions, remedies, and penalties allowed herein or by law. 
B.  Applicability. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of these regulations shall be found to be in violation of City ordinance and shall be subject to the fines and penalties as established in Section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances.  
Section 13.1.2 - Enforcement Procedures 
A.  Generally. This Section establishes the authorities of the City and procedures to monitor, investigate, and enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
B.  Administration. The provisions of this Article shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager or their designee, in consultation with the City Attorney as may be necessary, or other officials in the exercise of this duty. 
C.  Filing a Complaint. Any person may allege a violation of these regulations by written and signed complaint that is filed with the City. Such complaint shall state the factual basis for the alleged violation along with the complainant's contact information. 
D.  Right to Enter. The designated City official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purposes of making periodic inspection of a building's exterior and/or premises or investigating alleged violations as are necessary to enforce these regulations. 
E.  Compliance Information Required. Whenever the designated City official, on the basis of a sworn complaint from any person or on the basis of other information available to the official, has reason to believe that a violation of these regulations exists, they may require an owner/operator to provide information as may be necessary to determine the existence or extent of any violation. 
F.  Notice of Violation. Upon determining a violation, the City shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner/operator of property upon which a violation of these regulations exists. Such notice shall set out the grounds upon which the notice is based, including the specific code section or sections at issue. Notices shall conform to the requirements of Section 54.005, Notices to Certain Property Owners, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code. 
G.  Correction of Violation. Upon notification of a violation, the person responsible for the violation shall correct the violation immediately.  
DIVISION 13.2 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT POWERS AND REMEDIES 
 
Section 13.2.1 - Administrative Enforcement 
A.  Generally. The City may use one or a combination of administrative enforcement efforts prior to and without judicial process to enforce these regulations. 
B.  Withholding or Denying Permits and Approvals. The City may withhold, revoke, or deny all permits, approvals, or other authorizations on any land, building, or structure for which there is an uncorrected violation. 
C.  Suspension of Permits. The City may suspend permits, including Conditional Use Permits, for a period of up to sixty (60) days to allow for the correction of the violation or the judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
D.  Stopping Work. The City may stop work on any site, building, or structure on such property where an uncorrected violation exists. The City Manager or designee shall order the work stopped by notice in writing (referred to as a "stop-work order") served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done. The stop-work order shall be posted on the property adjacent to the activity in question, and any such person shall stop work accordingly until authorized by the City to proceed with the work. The City may revoke permits as part of its effort to stop work pursuant to Subsection 13.2.1.E, Revocation of Permits and Approvals, below. 
E.  Revocation of Permits and Approvals. 
1.  Revocation. Any permit, Certificate of Occupancy, or other permit or approval required under these regulations shall be revoked when it is determined that: 
a.  There is a departure from the approved plans, specifications, limitations, or conditions as required under the permit or approval; 
b.  The permit or approval was procured by false representation; 
c.  The permit or approval was issued in error; or 
d.  There is a violation of any provision of these regulations. 
2.  Written Notice. When revoking a permit, the City shall provide written notice of such revocation to the permit holder, stating that the subject violation shall be corrected in no less than ten (10) days. 
3.  Effect of Notice. No work or construction may proceed after service of the revocation notice unless such work is to correct a violation.  
ARTICLE 14 - DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS  
DIVISION 14.1 - MEASUREMENTS AND CALCULATIONS 
 
Section 14.1.1 - Density 
A.  Generally. Density may be measured as gross density or net density, as specified in these regulations. 
B.  Gross Density. Gross density is calculated by dividing the number of proposed dwelling units by the total area of the parcel proposed for development. 
C.  Net Density. Net density is calculated by dividing the number of proposed dwelling units by the buildable area of the parcel proposed for development.  
Section 14.1.2 - Gross Floor Area 
A.  Generally. Gross floor area (GFA) is a measurement of the horizontal floor area of a building or structure and is calculated based on the following criteria: 
1.  Horizontal square footage is measured from the outside face of all exterior walls. 
2.  The gross floor area includes the square footage of each floor level of a building. 
3.  Gross floor area does not include areas not habitable or used as dwelling space. This may include, but is not limited to, cellars, basements, attics, covered or uncovered porches, terraces, breezeways, balconies, decks, patios, enclosed storage or mechanical areas, mezzanines, and similar structures. 
4.  Protected upper floors of open atriums and foyers shall not be included.  
Section 14.1.3 - Height 
A.  Buildings. Building height is calculated by measuring the vertical distance from "grade" to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the deck line or a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable on a pitched or hipped roof, or to the highest point of a structure. The "grade" used to determine building height is the highest pre-development ground surface elevation within the building's footprint. For subdivisions of five acres or more, the finished ground surface elevation resulting from any site development grading shall be used as "grade" for the building height determination. Each building will have an individual grade separate from that of another building. 
B.  Other Structures. Structure height is calculated by measuring the vertical distance from the average finished grade around the base of the structure to the highest point on the structure. This measurement applies to: 
1.  Structures without roofs (e.g., fences); and 
2.  Amateur radio antennae, whether mounted on a roof, the ground, or another structure. 
C.  Specialized Building Appurtenances. Specialized building appurtenances are not counted in the calculation of building height provided that: 
1.  They project not more than: 
a.  Fifteen (15) feet above the highest point on the building for buildings that are two or more stories in height; or 
b.  Seven feet above the highest point on the building for buildings that are less than two stories in height. 
2.  They occupy not more than 10 percent of the total roof area of the building; and 
3.  They are not used for human habitation, nonresidential, or industrial purposes, except as incidental to the operation of the building. 
D.  Smokestacks. Smokestacks shall be permitted to a height of ninety (90) feet in the General Industrial (IN) District. In other districts, they are subject to Subsection 14.1.3.C, above.  
Section 14.1.4 - Lot Dimensions 
A.  Lot Area. Lot area is calculated as the total area within the property lines. 
B.  Lot Coverage. Lot coverage is the total horizontal area measurement of all buildings, structures, and improvements. 
1.  Buildings and Structures. Measurements for buildings and structures are taken at the main grade level of the principal building or structure and all accessory buildings or structures. All dimensions are measured from the outside face of all exterior walls. 
2.  Other Improvements. Other improvements such as driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, pools, and other non-elevated surfaces are taken using the area delineated by the improved hard surface. 
C.  Lot Coverage Ratio. Lot coverage ratio is calculated by dividing the lot coverage by the lot area to yield the percentage of the total lot that is covered by some building, structure, or improvement. 
D.  Lot Width. 
1.  Generally. Lot width is measured from one side lot line to the opposite side lot line at the front setback line. Distance is measured along a horizontal plane and does not follow the topography. 
2.  Irregular Lots. Lot width of an irregular lot is measured from one side lot line to the opposite side lot line along the tangent of the curve representing the front building line. The front building line is established by the front setback line or subdivision plat (when the front building line is set back further than the front setback line).  
Section 14.1.5 - Open Space Area and Ratio 
A.  Generally. Open space area refers to commonly-owned open space (i.e., not located on private lot), and open space ratio refers to the percentage of the total area of the parcel proposed for development that is dedicated toward open space area. The following delineations further define what can or cannot be counted as open space area: 
1.  Allowable Open Space Areas. Natural resource protection areas, stormwater management systems, passive recreation areas, bufferyard requirements, required landscape areas, and areas that shall remain undeveloped shall count as open space area. 
2.  Prohibited Areas. Areas on private, buildable lots and any commonly-owned open space that is less than 320 contiguous square feet (including landscape areas) shall not count as open space area. 
B.  Open Space Ratio Calculation. Open space ratio is calculated by dividing the total amount of commonly-owned open space area on the parcel proposed by development by the total area of the entire parcel proposed for development.  
Section 14.1.6 - Setbacks 
A.  Generally. Setbacks are measured from the lot line towards the center of the lot as provided in this Section. Distance is measured along a horizontal plane and does not follow the topography. 
B.  Standard Lots. 
1.  Front Setbacks. Front setbacks are measured from the front lot line, which is the lot line that abuts the right-of-way. 
2.  Street Side Setbacks. Street side setbacks are measured from the street side lot line, except on corner lots where the front setback extends to the side street and supersedes the street side setback. 
3.  Rear Setbacks. Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line, except on corner lots, where the street side setback supersedes. 
4.  Side Setbacks. Side setbacks are measured from the side lot line. 
 
C.  Odd-Shaped Lots. 
1.  Curvilinear Lot Lines. Where lot lines are curvilinear, setbacks shall be measured as offsets from the curvilinear lot line. 
2.  Multiple Rear Lot Lines. Where there are multiple rear lot lines, the rear setback is measured as offsets from the multiple rear lot lines. 
3.  No Rear Lot Line. Where there is no rear lot line, the rear setback shall be measured as a radial distance from the intersection of side lot lines at the rear of the lot. 
4.  Front Lot Line along Arc. Where the front lot line is an arc, the street side setback area is defined as the area behind the front of the building line along the arc of the street.  
DIVISION 14.2 - INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS AND WORDS 
 
Section 14.2.1 - Document Usage 
A.  Generally. For purposes of interpretation of these regulations, the following rules apply regarding usage of this document. 
B.  Titles. Titles of the Articles, Divisions, Sections, and Subsections are intended to facilitate navigation of these regulations. Where there is a conflict between the title of an Article, Division, Section, or Subsection and the regulatory provisions, the regulatory provision shall control. 
C.  Internal Cross-References. If a cross-reference is set out within these regulations, the cross-reference shall refer to another part of these regulations unless a separate document is specifically identified in the cross-reference. 
D.  Illustrations. The illustrations provided in these regulations are intended to provide a visual example regarding how particular standards are to be applied and are not intended to be a standard in their own right. 
1.  Conflicts. Where there is a conflict between the illustration and the text of the regulatory provision, the text of the regulatory provision shall control. 
2.  Authorization to Create, Delete, and Modify Illustrations. The Director is authorized to create, delete, and modify illustrations herein, and create, delete, or modify related code references, without an official amendment to these regulatory provisions. 
E.  External Cross-References. 
1.  Generally. References to external documents and materials are intended to provide for the convenience of the user and facilitate navigation of these regulations. External documents referenced by these regulations exist in their own right and are not part of these regulations unless specifically incorporated by reference or by application. 
2.  Reference to State and Federal Statues. 
a.  References to the Texas Local Government Code and the United States Code shall be interpreted to mean the most current version of the referenced section at the time the reference is applied. 
b.  If a referenced statute of the Texas Local Government Code or United States Code is repealed and replaced by another statute with comparable subject matter, the replacement statute shall control. 
c.  If a referenced statute of the Texas Local Government Code or United States Code is repealed and not replaced by another statute, the repealed statute shall control if it is within the statutory authority of the City to effectuate such results, or the application shall be held (and not considered officially filed) for up to 12 weeks for the City to revise these regulations to resolve the reference and establish an appropriate rule or policy. 
d.  References to the Texas Local Government Code and the United States Code as the source of authority of administrative rules, such references shall be interpreted to include the rules and statues provided thereunder.  
Section 14.2.2 - Interpretation of Words 
A.  Generally. For the purposes of these regulations, the words and terms used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; 
2.  Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary; 
3.  The term "shall" is always mandatory; 
4.  The term "may" is discretionary; 
5.  The term "City" shall refer to the City of Marble Falls, "county" shall refer to Burnet County or Blanco County (whichever county the property resides within), "state" shall refer to the State of Texas, and "federal" shall refer to the United States of America, unless otherwise indicated; and 
6.  All public officials, bodies, and agencies reference those of the City of Marble Falls, unless otherwise indicated. 
B.  Terms and Words Not Expressly Defined. The words, terms, and phrases that are defined in Division 14.3, Definitions, are those having a meaning unique to the purposes of these regulations. All words, terms, and phrases not expressly defined in Division 14.3, Definitions, or otherwise within these regulations, are to be construed in accordance to adopted ordinances, codes, or standards of the City, or according to the customary meaning and usage of such word, term, or phrase.  
DIVISION 14.3 - DEFINITIONS 
 
A—E 
- A - 
Abandonment means to discontinue a use or activity, excluding temporary or short-term interruptions such as seasonal closures, or due to remodeling, maintenance, or otherwise improving a facility. 
Abutting, when referring to lots, parcels or property, is next to and having some portion of a boundary that is coterminous with the parcel proposed for development. Lots or parcels that are separated only by an alley are abutting if their property lines would be shared if they extended to the centerline of the alley. 
Access Point means a point of vehicular entry to or exist from a property or lot. See also "Cross Access". 
Accessory Building or Structure means a building or structure that is subordinate to the principal building which serves a purpose that is customarily associated with the principal use. Examples of accessory buildings and structures include pergolas, gazebos, storage sheds, and detached residential garages. The phrase "accessory building or structure" does not include a parking structure. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit means a separate dwelling unit located in a detached accessory building or as an attached independent unit to the principal dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling unit includes independent living quarters with cooking facilities, sanitation, and sleeping spaces and is limited in size by the standards of these regulations. An accessory dwelling unit may be commonly referred to as "guest home," "granny flat," "garage apartment," mother-in-law suite," etc. 
Attached ADU means a unit that is created within or attached to a principal building such that it appears to be an integrated part of it. 
One-Story Detached ADU means a detached accessory building that contains an accessory dwelling unit. It may or may not also include a garage or storage area. 
Second-Story Detached ADU means an accessory dwelling unit which is located on the second floor of an accessory building. A typical example is a dwelling unit located above a detached garage. 
Accessory Use means a use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use located on the same lot or parcel. 
Adjacent means "next to" or "closest to" but shall not necessarily mean "touching". 
Administrative Approval means an application process for permit or approval whereby the decision is made by an administrative representative of the City, pursuant to Division 11.5, Administrative Permits and Approvals. 
Administrative Exception means an allowed variation from the Land Use Regulations but is differentiated from a Zoning Variance as used in these regulations in that, (1) it does not require a finding of an undue hardship, and (2) the approval of an Administrative Exception is specifically provided for and defined by these regulations. Administrative Exceptions are approved administratively, pursuant to Section 11.5.4, Administrative Exception. 
Administrative Officers means any officer of the City referred to in these regulations by title, including but not limited to the City Manager, Assistant City Manager, City Secretary, Fire Chief, Police Chief, City Engineer, Director, Director of Public Works, Floodplain Administrator, and Chief Building Official shall be the person so retained in that position by the City, or his or her duly authorized representative. This definition shall also include civil engineering, planning, legal, and financial, traffic engineering and other consultants retained by the City to supplement or support existing City staff, as deemed appropriate by the City. 
Agricultural and Ranch Uses means a category of uses that create and preserve areas intended primarily for the raising of animals and crops, and the secondary industries associated with agricultural production and ranching. 
Alley means a minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties that derive primary access from a street. The length of an alley segment is to be measured from the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the alley is provided access, or from the center point of an intersection with another alley which connects to a street. An alley is not the same as a street for purposes of the setback or design requirements of these regulations. 
Alluvial Fan Flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Alteration means any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a building or structure or change in relative position of buildings or structures on a site, or substantial change in appearance of any building or structure. 
Amateur Radio Antennas means an antenna for the private use and enjoyment of an individual holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Communication and not used for any commercial or industrial use. 
Amending Plat. See "Plat, Amending Plat". 
Amenity means an improvement to be dedicated to the public or to the common ownership of the lot owners of the subdivision that provides an aesthetic, recreational or other benefit, other than those prescribed by these regulations. 
Animal Clinic or Services means indoor and outdoor facilities providing temporary medical care and/or overnight housing for the boarding, training, and breeding of domesticated animals. The phrase "animal clinic or services" includes commonly used terms such as kennels and veterinary services. 
Animal Raising or Production means the on-site raising and breeding of animals for the purpose of food or the production of food. The phrase "animal raising or production" includes commonly used terms such as: 
1.  Ranching, an establishment devoted primarily to the raising, breeding, and managing livestock such as horses, cattle, and sheep, under range conditions. 
2.  Poultry Farm, an establishment devoted primarily to the raising of birds such as chickens, ducks, turkeys and other birds for the purpose and harvesting and processing of meat or eggs for food. 
3.  Fish Farm, an establishment where fish are artificially bred or cultivated for commercial purposes, such as food or to supply aquariums, or to restock lakes for angling. 
4.  Beekeeping, the practice of raising, breeding, or managing bee colonies in order to collect their honey and other products of bee hives, to provide pollination services for local food crops, or to raise bee livestock for other beekeepers. 
5.  Dairy Farm, an establishment devoted chiefly to the production of milk or milk products such as butter and cheese. 
Annexation means the process by which a City, by ordinance, annexes land into the City limits pursuant to the various processes of Chapter 43, Municipal Annexations, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code and the Home Rule Charter. 
Annexation, Voluntary means an annexation initiated by an annexation petition application by the property owner(s) or their authorized representatives. See Section 11.3.1, Annexation (Voluntary). 
Antenna means a device used to collect or transmit radio waves, microwaves, or electromagnetic waves. 
Apartment means a multifamily building type that is comprised of five or more dwelling units. Apartments may be leased, rented, or owned in a condominium style of ownership. 
Apartment, Loft means multifamily residential dwelling units which are housed on the second floor and above of a building where the first floor contains a nonresidential use. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appeal means the process of reviewing a decision of an application that may be requested by a person aggrieved by such decision. 
Appeal of Administrative Decision means an appeal by any person, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by a decision of an administrative official acting in the enforcement of these regulations. Appeals of Administrative Decisions are appealed to City Council. See Section 11.6.1, Appeals of Administrative Decisions. 
Applicant means a person or entity who submits an application for an approval required by these regulations. An applicant shall be the owner of the property or space for which an application is submitted or shall be an authorized agent or representative of the property owner. May also be referred to as "developer", "subdivider", "owner's agent" or other similar term. 
Application means a written request and submission of materials for an approval as required by these regulations. 
Application Forms means a collection of forms and checklists created, updated, and managed by the Director. 
Approval means the final action granting an application given by the appropriate administrative or governing body specified in Article 11, Administration, as having final approval authority. 
Appurtenant Structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. This will be included in the Flood Protection Plan currently in progress as part of the Texas Water Development Board's Flood Protection Planning Grant. 
Arborist refers to a person trained in and practicing the cultivation, management, and care for trees, shrubs, and other perennial woody plants. 
Area of Future Conditions Flood Hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one (1) percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
As-Built Plans means plans and specifications prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor, licensed landscape architect, or licensed engineer, as appropriate to the type of plans, that clearly depict the completed improvements as they were constructed or installed on a lot. Also known as record drawing. 
Assistant City Manager means a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager, who serves as the assistant to the City Manager and to perform such duties as assigned by the City Manager. 
Authorized Representative means any person showing written verification that he or she is acting for and with the knowledge and consent of a property owner. 
Average Daily Trips (ADT) means the average number of vehicles or pedestrians passing a specific point in a 24-hour period, normally measured through a year. ADT is the standard measurement for vehicle traffic load on a section of road and is the basis for most decisions regarding transportation planning. 
Aviation Facilities, Fixed Wing means facilities designed for the operation of fixed-wing aircraft such as airplanes which use wings to generate lift. The phrase "aviation facilities, fixed wing" includes the necessary landing, parking, servicing, maintenance, fueling and repair of such aircraft. 
Aviation Facilities, Rotary Wing means facilities designed for the operation of rotary wing aircraft such as helicopters which use rotor blades that revolve around a mast. The phrase "aviation facility, rotary wing" includes heliports and helistops and includes the necessary landing, parking, servicing, maintenance, fueling and repair of such aircraft. 
Awning means an architectural projection, which provides weather protection, identity or decoration, and is wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. It is composed of a lightweight rigid or retractable skeleton structure over which a covering of fabric or other materials is attached. 
- B - 
Bar or Nightclub means a commercial establishment where the primary purpose is to sell alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption where more than 75 percent of the sales proceeds is for the sale of alcohol beverages and may include dancing and/or musical entertainment. The term "bar or nightclub" may also be called a cocktail lounge, tavern, saloon, cantina, etc. The term "bar or nightclub" is not synonymous with the term "restaurant or food and drink establishment," as the sale of food is a common accessory use to the primary use, as described above. 
Base Flood means a flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year (also called the base flood). 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Bed and Breakfast Lodging means a residential structure providing overnight accommodations to guests. 
Bioretention Cell means a low impact development facility that collects and temporarily stores or conveys stormwater runoff and manages it through vertical filtration methods such as infiltration, evaporation, and transpiration. 
Bioswale is a vegetated shallow channel that temporarily stores and sometimes stormwater. It is similar to a rain garden, except its design is vertical. Bioswales can be used to convey stormwater, but the primary objective is infiltration and enhancing water quality. 
Block means a tract or parcel of land bounded on all sides by streets or other transportation rights-of-way, or by physical boundaries such as waterbodies, water courses, open spaces etc., or any or by a combination thereof. Blocks are typically divided into lots. 
Block Length, for a residential subdivision, means the distance measured along the centerline of the street from the intersection centerpoint of one (1) through street to the intersecting centerpoint of another through street. The through street referred to above shall not be a cul-de-sac, an alley, a dead-end street, or a looped street, but shall be a street which clearly has two (2) points of ingress from two (2) different directions. Also known as "street length". 
Boat Dock means a fixed or floating structure for docking and storage of boats on the water and affixed to the abutting shoreline and are typically perpendicular to the shoreline. 
Boat Dock, Commercial means a dock or boat slips operated as an accessory use to the principal commercial usage of the property to which the commercial boat dock is attached. 
Boat Dock, Residential means a noncommercial dock utilized for personal recreation purposes by the owner or occupant of the single-family residence of the property to which the commercial boat dock is attached. 
Bond means any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the City. 
Breakaway Wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Brewery/Distillery/Winery means an establishment where beer, liquor, or wine is produced on the premises and may include in-house consumption and sale. Food sales or a restaurant may also be included, as well as associated retail sales. 
Broadcast Systems refers to systems that transmit communication data over airwaves for public reception by anyone with a receiver tuned to the right signal channel. 
Buffer means physical spaces or improvements that physically and visually separate one use or property from an abutting property in order to mitigate the impacts of noise, light, or other nuisance as required by these regulations. Buffers may include but are not limited to open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof. 
Bufferyard means a designated area of land upon which a buffer is installed as required by these regulations. 
Build-to Line means the line located a distance from a right-of-way that a portion of a building must be built to. 
Buildable Area, also known as "building envelope," means the area of a lot or parcel that is buildable, as determined by setback requirements. 
Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, real property, and business activity. 
Building Articulation means a variation or change in the plane of a building wall. 
Horizontal Articulation means a variation in the height of a wall surface of a building or structure. 
Vertical Articulation means a variation in the depth of a wall surface. 
Building Height means the vertical distance measured from "grade" to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the deck line or a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable on a pitched or hipped roof, or to the highest point of a structure. 
Building Official means a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager to be the administrator of these regulations as established by Section 11.1.11, Building Official. 
Building Setback Line means the line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structure and the adjacent street right-of-way line, property line, a creek, or some other specific feature. See "Setback". 
Business or Trade School means a facility or campus of facilities that provide educational training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit. The term does not include educational activities associated with home enterprises, college/university, or education uses. 
Business/Industrial Park District means a nonresidential zoning district intended to support various employment opportunities predominantly related to light manufacturing, light industry, or warehousing. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
- C - 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree measured 12 inches above the ground when planted. 
Campground means any property which provides space for transient occupancy and is used, or intended to be used, for the parking or placing of one or more tents, camping trailers, or similar recreational vehicles for a period of 15 days or less. 
Canopy means a roof-like structure, often attached to and supported by a building, that provides architectural detail or weather protection over a door, entrance, window, fuel pumps, or outdoor area. 
Capital Improvements Program (CIP) means the official proposed schedule, if any, of all future public projects listed together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project, as adopted by City Council. 
Cellular System means a communication network of several areas (cells) equipped with cellular base stations that receive and transmit data that are interconnected through a central exchange. 
Cemetery means a place used for the burial or entombment of the dead, whether intended for a human or animal resting place. The term "cemetery" includes the customary associated uses such as mausoleum and columbarium. 
Certificate of Occupancy means a process and permit required prior to the occupancy of a building. Certificates of Occupancy are approved administratively pursuant to Section 11.5.6, Certificate of Occupancy. 
Child-care Facility, commonly referred to as "day care," means a facility licensed, certified, or registered by the state to provide assessment, care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for a child who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the 24-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. See Texas Human Resources Code, Chapter 42. 
Child-care Facility, Day-Care Center means a child-care facility that provides care at a location other than the residence of the director, owner, or operator of the child-care facility for seven or more children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day, but at least two hours a day, three or more days a week, which could include the following: 
1.  Before or After-School Programs, establishment providing care before or after, or before and after, the customary school day and during school holidays, for at least two hours a day, three days a week, to children who attend pre-kindergarten through grade six. 
2.  School-Age Programs, establishment providing supervision, along with recreation or skills instruction or training, and may provide transportation, before or after the customary school day, for at least two hours a day, three days a week, to children attending pre-kindergarten through grade six. A school-age program may also operate during school holidays, the summer period, or any other time when school is not in session. 
See Texas Human Resources Code, Chapter 42. 
Child-care Facility, Family Home means a home that provides regular care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six children under 14 years of age, excluding children who are related to the caretaker, and that provides care after school hours for not more than six additional elementary school children, but the total number of children, including children who are related to the caretaker, does not exceed 12 at any given time. The term does not include a home that provides care exclusively for any number of children who are related to the caretaker. See Texas Human Resources Code, Chapter 42. 
Child-care Facility, Residential means a facility licensed or certified by the state that operates for all of the 24-hour day. The term includes general residential operations, foster group homes, foster homes, agency foster group homes, and agency foster homes, which are further defined as follows: 
1.  General Residential Operation, a child-care facility that provides care for more than 12 children for 24 hours a day, including facilities known as children's homes, halfway houses, residential treatment centers, emergency shelters, and therapeutic camps. 
2.  Foster Group Home, a child-care facility that provides care for 7 to 12 children for 24 hours a day. 
3.  Foster Home is a child-care facility that provides care for not more than six children for 24 hours a day. 
4.  Agency Foster Group Home, a facility that provides care for seven to 12 children for 24 hours a day, is used only by a licensed child-placing agency and meets department standards. 
5.  Agency Foster Home, a facility that provides care for not more than six children for 24 hours a day, is used only by a licensed child-placing agency and meets department standards. 
See Chapter 42, of the Tex. Human Resources Code. 
City Attorney shall apply only to such attorney, or firm of attorney, that has been specifically employed by the City to assist in legal matters. This term shall also apply if the City retains a person to perform the functions of City Attorney as an official City employee. 
City Council means the duly elected governing body of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
City Engineer shall apply only to such licensed professional engineer, or firm of licensed professional consulting engineers, that has been specifically employed by the City to assist in engineering-related matters. This term shall also apply if the City retains a person to perform the functions of City Engineer as an official City employee. 
City Limits means the corporate boundary limits of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. 
City Manager means the person holding the position of the City's chief executive officer (e.g., City Manager), as appointed by the City Council, as the term is applicable to the City's form of management (per the City Charter). 
City Secretary means the person holding the position to provide clerical and official services for the City Council. 
Civic Uses means a category of uses that provides community services to or for the general public. 
Cluster Development means a type of development where the residential dwelling units are "clustered" on a portion of the parcel proposed for development in order to allow the remaining portion of the parcel to be used for recreation, open space, or the preservation of natural or sensitive land area. 
Co-location, with regards to wireless transmission facilities, refers to the act of sharing a wireless transmission facility with two or more service providers. See Section 4.6.6, Wireless Transmission Facilities/Cell Towers. College/University means an educational institution of higher learning that offers courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree. Typically includes a campus of facilities that may include student housing, offices, athletic facilities, food services, laboratories and other associated facilities that support such a campus. 
Columbarium means a structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the internment of the cremated remains of a deceased person. 
Commercial is a term that describes activities that are nonresidential in nature and generally involve the exchange of goods or services. 
Commercial Message means any sign wording, logo, or other similar representation that directly calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity by expression of a commercial message. 
Commercial Mobile Radio Services means a classification of mobile service that is provide for profit, an interconnected service, and available to the public, or the functional equivalent to such mobile service. 
Commercial Recreation/Entertainment means a privately established and operated facility that provides indoor or outdoor entertainment, amusement, or recreation for a fee. The phrase "commercial recreation/entertainment" includes, but is not limited to, commonly used terms such as: 
1.  Bowling alley, an establishment providing facilities for the sport of bowling. 
2.  Movie theater, an indoor facility that provides fixed seating for customers to view motion pictures. 
3.  Performance venue, an indoor or outdoor facility that provides fixed seating for customers to view dramatic, comedic, musical, lectures or others live performances including concert halls and amphitheaters. 
4.  Dance hall, an establishment offering to the general public facilities for dancing. 
5.  Billiards or Pool hall, an establishment providing facilities for playing billiards or cue sports. 
6.  Gaming center, an establishment offering facilities for amusement game devices, such as video arcades, pinball machines, LAN gaming centers, laser tag, and similar mechanical and electronic amusement devices. 
7.  Skating rink or skate park, an establishment providing facilities for ice skating, roller skating or skate boarding. 
8.  Amusement park, an establishment providing various entertainment activities including, but not limited to, miniature golf, go kart tracks, ferris wheels, roller coasters, and/or rock climbing walls. 
9.  Golf driving range, an establishment equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for practicing long distance golf drives. 
10.  Shooting range (indoor only), an establishment that operates an indoor area for the discharge or other use of firearms for recreational shooting. 
11.  Garden plot rentals, an establishment providing indoor or outdoor plots for a fee to individuals wanting to plant gardens. 
Commercial Stables means a leasing facility intended for the sheltering and care of domestic animals such as horses or mules. 
Commercial Uses means a category of uses that include businesses that facilitate the buying and selling of manufactured goods or provide consumer and professional sales and services. 
Common Area Amenity means an area held, designed and designated principally for the common use of the owners or occupants of a multifamily, mobile home park, tiny house development, or RV park. 
Common Carrier means a company providing mobile or wireless service to the general public. 
Communication Facility mean a facility supporting antennas that sends or receives wireless frequency signals, including those mounted on towers, accessory buildings, and ground base equipment. 
Communication Service means an establishment primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as major utility facilities. Examples include television, film, or sound recording studios, telecommunication service centers, and telegraph service offices. 
Community Assembly/Amenity means an indoor and/or outdoor facility, typically public or non-profit, that provides educational, recreational, social, and/or cultural activities, spaces, or services which are open to the public. The phrase "community assembly/amenity" includes, but is not limited to, commonly used terms such as: 
1.  Active outdoor recreation, a publicly owned and operated facility that provides opportunities for active outdoor recreation including, but not limited to, sport fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, skate parks, and similar recreation facilities. 
2.  Community center, a publicly owned and operated building or complex typically consisting of one or more meeting or multi-purpose rooms generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. 
3.  Recreation center, a publicly owned and operated building or complex providing recreational facilities such as basketball courts, racquetball courts, game rooms, and general activity rooms. Ongoing child daycare or day nursery is included only as an accessory use to serve the adults while attending the activities offered. 
4.  Cultural service, a library, museum, art gallery, or similar non-profit use affording display, preservation and exhibition of objects of permanent interest in one (1) or more of the arts and sciences. 
5.  Club or lodge, a use providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a non-profit association, primarily for use by members and guests. 
6.  Public assembly, a publicly owned or operated facility with the primary purpose of providing indoor and/or outdoor areas such as amphitheaters, auditoriums, stadiums, concert halls, sporting or rodeo arenas, exhibition halls, convention facilities, and fairgrounds for performances, exhibitions, sporting events, or similar attractions. Does not include facilities where the public assembly is not the primary use such as a school site containing an auditorium or sports stadium or a hotel with an event room. 
7.  Community garden, a site available to the general public to grow plants, fruit, vegetables, fiber, herbs, and/or flowers for recreational purposes. 
8.  Public golf course, a publicly owned and operated facility that provides improved land area for conducting a game of golf and may include a clubhouse, shower/changing facility, driving range, equipment sales, golf cart storage, and similar accessory uses. 
Comprehensive Plan shall mean the Comprehensive Plan of the City and adjoining areas as adopted by the City Council, including all its revisions and plan elements (including, but not limited to, the Future Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Parks and Open Space Plan, etc.). This plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks, water and wastewater facilities, and other public and private developments and improvements. 
Concept Plan means a general plan for the development of property which demonstrates the nature of the parcel proposed for development to evaluate the impacts of the development on abutting uses and compliance with the City's long-range plans. See Section 11.3.5, Concept Plan. 
Conditional Use means a use that may be allowed in a specific zoning district subject to: 
1.  Standards for the permitted uses; 
2.  Use-specific requirements; 
3.  Procedural requirements to obtain a Conditional Use Permit; and 
4.  Approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the City Council following a public hearing. 
See Section 3.1.1.C.4; Section 3.2.1; Section 11.3.4 
Conditional Use Permit means a permit required to operate a conditional use, pursuant to conditions identified in Section 3.2.1, Restricted and Conditional Uses. A Conditional Use Permit is granted by City Council pursuant to the procedural requirements established in Section 11.3.4, Conditional Use Permit. 
Condominium means a form of real property ownership that combines separate ownership of individual dwelling units within common ownership of other elements such as land or accessory buildings. 
Conservation Development means a development where new structures are clustered onto a portion of the development parcel, so that the remainder can be preserved as open space. 
Constructed Stormwater Wetland means a manmade, shallow-water ecosystem designed to treat stormwater runoff. They provide flood control benefits by storing water, during which it is treated by vegetation and pollutants settle out, and then slowly releasing it over the next few days. 
Construction Plans means the maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the specific location and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the City as a condition of approval of the Preliminary Plat. May also be referred to as "engineering plans". 
Contiguous refers to two lots where at least one boundary line or point of one (1) lot touches a boundary line, or lines, or point of another lot. 
Continuance means a request to delay or "table" a decision on a completed application. 
Cottage means a small single-family detached dwelling unit which is intended for small lots in specified zoning districts. 
Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions means a restriction on the use or development of land, which requires affirmative actions to be performed, that is set forth in a recorded agreement, and that runs with the land. 
Critical Feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Critical Root Zone (CRZ) means the circular region measured outward from the trunk that corresponds to the drip line of the tree. The Critical Root Zone represents the essential area of roots that must be maintained or protected for the tree's survival. 
Crop Production and Sales means the cultivation, harvesting, production, and sales of produce such as vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain or similar crops and the cultivation of plants and trees for commercial distribution. May include on-site farm stands as an accessory use. The phrase "crop production and sales" includes commonly used terms such as: 
1.  Crop production, the raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, including incidental packing and processing. 
2.  Farming, the growing and commercial use of the usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising there of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, goats, and sheep. 
3.  Greenhouse, green nursery and general gardening, the growing and commercial use of the usual vegetables, fruits, trees and grain. 
4.  Horticulture, the growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. 
Cross Access means an access point between abutting lots. Also known as inter-parcel cross access. 
Crosswalk Way means a public right-of-way between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having only one (1) outlet to another street and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround or "bulb". The length of a cul-de-sac is to be measured from the intersection center point of the adjoining through street to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac bulb. 
- D - 
Day Dock means a boat dock situated parallel to the shoreline and not extending into the waterway to facilitate boat docking parallel to the shoreline. 
Dead-End Street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet. 
Deciduous Plat Species/Variety means a plant which defoliates completely in the fall/winter and develops new foliage in the spring. 
Decision-Making Body or Authority means the entity that is authorized to finally approve or deny an application for permit or approval required under these regulations. 
Dedication means the commitment of property interest from a private entity to a public entity for a public purpose. 
Developed Area means the portion of a lot or parcel upon which a building, structure, pavement, or other improvements have been placed. 
Developer means a person seeking to construct buildings or structures, or otherwise improve a parcel proposed for development as defined in these regulations. 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures (including, but not limited to, parking, fencing, pools, and signs), land disturbing activity (including mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations), or storage of equipment or materials. 
Development Approval means any written authorization from a governmental entity that authorizes the commencement of development. 
Development Plat. See "Plat, Development Plat". 
Diameter Breast Height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree's trunk measured at a height of four and one-half feet above natural grade. 
Director means a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager, whose duties include the administration and enforcement of these regulations as established in Section 11.1.9, Director. 
Director of Public Works means a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager, to oversee the Public Works Department, the responsibilities of which include the road system, sewer utility, stormwater system, water utility, and brush pick up. 
Downtown District means a primarily nonresidential zoning district intended to serve the general area identified as Downtown on the Future Land Use Plan of the City's Comprehensive Plan. It is envisioned that this area will be developed with a higher intensity urban character. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Downtown Residential District means a residential zoning district in Old Town Marble Falls intended to promote infill development and redevelopment of residential uses surrounding the more commercial center identified as Downtown while also preserving the older, and sometimes historic, pattern and character of Old Town Marble Falls. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Downtown Transition District means a primarily nonresidential zoning district intended to serve the area surrounding the Downtown District and within the outer edges of the general area identified as Downtown on the Future Land Use Plan of the City's Comprehensive Plan. It is envisioned that this area will be developed with a higher intensity urban character, but not as intense as the Downtown District. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Drive Through means a commercial facility where transactions of services, goods, food, or beverages are conducted from a vehicle either parked or in a drive-through lane. May also be referred to as "drive-in" or "drive-up". 
Driveway means a surfaced area providing vehicular access from a public street and within a property. 
Duplex means a parcel developed with two dwelling units in a single structure. Duplexes are designed exclusively for the use and occupancy of two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling Unit means a residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one family, including permanent sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities. Also known as "dwelling". 
- E - 
Easement means an area for restricted use on private property upon which the City or a public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs and other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems within said easements. The City and public utilities shall, at all times, have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of their respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. 
Education Facilities means primary and secondary schools focused on full-time educational instruction for students from pre-kindergarten through 12 th grade, including: 
1.  Primary Education, a pre-kindergarten, kindergarten, or elementary school. 
2.  Secondary Education, a middle school, junior high, or high school. 
The phrase "education facilities" typically includes a campus of facilities that may include offices, athletic facilities, food services, laboratories, and other associated facilities that support such a campus. It also includes public, private, and charter schools, as classified by the State of Texas. It does not include or equate to a child-care facility. 
Effective Date means the date that these regulations became effective and when individual Articles, Division, or Sections were amended. 
Elevated Building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Encroachment means: 
1.  Generally, building or structure or portion thereof that crosses a lot line, building line, or setback line into a setback area, right-of-way, abutting property under separate ownership, or any other area which does not allow for the building or structure. 
2.  With regards to floodplain management, encroachment means an addition to or change to the physical condition of a specified type of flood hazard area that results in the blockage, diversion, or displacement of floodwaters. 
Engineer means a person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act to practice the profession of engineering. 
Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio means a wireless communication system in which numerous mobile or portable transceivers are linked in a network of repeaters. 
Escrow means a deposit of cash with the City in accordance with these regulations. 
Evergreen Plant Species/Variety means a plant which maintains live foliage year-round and defoliates only once new foliage has formed. 
Existing Construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing Neighborhood Zone means a zoning district, divided into 5 sub-district, intended to protect the established development pattern and character of existing neighborhoods (such as density, lot dimensions, and street pattern) while also providing opportunities for infill development and improvements to existing homes. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Extension means a request to extend an application for permit or approval that is subject to expire. 
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) means the area of land adjacent to the City Limits which through the authorities provided by state law allows the City to extend some regulatory provisions into the unincorporated area as a means to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of persons residing in and adjacent to the City, and to provide the City with some control over its growth area.  
F—J 
- F - 
Façade mean any face of a building, including front, side, or rear faces. 
Façade, Front means the face of a building that is considered the principal entrance to the building. 
Fall Zone means the area around a wireless transmission facility or communication facility that has the potential for being damaged in the event that such facility should fall or collapse, including the scattering of equipment debris. See Subsection 4.6.6.F.3. 
Family means an individual living alone, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
Farm and Ranch District means a primarily agricultural zoning district intended to protect the urban fringe from incompatible development and unplanned development by allowing the continuation of farming and ranching activities and remaining rural in character through a large minimum lot size and rural roadway cross-section. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Feeder or Feeder/Lateral Line means high voltage supply electric lines carrying more than sixty-nine thousand (69,000) volts that emanate from substations used to distribute power through an area to an unspecified number of customers. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the U.S. government. 
Final Plat. See "Plat, Final Plat". 
Fire Chief means the commanding officer of the Marble Falls Fire Rescue. 
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Elevation Study (also "Flood Insurance Study") means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). See "Flood Elevation Study". 
Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "Flood"). 
Floodplain Administrator means a representative of the City staff appointed by the City Manager to administer and implement all floodplain management provisions of these regulations and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance—National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. See also Section 11.1.12, Floodplain Administrator, Section 11.3.8, Floodplain Development Variance, and Section 11.5.2, Floodplain Development Permit. 
Floodplain Development Permit means an administrative process and permit required for development that encroaches in the floodplain. 
Floodplain Development Variance means an appeals process and grant of relief, granted by City Council, from the requirements of Division 5.2, Flood Damage Prevention. See Section 11.3.8, Floodplain Development Variance. 
Floodplain Management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain Management Regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood Protection System means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. Specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See "Regulatory Floodway". 
Floor to Area Ratio (FAR) means the ratio of total building floor area to the area of the lot on which it is located. When the allowed FAR is multiplied by the lot area it results in the maximum amount of floor area allowable in a building on that lot. 
Food and Drink Establishment (general) means a place where food and beverages are prepared and served to patrons for consumption on-site or off-site and may include live indoor or outdoor entertainment subject to the development standards set out in these regulations. Typical uses include restaurants, both full service and fast food, coffee shops, dinner houses and similar establishments. 
Food and Drink Establishment (neighborhood) means a place where food and beverages are prepared and served to patrons for consumption on-site or off-site but does not include outdoor entertainment and does not include drive-through, drive-in or drive-up services. Typical uses include restaurants, both full service and fast food, coffee shops, dinner houses, and similar establishments. 
Frontage means the portion of a lot, parcel, or tract that abuts a street right-of-way. 
- G - 
Game Ranch means a property leased for the commercial recreational purpose of hunting game and animal harvesting. 
Garage means the building or structure or part thereof designed, used, or intended for the parking and storage of automobiles. 
General Commercial District means a nonresidential zoning district primarily intended for nonresidential development along the City's major thoroughfares in accordance with the vision set out in the Future Land Use Plan of the City's Comprehensive Plan. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
General Industrial District means a nonresidential zoning district intended for areas of greater intensity than the Business/Industrial Park District. These areas are to provide a range of development opportunities including such uses as manufacturing, fabrication, and/or warehousing. 
Governing Body means the City Council of the City of Marble Falls. 
Government means federal, state, county or City governing entities. The term "government" could mean an individual entity or a grouping of entities. 
Grade means the highest pre-development elevation of the surface of the ground within each proposed or existing building footprint on a lot. Each building shall have separate and individual grade applicable to each building. If permitted site development grading is (was) done in conjunction with subdivision of five acres or more, then the resulting finished ground surface shall be allotted as the surface of the ground for grade determination. 
Green Roof means a vegetative layer grown on a rooftop that captures stormwater and reduces runoff. 
Gross Floor Area means the total habitable area of every floor of every building or structure on a lot. 
Ground Cover means living plant materials that are designed to grow low to the ground, generally maintained at less than two (2) feet in height. 
Group Home means a facility or home licensed by the State of Texas to provide shared residential living arrangements for the 24-hour protective care of the mentally or physically impaired, developmentally disabled, or victims of abuse or neglect. The term includes foster homes, congregate living facilities for persons 62 years and older, and maternity homes. This term does not include post-incarceration facilities or facilities for those who are a danger to themselves or others. In addition to the group or community homes described in this code it is the intent of the City to authorize any other group or community home use in residential districts if required by federal or state fair housing requirements. 
Guyed Wire Tower means any tower that requires the support of guyed wires anchored into the ground or other surface for support. 
- H - 
Halfway House means, pursuant to Texas Human Resources Code Section 42.002, a licensed home for inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. Such placement is pursuant to the authority of the State Department of Corrections. 
Hazardous Waste Management Facilities means a facility that receives hazardous waste for treatment, storage, or disposal. 
Heritage Tree means, for the purposes of these regulations, a Live Oak, Post Oak, Shumard Oak, Bur Oak, Chinquapin Oak, Monterey Oak, Bald Cypress, American Elm, Cedar Elm, Pecan, Walnut, Texas Ash, or Southern Magnolia tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of 24 inches or greater. 
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic Structure means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Home Enterprise means an accessory occupation or business activity for financial gain conducted in whole or part in the principal dwelling unit or accessory building and is clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the property. The phrase "home enterprise" may also be referred to as home based business or home occupation, but does not include "bed and breakfast lodging", short term rentals, or common work-from-home activities such as telecommuting or a personal home office. 
Hospital means an institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care, primarily on an in-patient basis, to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, and/or other abnormal physical conditions. Services may include out-patient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, laboratories, rehabilitation services, training or teaching facilities, medical offices, hospital administration, meeting areas, maintenance facilities, staff dormitories, and supportive services for patients, employees, and visitors such as cafeterias and ancillary retail sales. The term "hospital" also includes "general hospital" or a "special hospital," as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code § 241.003, and includes all sub-classifications thereof, as defined in Texas Health and Safety Code § 254.001. 
Hotel/Lodging, Full Service means a building(s) providing transient overnight lodging including four or more guest rooms to the general public for an established rate or fee. Full Service hotels provide internal access to guest rooms, furnish customary hotel services (e.g., linen, maid service, telephone, and the use and upkeep of furniture) and may also provide additional services (e.g., restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services, and recreational facilities). 
Hotel/Lodging, Limited Service means a building(s) providing transient overnight lodging including four or more guest rooms to the general public for an established rate or fee. Limited Service hotels may provide external access to guest rooms, allowing access directly from the parking areas to each room. A pool, continental or hot bar breakfast eating space and preparation space, fitness room, and limited meeting space may be provided, but use of the facilities shall be limited to registered guests of the facility only. Typical uses include express hotels, extended stay hotels, motels, inns, or hostels. 
Hotel/Lodging, Resort means a building(s) providing transient overnight lodging including four or more guest rooms to the general public for an established rate or fee designed as a resort or leisure facility. Due to the scope of the facility, ingress and egress to rooms shall not be restricted to lobby access only, as is required with the full-service hotel. Access by daytime guests is encouraged in addition to lodging guests, who will have access to a variety of amenities within the acreage of the resort. Typical accessory uses may include a spa, conference center, retail facilities, amusement facilities, and indoor and outdoor sports and recreation facilities. 
Housing & Services for the Aging means a building or group of buildings providing general living and health care services for the aging. The phrase "housing & services for the aging" includes commonly used terms such as: 
1.  Retirement homes, generally refers to residential facility that provides a range of services, amenities, or care for the aging. 
2.  Independent living, a residential facility for elderly and aging individuals who can live independently but that can provide assistance to a limited number of services and daily activities as required. 
3.  Assisted living, a residential facility that provides assistance for basic activities and necessities, such as nursing care, housekeeping, and prepared meals while emphasizing residents' independence. 
4.  Nursing home, a residential facility that provide assistance for basic activities and necessities. Healthcare is emphasized over independent living, and nursing homes are typically staffed with certified healthcare professionals to provide skilled nursing care for residents. 
5.  Skilled nursing facility, a residential facility that provides assistance for basic activities and necessities, much like a nursing home, but often provides a broader range of healthcare services and medical options, such as emergency care, rehabilitation services. 
6.  Continuum care, a residential facility that provide housing and services at all levels of care, from independent living to assisted living to long- or short-term skilled nursing care, at one location to meet need requirements as they change. 
7.  Short-term rehabilitation, a residential facility that provides amenities and services that assist in the recovery from health issues. Length of stay is determined by the health issue and requirements for recovery. 
- I - 
Impervious Cover means any structure or surfacing that might disallow penetration of water in the ground. 
Improvement means any constructed physical feature which is not a natural feature such as but not limited to, a structure, building, fence, gate, landscaping, tree, wall, parking area, etc. 
Improvement Agreement means a contract entered into by the applicant and the City, by which the applicant promises to complete the required public improvements within the subdivision or addition within a specified time period following Final Plat approval. 
Industrial Services, Heavy means any use that is classified as a "high hazard" occupancy by the City or other governmental entity. The phrase "industrial sales and services, heavy" includes, but is not limited to, such uses as: 
1.  Heavy manufacturing, the manufacturing or other industrial processing of products primarily from extracted/raw materials or the bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. Differs from light manufacturing due to the potential impacts on surrounding properties. 
2.  Refinery, a processing plant that uses mechanical and chemical means to purify and refine a raw substance to convert it to a more useful product, such as coal, cement, fuel, sugar, petrochemicals, or metals. 
3.  Freight management, the management of mobility and access of truck, rail, or air cargo freight. 
4.  Any use which will involve a material risk of environmental contamination, explosion, or fire; perceptible ground vibration; excessive noise; emission of objectionable odors; or requires access by rail or more than 10 vehicle trips per day by semi-trailer trucks or similar sized vehicles; or 
5.  Primary processing, manufacturing, or repair not otherwise defined in these regulations 
Industrial Services, Light means uses that involve assembly, compounding, packaging, or treatment of products from previously prepared materials, with limited outside storage and limited external impacts or risks. The phrase "industrial services, light" includes, but is not limited to, such uses as: 
1.  Light manufacturing, the manufacture of predominantly previously prepared materials or finished products, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and storage, sales, and distribution of such products. 
2.  Building maintenance services, the provision of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance or window cleaning services. 
3.  Custom manufacturing, the on-site, indoor production and storage of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or mechanical equipment not exceeding two (2) horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding eight (8) kilowatts. The direct sale to consumers of those goods produced on-site is prohibited. 
4.  Manufacturing and assembling of electronic components, precision instruments and devices, the manufacturing of electronic components into finished products, including fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products. 
5.  Office warehouse, office space associated with warehousing of goods and materials associated with a service industry, but not involving manufacturing or production. 
6.  Printing, lithography, publishing or similar establishments, an establishment in which the principal business consists of duplicating and printing services using photocopy, blueprint, or offset printing equipment, including publishing, binding, and engraving. 
7.  Pharmaceutical manufacturing, the processing or compounding of drugs and other medical and pharmaceutical products. 
8.  Communication facilities, establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as major utility facilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers or telegraph service offices. 
9.  Data centers, a facility that provides processing, storage, networking, management and the distribution of data within an enterprise. 
Industrial Uses means a category of uses that range from light manufacturing and assembly, equipment servicing, storage/freight management to waste related services. Industrialized Housing or modular housing is a residential building that: 
1.  Includes the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems and is: 
a.  Designed for the occupancy of one or more families; 
b.  Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site; and 
c.  Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the module or the modular component is transported to the permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation system. 
2.  Industrial housing does not include: 
a.  A residential structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in height; 
b.  Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does not use a modular component; or 
c.  A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location. 
See Tex. Occ. Code §1202, Industrialized Housing and Buildings. 
Infrastructure means any street, alley, roadway, sidewalks, storm drainage, water and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting transportation, or any other facility or portion thereof as required by the City. 
Irrigation Plan means a plan that graphically depicts a proposed mechanical water system that illustrates the method and means of conveying appropriate water levels to the selected landscape plantings. 
- J -  
K—O 
- K - 
Kennel means a commercial establishment that is engaged in the temporary boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small domesticated animals (pets). Typical uses include boarding kennels, pet motels, or dog training centers. 
- L - 
Lake Marble Falls means the water body located on the Colorado River in Burnet County, spanning downstream of Lake LBJ and Wirtz Dam and upstream of Max Starke Dam and Lake Travis. 
Land Disturbance means a process and permit required prior to removing any vegetative cover, excavating, filling, or generally disturbing the land. 
Land Disturbance Permit means an administrative permit required for parcels proposed for development in the City limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant to Section 11.5.1, Land Disturbance Permit. The permit is intended to control erosion and sedimentation runoff and protect the natural topography and vegetation of land. 
Land Planner means persons, including surveyors or engineers, who possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the planning of residential, nonresidential and other related developments, such proficiency often having been acquired by education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum, or by actual experience and practice in the field of land planning, and who may be certified as a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP). 
Landscape Architect. See "Registered Landscape Architect". 
Landscape Plan means a graphic and written representation of criteria, specifications, and detailed plans to arrange and modify the effects of natural features such as plantings (existing and new), ground and water forms, circulation, walks, irrigation, landscape lighting, erosion control, on-site drainage, and other features. 
Landscaped means an area devoted to or developed predominately with plant material or natural landscape features, including lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees, shrubs and other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as pools, fountains, water features, paved or decorated surfaces or rock, stone, brick, block, or similar material (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements, provided that the use of brick, stone, aggregate, or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over the use of plant material. 
Landscaped Area means any area of ground that can support vegetative groundcover and other landscaping plant materials that has been set aside for the preservation or installation and maintenance of plant materials. Sidewalks and other impervious surfaces are not considered landscaped areas. For the purposes of these regulations, the landscaped edge and landscaped areas within parking lots are contained within this definition. 
Landscaping means the improvement of a section of ground by contouring the land and planting live shrubs, trees, groundcover, and/or flowers. 
Lateral Lines means those electric or telephone lines used to distribute services from a feeder line to a single subdivision. These electric lines are normally connected to a feeder line through a sectionalizing device such as a fuse. 
Legal Nonconformity means any structure, lot, site, sign, or use that does not meet the requirements of the current regulations or amendment hereto but was legally established on the effective date of these regulations or any effective date of any amendment hereto and has been in regular and continuous use. See also "Nonconformity" and Article 12, Nonconformities. 
Landscape Design Professional means an individual currently certified by the Texas Nursery & Landscape Association to practice landscape design. 
Large Shrub means a shrub that is intended to provide screening. Large shrubs typically grow to a height of five (5) to six (6) feet high. 
LCRA means the Lower Colorado River Authority. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee System means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Licensed Surveyor means a professional land surveyor registered with and licensed in the State of Texas by the Texas Board of Professional Land Surveying. 
Light Industrial Services. See "Industrial Services, Light". 
Limits of Construction means the boundary of the area within which all construction activity will occur, as delineated on a Site Development Plan, Site Plan, or Construction Plans. 
Live-Work Unit means a structure that provides residential living space and commercial or office use space to be utilized by the resident of the premises. 
Loading Space means an area used for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space is located. Not to include public streets and rights-of-ways. Also known as loading zone or loading area. 
Local Utility Service means services which are necessary to support principal development and involve only minor structures such as lines and poles which are necessary to support principal development. 
Lot means a divided or undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, and which is, or which may in the future be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record at the county. Also known as parcel, tract, or plot. 
Lot Area means the area of a lot contained within its boundaries, exclusive of any portion within a public or private street or street right-of-way. 
Lot Balancing means a design technique that provides predictable variation in the design of lots which allows a developer greater flexibility in offering multiple house plan options without decreasing overall gross density. 
Lot, Corner means a lot located at the junction of two or more streets. 
Lot Coverage means the ratio of gross floor area of all buildings, structures, and all areas associated with driveways and parking lots on a lot, to the total lot area, expressed as a percentage. 
Lot Depth means the distance between the front lot line and rear lot line, measured at the mid-points of the front and rear lines. 
Lot, Flag means a lot located behind another lot connected to the street by an area narrower than the full lot width. Also known as a panhandle lot. 
Lot Frontage means the distance between the side lot lines, measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the street right-of-way. All sides of a lot that abuts a street shall be considered frontage. 
Lot, Interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot Line means a line or series of lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
 
Lot Line, Front means a lot line abutting a public or private street, or access easement. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting public or private street or access easement shall be considered the front lot line. On a through lot, the lot line abutting the public or private street providing the primary access to the lot shall be considered the front lot line. On a flag lot, subdivision plat or parcel map shall designate an interior lot line as a front lot line, or it shall be determined by the Building Official. 
Lot Line, Rear means a lot line defined as other than a front or side lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three (3) lot lines, a line within the lot having a length of ten (10) feet, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of determining required yards, setbacks and other provisions of these regulations. 
Lot Line, Side means any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot Line, Street means any lot line abutting an existing or dedicated street right-of-way. 
Lot of Record means a lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Burnet County Clerk, or a parcel of land the deed (including metes and bounds description) for which was recorded in the office of either the Burnet County Clerk or the Blanco County Clerk on or before June 27, 2005. 
Lot, Through means any lot that is not a corner lot with frontage on two streets which are parallel to each other or within 45 degrees of being parallel to each other. 
Lot Width means the distance between the side lot lines, measured at the front setback line. 
Low Impact Development (LID) means systems and practices that use or mimic natural processes that result in the infiltration, evapotranspiration or use of stormwater in order to protect water quality and associated aquatic habitat. 
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
- M - 
Manufactured Home, also known as a "HUD-code manufactured home" means: 
1.  A structure that is: 
a.  Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; 
2.  Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and 
3.  Does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by Chapter 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 3282.8(g). 
See Tex. Occ. Code § 1201, Manufactured Housing. 
Manufactured Home Lot or Space means a part of a parcel of land located within a manufactured home park or subdivision designed to meet the minimum provisions set out in these regulations for the placement of a single manufactured home. The two can be distinguished as follows: 
Manufactured Home Lot means a part of the parcel within a manufactured home subdivision which is owned in fee simple by the owner of the property. 
Manufactured Home Space means an undivided space within a manufactured home park which is established for identification purposes, used to calculate the minimum requirements as set out in these regulations, and is under common ownership. 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel of land providing for the placement of two or more manufactured home lots or spaces, either for rent ("manufactured home park") or for sale ("manufactured home subdivision"). Where established as a single-ownership undivided parcel, manufactured home spaces are used to calculate minimum size requirements pertaining to each home within the park. 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Existing means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Expansion of Existing means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, New means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Master Planned Community means a land development process permitted by these regulations which promotes the mixture of multiple housing types with neighborhood oriented nonresidential uses. See Section 4.4.2, Master Planned Communities. 
Mechanical Equipment means all equipment or devices installed for a primary or accessory use or structure, including, but not limited to, heating and air conditioning equipment, antennas, utility huts, power generating devices, condensers, air ducts, meters, etc., that are located on the site or attached to the exterior (walls or roof) of the building. 
Mean Sea Level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
Medical Clinic, also referred to as "outpatient clinic", means a facility providing for the examination, diagnosis, consultation, and/or treatment of patients on an outpatient basis, weather by appointment or walk-in basis, with no overnight stay allowed. The term "medical clinic" includes, but is not limited to, urgent care and other specialized forms of medicine not meeting the definition of "Hospital". 
Minor Plat. See "Plat, Minor Plat". 
Mitigation Replacement Ratio means the calculation of the amount of required tree or monetary compensation for removal of protected or heritage trees. 
Mixed Use means the horizontal or vertical mix of residential and nonresidential uses or a mix of nonresidential uses located on the same property. 
Mobile Home means a pre-fabricated housing unit built prior to July 15, 1976 that is primarily constructed at an assembly facility and transported to its location for permanent installation. The housing code enacted by the Department of Housing and Urban Development in 1976, renamed mobile homes to manufactured homes. See also "Manufactured Home". 
Mobile Service means a radio communication service carried on between mobile stations or receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating among themselves. 
Model Homes/Model Apartments and Sales means permanent structures built initially for the intent to showcase exterior and interior features of new homes or apartment structures for sale or lease. Models are designed and built for the eventual conversion to a residential dwelling unit and are located within the subdivision or construction area of the products for sale or lease. 
Modular Home. See "Industrialized Housing". 
Monopole shall mean a freestanding pole that requires no additional structural support from guyed wires or other appurtenance that may exist between the ground surface and the pole for structural support. 
Multifamily means a building(s) that contains three or more dwelling units that are accessed by from interior hallways or from individual exterior entrances (e.g., an apartment complex), including apartments, triplexes, and fourplexes intended for rental, lease or condominium ownership. The term multifamily does not include bed and breakfast lodging, manufactured housing, single-family detached or attached residential uses, or hotels/lodging. 
Multifamily Residential District means a primarily residential zoning district intended to provide areas of even higher density than in the Transitional Residential District. It is tied to an overall development density and is intended to provide an area of transition between the lower density Transitional Residential District and nonresidential districts. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Multi-Lot Unified Development means a development that is designed and approved as a cohesive, planned project located on multiple abutting properties established under a single development application such as a Site Development Plan or subdivision plat. 
Multi-Use Path, including "Shared-Use Path" or "Side Path", means a path in the public right-of-way that is for the shared use of bicyclists and pedestrians for transportation and recreational purposes. 
- N - 
Native or Native Plant means any plant species that is indigenous to Central Texas. 
Natural Area means an area of naturally grown landscape that is left primarily undisturbed, except for the removal of poison ivy, invasive species, diseased or dead trees, and similar vegetation, and allowing for maintenance of the trees to encourage vigorous growth. 
Neighborhood Amenity means a privately established indoor and/or outdoor facility that provides recreational, social, or other types of common spaces, amenities, activities, or services intended specifically for the residents of a particular residential development. The phrase "neighborhood amenity" includes, but is not limited to, commonly used terms such as: 
1.  Neighborhood park, an area providing open space for the enjoyment of the residents that may include playgrounds, picnic areas, pavilions, benches, walking trails, and restrooms. 
2.  Amenity center, a facility providing gathering or recreational space for the residents that may include a clubhouse, swimming pool, and sport courts (basketball/tennis/volleyball). 
3.  Neighborhood garden, a site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs, and/or flowers, which is shared and maintained by the residents of the neighborhood. 
4.  Residential convenience service, a use or activity conducted as an accessory use to multiple family residential or mobile home park residential use and intended solely for the convenience of residents thereof. 
5.  Private golf course, a facility provided for the benefit of the residents of the community but may be open to external memberships, that provides improved land area for conducting a game of golf and may include a clubhouse, shower/changing facility, driving range, equipment sales, golf cart storage, and similar accessory uses. 
Neighborhood Commercial District means a nonresidential zoning district intended for nonresidential development that is of an appropriate use, scale, and design that is compatible with abutting or nearby residential development. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Neighborhood Residential District means a residential zoning district intended to be the default single-family detached district and suburban in character, with flexible lot size configurations tied to an overall development density. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
New Construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Nonconformity means any structure, lot, site, sign, or use that does not meet the requirements of these regulations or other local, state, or federal ordinances or technical manuals. In order to be considered a legally nonconforming status, the nonconforming structure, lot, site, sign, or use must have been legally established on the effective date of these regulations or any effective date of any amendment hereto and has been in regular and continuous use. See also "Legal Nonconformity". 
Nonconforming Use means a use that is not permitted within the zoning district of the subject property upon which the use is located, including those uses that contain restrictions or require a Conditional Use Permit but lacks such permit or are operating outside the restrictions of such use. 
Nonconforming Structure means any structure that does not meet the requirements of these regulations, such as building placement, setback requirements, height limitations, material requirements or articulation, or does not meet any other local ordinances or technical manuals. In Article 12, Nonconformities, the term structure applies to anything constructed or erected on the ground or which is attached to something located on the ground, except signs. This includes, but is not limited to, buildings, telecommunications towers, utility improvements and sheds, and is applicable to all structures regardless of whether they are deemed principal or accessory. 
Nonconforming Lot means a lot of record that does not meet the minimum area or dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
Nonconforming Site means a property with existing site improvements that do not conform to one or more of the regulations of these regulations applicable to the property. Site improvements may include, but not limited to, parking areas, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks, landscaping, screening, and buffers. 
Nonresidential means any use, building or structure (or portion of a building or structure) occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a use other than a residential dwelling unit. 
- O - 
Off-Site Facilities or Improvements means those facilities or improvements that are required to serve a site but that are not located within the boundaries of a plat and are not required to be constructed or improved immediately adjacent to the property to serve the development. These include oversizing for streets, sewer lines, water lines and storm drainage facilities, as well as the excess capacity of facilities such as water storage tanks and wastewater treatment plants available for new development. 
Off-Street Parking means an area reserved exclusively for the parking of motor vehicles that is located outside of the public right-of-way. 
Office means uses where administrative, business, or professional services are provided. The term "office" includes, but is not limited to, such uses as: 
1.  Administrative and business offices, offices of private firms or organizations which are primarily associated with the provision of executive, management or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, photocopy and reproduction, and business offices or public utilities, organizations and associations, or other use classifications when the service rendered is that customarily associated with administrative office services. 
2.  Drafting services or quick reproduction services, establishments primarily engaged in such services as surveying, mapping, aerial photography, LiDAR management, hydrographic surveying, and other drafting and reproduction services. 
3.  Engineering, architectural and design services, establishment primarily engaged in providing consulting, design, and drafting services for construction projects. 
4.  Professional offices, a use providing professional office space for services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions. 
5.  Real estate offices and sales, a use providing professional office space for services primarily engaged in the sale or lease of real property. 
The term "office" does not include the term "Office, Medical" or "Office, Showroom" or "Office, Warehouse" and excludes sale or storage of merchandise on the premises. 
Office, Medical means office space used for the examination, diagnosis, consultation, and/or treatment of patients on an outpatient basis, generally by appointment, with no overnight stay allowed. The term "medical office" includes, but is not limited to, health care offices and laboratories supporting the work of physicians, pediatricians, obstetricians, dentists, optometrists, physical therapists, chiropractors, nutritionists, psychiatrists, and other similar health related care and excludes outpatient clinics (e.g., urgent care and other specialized forms of medicine not meeting the definition of "Hospital"). 
Office, Showroom means office space with both a business office and associated showroom for display of sample goods or services to be delivered or performed off-premises. 
Office, Warehouse means office space with both a business office and associated warehouse for storage of materials associated with a service industry, but not involving manufacturing or production. 
Official Zoning Map means the map showing the location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by these regulations. The map is entitled "Official Zoning Map of Marble Falls, Texas" and is kept on record with the City. 
On-site Facilities or Improvements means the existing or proposed facilities or improvements constructed within the property boundaries of a plat, and the existing or proposed facilities required to be constructed or improved immediately adjacent to the property that are needed to serve a development. Facilities and improvements include, but are not limited to, streets, alleys, water lines, sewer lines, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks, screening devices, and curbs and gutters. 
Open Space means the areas of a lot or parcel proposed for development that are set aside to be used for the common use or enjoyment of the residents, patrons, or users of the development. 
Ornamental Tree means a tree smaller than a shade tree that is intended to provide screening and aesthetic benefit rather than significant shade. 
Outdoor Display means the display of merchandise, goods, or materials that are actively for sale. 
Outdoor Storage means the storage of merchandise, goods, or materials that are not actively for sale. 
Overlength Street or Alley means a street segment, or a cul-de-sac or alley segment, which exceeds the maximum length allowed by these regulations, as measured along the centerline of the street from the intersection centerpoint of one through street, which shall not be a cul-de-sac or dead-end or looped street, to the intersecting centerpoint of another through street or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac. For an alley segment, the measurement shall be to the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the alley is provided access, including any alley turnouts, or from the centerpoint of an intersection with another alley which connects to a street.  
P—T 
- P - 
Parcel means a legally described area of land. 
Parcel Proposed for Development means any legally described parcel of land which is designated by the owner/operator or developer as land to be used or developed as a single unit, or which has been developed as a unit as determined by the Director. Parcels proposed for development oftentimes go through the subdivision process to create individual lots. 
Parking, Commercial means an o?-street facility for the parking of vehicles on a temporary basis that may be operated as a business enterprise by charging the public a fee and is not reserved or required to accommodate occupants, clients, customers, or employees of a particular establishment or premises. 
Passive Outdoor Recreation means open space areas or parks with limited manipulation of the natural landscape that provide opportunities for passive enjoyment of the natural environment which may include walking/jogging trails, picnic areas, benches, playgrounds, and similar features generating limited traffic demand and lighting. 
Pavement Width means the portion of a street that is available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are used, it is the portion from the back of one curb to the back of the opposite curb. 
Pawn Shop means an establishment that is engaged in the business of: 
1.  Lending money on the security of pledged goods; or 
2.  Purchasing goods on the condition that they may be repurchased by the seller at a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
See Texas Finance Code § 371.003. 
Perimeter Street means any existing or planned street which abuts the subdivision or addition to be platted. 
Permeable Pavement is a low impact development practice that allows water to drain through it. It is an alternative to traditional impervious pavements used for sidewalks, parking areas, roads, or other impervious ground covers. Must be approved for use by the City Engineer. May also be referred to as pervious cover or surface. 
Permit means a license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit, contract, or other agreement for construction related to, or provision of, service from a water or wastewater utility owned, operated, or controlled by a regulatory agency, or other form of authorization required by law, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance that a person must obtain to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project for which the permit is sought. 
Personal Communication Services or Networks means digital wireless telephone technology such as portable phones, pagers, faxes, and computers. 
Personal Services means an establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Accessory uses may include drive-in or drive-through facilities, which may be further limited in certain zoning districts. The phrase "personal services" includes, but is not limited to, such uses as: 
1.  Branch banking and check cashing, a financial institution that is open to the public and engaged in deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities, excluding non-depository financial institution or payday lending establishments. 
2.  Computer programming and other software services, an establishment providing computer-related services, including sales and repair. 
3.  Consumer and small appliance repair services, an establishment providing repair services for small consumer appliances. 
4.  Copy centers, parcel service drop-off locations, and mailbox services. 
5.  Hair and nail salons, a retail use which provides grooming or cosmetic services to the individual. 
6.  Health spas and physical fitness centers, facilities that provide amenities for health and fitness activities, such as fitness gym, gymnasium, indoor sports such as tennis, racquetball, bocce ball, soccer, swimming, or other sports activities. 
7.  Laundromat, retail dry cleaning, tailoring, shoe repair, and clothes restoration, establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as clothing restoration. 
8.  Music, dance, martial arts, yoga, and other similar instruction, an establishment providing group instruction. 
9.  Pet services (not including animal clinics or services), retail sales and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops. 
10.  Tattoo parlors, establishments that engage in the business of tattooing and/or branding human beings. 
Personal Wireless Services means wireless communications technology that provides users with the ability to communicate using portable devices not physically interconnected by equipment such as wire or cable. 
Permitted Use is a use that is allowed in a specific zoning district. 
Person means any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision, or legal entity of any kind. 
Planning and Zoning Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Marble Falls, Texas. May be referred to as "P&Z" or "Commission". 
Planned Development District means a customizable zoning district, represented through an adopted development plan, per these regulations, which may provide for one or more main uses or structures on a single parcel or contiguous parcels of land, and which permits flexibility related to land uses, dimensional requirements, landscaping, design, and other similar regulations in return for assurances of a comprehensive plan for overall innovation and/or quality of development. 
Planter box means an enclosed bioretention system that collects and filters stormwater runoff through vegetation and soil media. Because the system is enclosed, filtered runoff is directed into an underdrain. 
Plat means a document, prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, that depicts the subdivision of land into lots and blocks (and sometimes the combination of land) for the purpose of identifying property. For the purposes of these regulations, the following definitions are included: 
Amending Plat means a subdivision plat which includes a plat revision to correct errors or make minor changes to a recorded plat. See Section 11.4.7, Amending Plat. 
Development Plat means a plat that is required prior to development of property that meets the requirements of Section 11.4.5, Development Plat. 
Final Plat means the official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a surveyor or engineer, with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner, and with all boundaries, corners and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. The Final Plat of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be recorded in the land records of Burnet County, Texas. See Section 11.4.3, Final Plat. 
Minor Plat means a subdivision resulting in four or fewer lots, provided that the plat does not require the creation of new streets or the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. Any property to be subdivided using a Minor Plat shall already be served or be able to be served by all required City utilities and services, and all lots will have access from a public street that has already been improved to City standards. Also known as Minor Subdivision. See Section 11.4.4, Minor Plat. 
Major Plat means all plats not classified as Minor Plats, including, but not limited to, subdivisions of more than four lots, or any plat that requires the construction of a new street (or portion thereof) or the extension of a municipal facility as required by these regulations or any other City ordinance. Major plat approval shall be in accordance with Section 11.4.2, Preliminary Plat, and Section 11.4.3, Final Plat. Also known as Major Subdivision. 
Preliminary Plat means a subdivision plat which is the graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a parcel proposed for development, showing the proposed street and lot layout, easements, dedications and other pertinent features, with such notations as are sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of the parcel proposed for development. See Section 11.4.2, Preliminary Plat. 
Replat means a subdivision plat which involves the re-subdivision of any part or all of a block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract. See Section 11.4.6, Replat. 
Plat Vacation means an instrument declaring that a plat and its dedication be vacated or cancelled and that the land be converted to acreage. An applicant of a Plat Vacation may remove, in whole or partially, subdivisions, dedicated easements, notes, covenants, or restrictions from a plat. See Section 11.4.9, Plat Vacation. 
Police Chief means the commanding officer of the Marble Falls Police Department. 
Preliminary Plat. See "Plat, Preliminary Plat". 
Primary means the basic, fundamental, or most important use, activity, or development of a building or site. For the purposes of these regulations, "primary" is equal to, identical to, and often used interchangeably with "principal". 
Primary Architectural Façade means the façade of a building facing a public right-of-way, or the façade that serves as the front façade which has received more elaborate or special architectural treatment. 
Principal Building means a building in which a principal use of the parcel or property is conducted. 
Principal Structure means a structure in which a principal use of the parcel or property can be associated. 
Principal Use means the use which is conducted as the primary activity on the parcel of property. 
Private Street means a private vehicular access way, including an alley, that is shared by and that serves two (2) or more lots, which is not dedicated to the public, and which is not publicly maintained. 
Prohibited Use means a use that is not allowed in the specified zoning district and in some cases the entire City. 
Project means an endeavor over which a regulatory agency exerts its jurisdiction and for which one or more permits are required to initiate, continue, or complete the endeavor. 
Projected Side Yard Line means a projection of the side lot line of a waterfront lot/property into the abutting body of water where a boat dock would be located. Utilized to achieve a minimum separation of docks from one another. 
Property Line. See "Lot Line". 
Property Owner means any person or firm, association, syndicate, general or limited partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity, or any agent thereof, that has sufficient proprietary interest in the land subject to these regulations. In any event, the term "property owner" shall be restricted to include only the owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of such owner(s), such as a developer. Can also be known as "Applicant" or "Subdivider" or "Developer". 
Protected Tree means, for the purposes of these regulations, a Live Oak, Post Oak, Shumard Oak, Bur Oak, Chinquapin Oak, Monterey Oak, Bald Cypress, American Elm, Cedar Elm, Pecan, Walnut, Texas Ash, or Southern Magnolia tree with a diameter breast height (DBH) of 12 inches or greater. 
Provisional Housing means a facility providing housing and/or overnight accommodations for groups of people whom will stay for a temporary, intermittent, or transitional period of time. This term includes facilities such as post incarceration facilities, halfway houses, and homeless shelters. 
Public Improvement means any improvement, facility, or service together with its associated public site, right-of-way, or easement necessary to provide transportation, drainage, public or private utilities, parks, energy, or similar essential public services and facilities, for which a governmental entity may ultimately assume ownership and the responsibility for operation and maintenance. 
Public Service and Emergency Systems means communication systems that are legally required by any governmental agency having jurisdiction. 
- Q - 
Quadplex means a parcel developed with four dwelling units in a single structure. Quadplexes are designed exclusively for the use and occupancy of four families living independently of each other. 
- R - 
Rain Garden is a vegetated depression that temporarily stores stormwater runoff. Water is then filtered through the soil media, removing pollutants as it is released. Evaporation and transpiration also occurs with stored water. 
Rainwater Harvesting means the practice of capturing and storing stormwater runoff to be used for irrigation and other non-potable uses. Rainwater harvesting systems can range in size and selection of the appropriate system will depend on the development type and goals. 
Rain Barrel means a small, above ground storage system that typically holds 100 gallons or less. They are most appropriate for residential developments such as single-family homes or similar buildings. 
Cistern means above ground storage systems that have a larger capacity than a rain barrel. They can collect water from larger buildings, such as commercial buildings or a multifamily building. 
Underground Storage System means a rainwater harvesting system that collects and stores water in chambers constructed below grade. They can collect from buildings as well as paved areas. 
Recreational Vehicle (RV) means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily for use as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Recreational Vehicle Park (RV Park) means a property or parcel of land developed for the use of short- or long-term occupancy of two or more recreational vehicles in designated spaces. 
Registered Landscape Architect (RLA) means an individual currently registered with and licensed by the State of Texas to practice landscape architecture. 
Regulatory Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Rendering Plant means plant that converts packing house waste, kitchen grease, and livestock carcasses into industrial fats and oils (as tallow for soap) and various other products (as fertilizer). 
Replat. See "Plat, Replat". 
Research and Development means a structure or group of structures used primarily for applied and developmental research, where product testing is an integral part of the operation and goods or products may be manufactured as necessary for testing, evaluation, and test marketing. 
Residential means any use, building or structure (or portion of a building or structure) that contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy. Residential uses are typically contained within single-family detached, single-family attached, duplex, and multifamily dwelling units. The term "residential" is separate and distinct from "hotel / lodging" and other overnight accommodations. 
Residential and Neighborhood Uses means a category of uses that are intended for residential dwellings and related accessory uses. 
Restricted Use means a use that is allowed in a specific zoning district subject to standards for the permitted uses and use specific requirements. 
Resource Extraction means the extraction of surface or sub-surface mineral products or natural resources including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. Typical extractive uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas extraction, and mining operations and may include milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the extraction site or as part of the extractive activity. 
Restrictions/Deed Restrictions means easements, servitudes, covenants, conditions, and/or restrictions on property which are set out in a recorded agreement or a plat note that binds subsequent owners and may include restrictions on use or development of land and require payment of dues and other affirmative actions to be performed. Restrictions may be either private agreements between private parties or public restrictions enforceable by the City or other public entities. 
Retail Sales, General means the sale of goods directly to a consumer, typically in small quantities and not for wholesale. Accessory uses may include drive-in or drive-through facilities, which may be further limited in certain zoning districts. The phrase "retail sales" includes, but is not limited to, such uses as: 
1.  Agricultural sales and services, establishments or places of business engaged in sale (from the premises) of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agricultural related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. 
2.  Alcohol sales, the retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. 
3.  Artisan sales, the manufacture and retail sale of hand-crafted wares such as pottery, jewelry, art, and similar products of craftsmanship. 
4.  Clothing, clothing accessory, and jewelry stores, the retail sales of clothing, clothing accessories, or jewelry merchandise. 
5.  Convenience store (without vehicle gas or fueling station), a retail establishment that sells consumable and non-consumable convenience products for off-premise use or consumption. 
6.  Electronics and appliance stores, the retail sales of appliance and other consumer electronics. 
7.  Florist, card, and gift shops, the retail sale of gift-related merchandise. 
8.  Food sales, establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops. 
9.  Furniture and home furnishings stores, retail sales of furniture or home furnishings. 
10.  General merchandise stores, retail sale of multiple lines of merchandise. 
11.  Hardware stores, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, lighting stores, retail sales of household goods or services. 
12.  Sporting goods, hobby, book, and music stores, retail sales of personal recreational goods, such as books, sporting goods, hobby and crafts, instruments, and similar merchandise. 
Retail Sales and Service, Heavy Equipment means: 
1.  Construction sales and services, businesses primarily engaged in construction activities and/or the retail or wholesale sale of materials used in the construction of buildings and other structures and excluding those uses classified as vehicle sales, rental, or services. May include incidental storage. Typical uses included building materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales. 
2.  Equipment sales, an establishment primarily engaged in the sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships sales establishments. 
3.  Equipment repair services, an establishment primarily engaged in the repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services and machine shops, but exclude dismantling or salvage. 
Retail Sales and Services, Large Scale means retail sales and service activities which may include exceptionally large floor areas, heavier traffic demand and circulation, partially enclosed structures (e.g., outdoor merchandise). The phrase "retail sales and services, large scale" includes, but is not limited to, such uses as: 
1.  Home retail centers, warehouse clubs, and other big box stores; and 
2.  Lawn and garden retail centers (not including crop production and sales). 
Review means "to read, analyze, assess and, as appropriate, act upon" a development application. 
Review Body or Authority means the entity that is authorized to either recommend approval or denial or be the decision-making authority of an application for permit or approval required by these regulations. 
Rezoning. See "Zoning Map Amendment". 
Right-of-Way means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a street or alley. Where appropriate, "right-of-way" may include other facilities and utilities such as sidewalks; railroad crossings; electrical, communication, oil and gas facilities, water and sanitary and storm sewer facilities; and any other special use. The use of right-of-way shall also include parkways and medians outside of the paved portion of the street. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a Final Plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and shall not be included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Rural Estate District means a residential zoning district intended to provide the opportunity to develop a large lot subdivision that is rural in character. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
- S - 
Sand Filter means a flow-through treatment system designed to remove particulates and solids from runoff by slowly filtering stormwater through sedimentation and filtration chambers to improve water quality. 
Satellite Antenna means an antenna that specifically sends and transmits data within a satellite communications system. 
Scrap and Salvage Yard means an establishment where junk, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including inoperable vehicles, house materials, appliances, and structural steel equipment. The use does not include the purchase, sale, or storage of used furniture and household equipment. 
Secondary is, for the purposes of these regulations, equal to, identical to, and often used interchangeably with "accessory". 
Service Lines means those lines used to connect between the utility's system or lateral lines and the end user's meter box. 
Setback means the distance between a lot line and a building line. 
Setback Area means the open area between building setback lines and lot lines. 
Setback, Front means a yard that extends across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required front setback line. 
Setback, Interior Side means a yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
Setback, Rear means a yard extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear setback line. For a corner lot, the rear yard does not extend beyond the street side setback line. 
Setback, Street Side means a yard extending from the front setback line to the rear lot line, located between the side street lot line and the street side setback line. 
Setback Line means a line within a lot parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing the placement of structures and uses on the lot. Also known as "Building Setback Line". 
Shade Tree means the largest plants in the landscape which provide overhead structure needed for shading and under which other plants live and grow. 
Shopping Center means a group of retail sales and personal services and other similar commercial uses typically grouped and managed as a unit, including food and drink establishments. Shopping centers include an off-street parking lot that collectively serves all of the uses. The phrase "shopping center" does not include out-parcels which may be separated (by lot lines or easements) from the main shopping center. 
Shoreline means the line at which the water surface of Lake Marble Falls and the navigable waterways intersect the land at any given time. 
Shrub means a self-supporting woody perennial evergreen or deciduous species, characterized by multiple stems and branches contiguous from the base. See also "Large Shrub" and "Small Shrub". 
Sight Triangle means the triangular area formed by an invisible diagonal line at the corner of either two intersecting street right-of-way lines, the edge of street lines, the edge of a driveway or combination of two thereof. The sight triangle exists to prevent sight obstruction for motor vehicles, pedestrians, etc. May also be referred to as "street visibility triangle" or "sight distance triangle". 
Single-Family Attached means a dwelling unit that is joined to another dwelling unit at one side by a party wall or abutting separate wall and each unit is situated entirely on its own lot. 
Single-Family Detached means a dwelling unit located on an individual lot or tract. Single-family detached buildings are separated from other principal dwelling units and are separate and distinct from single-family attached, duplexes or townhouses. 
Single-Family Zero Lot Line means a single-family detached dwelling unit, located on an individual lot, that is set on or relatively close to one interior side lot line to create additional side yard area on the opposite side of the unit. 
Site Development Plan means a detailed, scaled plan, or set of plans, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures and uses, and the principal site development features including parking, access, and landscaping and screening, proposed for a specific parcel of land. The Site Development Plan is the basis for site development and is intended to demonstrate compliance with the development standards and other requirements, as applicable, of these regulations. See Section 11.5.3, Site Development Plan. 
Small Shrub means a shrub intended as a planting base to provide aesthetic benefit. Small shrubs typically grow to a height of 2 to 4 feet. 
Social Service Institution means a multi-functional facility that provides assistance, advocacy, case management, guidance, counseling, or similar services on a daytime care basis to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance or those with limited ability for self-care, but for whom medical care is not a major element. The phrase includes a facility that provides assistance concerning psychological problems, employment, learning, or physical disabilities, and child support issues, but does not include a rescue mission, homeless shelter, or child-care facility. 
Special Event Venue means an indoor and/or outdoor facility or site consisting of multi-purpose rooms, outdoor courtyards, or recreational facilities available for rental by the public for the primary intended purpose of hosting social gatherings such as parties, weddings, banquets, corporate meetings or similar group events. Special Event Venue does not include an event room available for rental in a structure housing another primary use where the event room rental is an accessory use to the primary use such as a restaurant or community center. 
Special Exception means an exception to certain provisions of these regulations, granted by the City Council, for specifically defined situations and standards, pursuant to Section 11.3.7, Special Exception. Such exception does not constitute a Variance or Waiver, as those terms are defined in these regulations. 
Special Flood Hazard Area. See "Area of Special Flood Hazard". 
Specialized Building Appurtenances means an accessory or other structure associated with a building and attached to such building. Specialized structures and building appurtenances shall refer to: 
1.  Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain a building; 
2.  Architectural towers, steeples, flagpoles, ventilating fans, or chimneys; 
3.  Smokestacks located in any district other than the General Industrial (IN) District; 
4.  Skylights, solar panels, and solar water heaters; and 
5.  Satellite dishes and antennae. 
Specialized Mobile Radio means a two-way radio system in which two or more mobile/portable wireless transceivers are linked by a single repeater. 
Standard Street means a street or road that meets or exceeds the minimum specifications in the City's standard street specifications, and which is constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of roadway it is designated for on the City's Thoroughfare Plan. 
Start of Construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), means substantial improvement and means the date the Building Permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Storage, Self means a controlled-access building or group of buildings housing individual storage spaces that are used to house personal property or records. There is no conduct of sales, business or any other activity allowed within the individual storage units. Does not include storage of any hazardous materials. The phrase may also be referred to as convenience storage, mini-storage, or mini-warehouse. 
Storage Yard means a facility used almost exclusively for outdoor storage of only operable equipment and construction materials temporarily stored for eventual off-site use. A storage yard is not limited by the outdoor storage limitations of these regulations. The phrase "storage yard" does not include outdoor storage areas that are associated with an on-site industrial use. 
Stormwater Management means the mitigation of the hydrologic impacts of lost natural runoff storage by the use of conventional stormwater conveyance systems or Low Impact Development. 
Stormwater Runoff means surplus surface water generated by rainfall that does not seep into the earth but flows into storm drains or overland to flowing or stagnant bodies of water. 
Street means a right-of-way, whether public or private and however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land. Streets may be of the following categories: 
Arterial Street, also known as major thoroughfare or primary thoroughfare, which provides vehicular movement from one neighborhood to another or to distant points within the City, and including freeways or highways leading to other communities. 
Collector Streets, also known as feeder streets or secondary thoroughfares, which provide vehicular circulation within neighborhoods, and from local streets to major thoroughfares. 
Local Streets, also known as neighborhood streets, which primarily provide direct vehicular access to abutting residential property. 
Private Streets are streets which are owned and maintained privately by an individual, homeowners' association, or property owners' association, and which are not dedicated to the public. 
Street Classification means the designation of street function established by the Marble Falls Comprehensive Plan. 
Street Improvements means any street or thoroughfare, together with all appurtenances required by City regulations to be provided with such street or thoroughfare, and including but not limited to curbs and gutters, walkways (sidewalks), drainage facilities to be situated in the right-of-way for such street or thoroughfare, traffic control devices, street lights and street signs, for which facilities the City will ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Street Length. See "Block Length". 
Street Right-of-Way means the shortest perpendicular distance of a roadway between the lines which delineate the rights-of-way of the street. 
Street Yard means that area between the building façade and any lot line along a public street. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires a permanent location on, above, or below the ground; or attached to something that has a permanent location on, above, or below the ground (e.g., fences, waste enclosures, signs, kiosks, etc.). A "structure" may sometimes also be a building. For floodplain management purposes, a structure may also include a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Subdivider means any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner of land sought to be subdivided. 
Subdivision means a division or re-division of any tract of land situated within the City's corporate limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction into two (2) or more parts, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership, or building development. "Subdivision" includes re-subdivisions of land or lots which are part of a previously recorded subdivision. 
Subdivision Plat. A general term that shares the meaning of "plat." 
Subdivision Sales Office means temporary buildings created for the short-term intention of being used as a sales office for and located within a particular subdivision. 
Subdivision Waiver means a grant of relief from the terms of the subdivision regulations, as specified in Section 11.4.8, Subdivision Waiver and Suspension. 
Submission Date refers to the date when all necessary forms, fees, plans, information and copies have been submitted to the City. 
Substandard Street means an existing street or road that does not meet the minimum specifications in the City's standard street specifications, and which is not constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of roadway it is designated for on the City's Thoroughfare Plan. 
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either, (a) before the improvement or repair is started or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Succulent Plant means a type of plant that stores water in its leaves and stems and has minimal watering or irrigation requirements. Succulent plants include cacti. 
Supermajority means a vote of three-fourths (¾) of the full City Council. 
Surveyor means a licensed land surveyor or a registered public land surveyor, as authorized by state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
Swale Block means installed build ups at intervals along a vegetated swale to allow stormwater to build up in a series of pools, slowing water flow and providing opportunities for vegetated filtration and infiltration. 
SWPPP means a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. 
- T - 
TCEQ means The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
TCSS means the City of Marble Falls Technical Construction Standards and Specifications for the construction of subdivision improvements, a copy of which is maintained and available for inspection at City Hall, and which is incorporated herein by reference. The TCSS shall be comprised of the provisions for trenching and backfilling, concrete, water system, sewer system, streets, sidewalks, and driveways, storm drainage, trench safety and the standard details (and as hereby amended) that are in effect at the time of submission of the plat application. The TCSS shall also include any additional provisions or policies the City of Marble Falls implements that pertain to the construction of site improvements such as street, parking lot, driveway and sidewalk paving, storm drainage structures, utility lines and facilities, screening walls/fences, retaining walls, landscaping and irrigation improvements, street lighting or signage, restricted access (gated) entrances to any type of development, and other similar improvements. The City Engineer and the City's Director of Public Works shall have the authority to determine whether or not the engineering plans for any type of site improvement are in conformance with the City's TCSS. 
Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points as specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunications Tower means any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term shall include, but will not be limited to, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and alternative tower structures. 
Television and AM/FM Radio Broadcast Towers mean towers used by television broadcasters to provide over the air signal as mandated by the FCC to television broadcasters to provide free service to those with in-home antennas. 
Temporary Improvements mean improvements built and maintained by the property owner that are needed to remedy a circumstance that is temporary in nature, such as a temporary drainage easement or erosion control device, that will be removed upon completion of the subdivision or shortly thereafter. 
Text Amendment means a change of the text of these regulations and does not include change or modification to the boundaries of any zoning district. Text amendments are granted by City Council pursuant to the procedural requirements established in Section 11.3.9, Text Amendment. 
Tiny House means a detached dwelling unit which contains all of the minimum standards for fitness for human habitation and is between 140 square feet and 599 square feet in size. Tiny houses include a permanent foundation. See Section 4.2.4, Tiny House Development. 
Townhouse means an attached building which contains three to six dwelling units arranged in a linear form that are separated by common walls extending from foundation to roof with exposed front and rear walls. Townhouses may be situated on individual lots, a single lot under one ownership, or a single lot through condominium ownership. 
Townhouse, Front-Loaded Single-Entry means a townhouse where the garage or required parking space is located on the front or side of the dwelling unit and is accessed from the front or side by a street. 
Townhouse, Rear-Loaded means a townhouse where the garage is located in the back of the dwelling unit and is accessed from the rear by an alley, or from a side-street for corner units. 
Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) means an analysis of the effect of traffic generated by a development on the capacity, operations, and safety of the public street and highway system. 
Transitional Residential District means a residential zoning district intended to serve as an area of transition between the lower density Neighborhood Residential District and higher density districts. This district is intended to provide an area of higher density and different housing types than in the Neighborhood Residential District, tied to an overall development density. See Section 2.1.1, Zoning Districts Established. 
Transportation Facilities means facilities intended for the loading, unloading, and/or interchange of passengers, baggage and incidental freight or package express between modes of transportation, including bus terminals, rail or freight loading and/or unloading areas, and other public forms of transportation. 
Tree Mitigation means the process to address the removal of a protected or heritage tree through either the planting of new replacement trees based on a Mitigation Replacement Ratio or paying fees-in-lieu. 
Tree Preservation Plan means a plan that graphically depicts the existing trees on a property, denotes their status, and indicates those being preserved and those being proposed for removal. 
Tree Survey means a plan that graphically identifies the location, size, and species of all existing protected and heritage trees on a parcel proposed for development. 
Triplex means a parcel developed with three dwelling units in a single structure. Triplexes are designed exclusively for the use and occupancy of three families living independently of each other. 
Turfgrass means a type of ground cover that consists typically of long narrow leaves on jointed stems. Turfgrass is typically maintained at a low uniform height. Also known as "lawn".  
U—Z 
- U - 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers means the civil engineering branch of the U.S. government. 
Unlicensed Wireless Services means wireless service utilizing unlicensed frequencies. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which land or any structure thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
Utilities, Local/Neighborhood are publicly-owned facilities or systems that are necessary to support principal development. Minor utilities include pressure mains and transmission lines (underground or overhead) including electrical, cable, natural gas, stormwater, water and wastewater; lift and pump stations; cable television and telephone transmission lines; or similar utility lines; pumping stations; lift stations; and telephone switching facilities (up to 100 square feet gross floor area). 
Utilities, Major are publicly- or privately-owned facilities or systems including generation, production, or treatment facilities such as power plants, water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants (including package treatment plants), or similar utilities; radio and television transmission towers; elevated storage tanks; transmission towers; electric substations; and uses of a similar intensity and public impact. 
Utility Easement means an interest in land granted to the City to the public generally and/or to a private utility corporation for installing or maintaining utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
Utility Services means facilities of any person, firm or corporation providing electric, natural gas, telephone, cable television, or any other such item or service for public use approved but not provided by the City of Marble Falls. 
- V - 
Variance. See "Zoning Variance". 
Vegetated Filter Strip means a band of vegetation surrounding a waterway that acts as a buffer between the body of water and impervious surface. Vegetated filter strips provide stormwater management and quality benefits through reducing velocity of runoff, promoting infiltration, and removing pollutants by sedimentation and horizontal filtration through vegetation. 
Vegetated Swale means a shallow, open grass channels designed to convey runoff while reducing velocity of runoff, promoting infiltration, and removing pollutants by sedimentation and horizontal filtration through vegetation. 
Vehicle Gas or Fueling Station means a service station providing on-site retail sales of vehicle fuel (e.g., gasoline, hydrogen, liquefied petroleum gas, compressed natural gas, electric charging station, or similar personal vehicle fuel). The phrase "vehicle gas and fueling station" typically includes convenience stores and accessory uses such as vehicle washing stations and ice dispensers. 
Vehicle Sales and Rentals means a place that sells or leases new and used automobiles, trucks, boats, construction equipment, all-terrain vehicles, and motorcycles, and where such inventory is stored and/or displayed on-site for any length of time. The phrase "vehicle sales and rentals" may also include accessory uses such as vehicle fueling or charging stations, inventory vehicle washing stations, and general vehicle services. Does not include body shops (e.g., collision repair), paint booths, or reupholstering unless they are approved as principal uses on the same site. 
Vehicle Services means a place designed, used or intended to be used for the purpose of providing general repair and servicing of all types of motor vehicles, including commercial. Such repair or servicing may include reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and transmissions; wrecker service; collision services, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; painting, undercoating and rust proofing; replacement or repair of brakes, shock absorbers, tires, batteries, mufflers, or upholstery; and other similar services that may require overnight on-site storage of vehicles, excluding dismantling, wrecking, or salvage. 
Vested Rights Petition means a request for relief from the standards or requirements of the current land development regulations based on the premises that the applicant has acquired a vested right under previous regulations. See Division 11.7, Vested Rights. 
Vine means a plant whose stem requires support and which climbs by tendrils or twining. 
Violation means, for flood damage prevention purposes, the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Code or by Sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Voluntary Annexation. See "Annexation, Voluntary". 
- W - 
Warehouse means a facility storing goods, materials, and equipment either within an enclosed building or structure or in containers or terminals for subsequent distribution to off-site wholesalers, retailers, or consumers. The term "warehouse" includes the storage of general freight storage, food, parcels, furniture and appliances but does not include self-storage, wholesale, or warehousing that is accessory to an industrial facility, nor parcel service drop-off locations that are not accessory to a parcel service processing facility. Warehouse includes: 
1.  General warehousing and distribution, open-air storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone yards, or open storage yards. 
2.  Limited warehousing and distribution, wholesaling, storage and warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical moving and storage firms and now retail mail order distribution centers. 
Waste Related Services means a use involving the collection, transportation, recycling, or disposal of waste, either on-site or at a transfer station. 
Water Surface Elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Wireless means a method of transmitting and receiving data without direct connection through wires and cables. 
Wireless Cable Systems means a method of cable television distribution using wireless technology. 
Wireless Service Provider means a company, corporation, alliance, individual, or other legal entity that provides a wireless communication service directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public regardless of the facilities used. 
Wireless Transmission Facilities means an unstaffed facility for the transmission and reception of radio, microwave, or electromagnetic signals used for commercial communication by a wireless communication service provider. Wireless Transmission Facilities are composed of one or more of the following components: antenna, equipment enclosure, security barrier, and/or communication tower. See Section 4.6.6, Wireless Transmission Facilities. 
- X - 
- Y - 
- Z - 
Zoning means a police power measure enacted by a municipality, including the City, in which the community is divided into zoning districts which establishes permitted and special uses and regulations governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards. 
Zoning Board of Adjustments means the board established by the City Council to hear and determine Zoning Variances, and any other powers granted thereto by the State, City Charter, or these regulations. May be referred to as "ZBA". 
Zoning District means an area of the City identified with an abbreviated symbol and delineated on the official zoning map. These districts establish the permitted uses and development standards in these defined areas of the City. Zoning districts are established in the following ways: 
Base Zoning District is the series of general zoning districts that apply across the whole incorporated City. 
Overlay District is a defined set of regulations established for specific areas of the City that are applied in addition to the base zoning district standards. 
Special District is a district that establishes separate use and development standards that are established on a case-by-case basis in order to establish a unique development type or address unique characteristics of the property that are otherwise not generally applicable across the City. 
Zoning Map. See "Official Zoning Map". 
Zoning Map Amendment means a change or modification of the boundaries of any zoning district within the City's Zoning Map. Annexations require a public hearing, notification, and approval by City Council. Also known as a rezoning. See Section 11.3.2, Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning). 
Zoning Variance means a request for relief from the terms of the zoning requirements of these regulations due to a special circumstance applicable to the property, granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Such procedures are in accordance with Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning, and Chapter 213, Municipal Comprehensive Plans, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code. See Section 11.3.6, Zoning Variance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-O-05A , § II.I.1—8, 5-21-2019; Ord. No. 2019-O-11D , § II.B, 11-19-2019)  
APPENDIX C - MASTER FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
ACCIDENT REPORT 	$6.00 
 
ALCOHOL LICENSING 	Alcohol License — Fee is equal to one-half (½) the permit or license fee charged by the state under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code (T.A.B.C.). 
 
ANIMAL CONTROL 
Adoption of impounded animals (w/mandatory spay/neuter agreement) 	$10.00 
Animal Care — Resident trap one-time permit fee 	$5.00 
Animal Registration — Altered dog/cat 	$10.00/$0 (over 65) 
Animal Registration — Unaltered dog/cat 	$20.00 annually 
Animal Registration — Service Animals 	No charge 
Animal Sales — Commercial permit 	$50.00 
Bees — Registration, per hive 	$5.00 
Dangerous Dog Registration and tag 	$100.00 
Electronic Pet Containment Device 	$40.00/ Annually 
Feral Cat Colony Manager Permit 	No charge 
Guard Dog Permit 	$35.00 
Impoundment fee (initial), per animal 	$40.00 
Impoundment fee, Dog/Cat per additional day per animal 	$5.00 
Kennel Permit 	$50.00 
Livestock — Registration 	$5.00 
Livestock and stray — Initial impoundment fee, per head 	$40.00 
Livestock and stray — impoundment per head, per additional day 	$5.00 
Owner surrender pet fee — City of Marble Falls Resident 	$10.00 
Owner surrender pet fee — Nonresident 	$55.00 
Owner surrender pets in litter, 8 wks. — 3 mos. — City of Marble Falls Resident 	$25.00 
Owner surrender pets in litter, 8 wks. — 3 mos. — Nonresident 	$55.00 
Owner surrender under 8 wks. of age — City of Marble Falls Resident 	$10.00 
Owner surrender under 8 wks. of age — Nonresident, per animal 	$55.00 
 
BRUSH COLLECTION PROGRAM 
CURBSIDE PICK-UP outside of regularly scheduled brush pick-up. Fee will be assessed on monthly utility bill or submitted by invoice to property owner/resident 	$75.00 
CURBSIDE PICK-UP during regularly scheduled brush pick up 	No charge 
BRUSH DROP-OFF 	
Residents and Property Owners of Marble Falls 	
(Documentation of residency/ownership required) 	No charge 
Non-residents, Contractors, and/or Commercial firms 	
8' trailer or less 	$35.00 
Greater than 8' trailer to 16' trailer 	$50.00 
Greater than 16' trailer 	$75.00 
 
COMMUNITY EVENT FUND (voluntary donation on utility bill) 	$1.00/month 
 
CEMETERY 	
Lot — Resident 	$900.00 	
Lot — Non-resident 	$1,100.00 	
Niche — Inside 		
Rows 1, 2, 6, and 7 	$1,300.00 per niche 	
Rows 3, 4, and 5 	$1,600.00 per niche 	
Niche — Outside 		
Rows 1, 2, 6, and 7 	$1,100.00 per niche 	
Rows 3, 4, and 5 	$1,400.00 per niche 	
 
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS HAULER 	
License Fee 	$100/annually 	
Tag 	$10.00/per motor vehicle or container annually 	
 
DEVELOPMENT FEES 	
BUILDING PERMITS RESIDENTIAL NEW CONSTRUCTION 	
New Residential Plan Review — 3,000 sq. ft. or less 	$60.00 	
New Residential Plan Review — 3,001 sq. ft. or more 	$100.00 	
New Residential Construction — 3,000 sq. ft. or less 	$0.10/sq. ft. 	
New Residential Construction — 3,001 sq. ft. or more 	$0.10/sq. ft. 	
New Residential Electrical 	$0.06/sq. ft. 	
New Residential Plumbing 	$0.08/sq. ft. 	
New Residential Mechanical 	$0.04/sq. ft. 	
BUILDING PERMITS RESIDENTIAL REMODEL/ADDITION/ALTERATION 	
Residential Remodel Plan Review 	$25.00 	
Residential Remodel Building Permit 		
500 sq. ft. or less 	$100.00 	
501 sq. ft. or more 	$140.00 	
Residential Remodel Electrical 		
With No Additional/New Square Footage 		
1 to 3 receptacles/fixtures 	$35.00 	
4 to 8 receptacles/fixtures 	$80.00 	
9 or more receptacles/fixtures 	$120.00 	
With Addition/New Square Footage 		
200 sq. ft. or less 	$35.00 	
201 sq. ft. — 500 sq. ft. 	$80.00 	
501 sq. ft. or more 	$120.00 	
Residential Remodel Plumbing 		
Base permit plus per item listed below 	$40.00 	
Fixture 	$3.00 	
Water Heater 	$5.00 	
Replacement yard line 	$5.00 	
Residential Remodel Mechanical 	$65.00 	
RESIDENTIAL INSPECTION — MISCELLANEOUS 	
New Residential/Remodel Re-Inspection 	$50.00 	
New Residential/Remodel After-Hours Inspections 	$100.00 	
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMITS — MISCELLANEOUS 	
Residential Driveway/Flatwork 	$40.00 	
Residential Fend/Yard Wall 	$40.00 	
Residential Retaining Wall 	$60.00 	
Residential Accessory Structures 		
Guest House — New residential fees 	$0.10/sq. ft. 	
Storage Building/Shed 		
100 sq. ft. or less 	$40.00 	
101 sq. ft. or more 	$80.00 	
Garage/Carport/Workshop 	$120.00 	
Deck/Patio/Gazebo 	$85.00 	
Residential Roofing/Re-roofing 	$100.00 	
Residential House Moving 	$50.00 	
Residential Land Clearing Permit 	$80.00 	
Residential Land Disturbance Permit (Cut and Fill) 	$25.00 	
Residential Floodplain Development Permit 	$100.00 	
Residential Floodplain Development Variance 	$600.00 	
Residential Boat Dock 	$200.00 	
Residential Irrigation 	$60.00 	
OSSF Systems (fee includes $10.00 for TCEQ fee) 	$160.00 	
Residential Swimming Pool 	$150.00 	
Mobile/Manufactured Home 	$300.00 	
Residential Demolition 	$50.00 	
Residential Building Permit Amendment 	$50.00 	
Certificate of Occupancy — Residential 	$30.00 	
Residential Tree Removal 	No fee 	
Work without a building permit 	Up to 3 × Fee per adopted International Building Code 	
Temporary Use Permit — Residential 	$300.00 	
BUILDING PERMITS COMMERCIAL NEW CONSTRUCTION 	
New Commercial Plan Review — 10,000 sq. ft. or less 	$150.00 	
New Commercial Plan Review — 10,001 to 30,000 sq. ft. 	$300.00 	
New Commercial Plan Review — 30,001 sq. ft. or more 	$450.00 	
New Commercial Construction 	$0.09/sq. ft. 	
New Commercial Electrical 		
5,000 sq. ft. or less 	$200.00 	
5,001 — 10,000 sq. ft. 	$400.00 	
10,001 sq. ft. or more 	$400.00 + $10.00 per each additional 1,000 sq. ft. over 10,000 sq. ft. 	
New Commercial Plumbing 	$100.00 plus $10.00 per fixture 	
New Commercial Mechanical 	$100.00 plus $5.00 per ton 	
BUILDING PERMITS COMMERCIAL REMODEL/ADDITION/ALTERATION 	
Commercial Remodel Plan Review 		
10,000 sq. ft. or less 	$150.00 	
10,001 sq. ft. or more 	$300.00 	
Commercial Remodel Building Permit 		
500 sq. ft. or less 	$100.00 	
501 sq. ft. or more 	$100.00 + $0.05/sq. ft. 	
Commercial Remodel Electrical 		
With No Additional/New Square Footage 		
1 to 3 receptacles/fixtures 	$80.00 	
4 to 8 receptacles/fixtures 	$160.00 	
9 to 15 receptacles/fixtures 	$400.00 	
16 or more receptacles/fixtures 	$400.00 + 10.00 per additional receptacle/fixture 	
With Addition/New Square Footage 		
2,500 sq. ft. or less 	$80.00 	
2,501 sq. ft. — 5,000 sq. ft. 	$160.00 	
5,001 sq. ft. — 10,000 sq. ft. 	$400.00 	
10,001 sq. ft. or more 	$400.00 + 10.00 per each additional 1,000 sq. ft. over 10,000 sq. ft. 	
Commercial Remodel Plumbing 	$50.00 plus $10.00 per fixture 	
Commercial Remodel Mechanical 	$50.00 plus $10.00 per ton 	
COMMERCIAL INSPECTION — MISCELLANEOUS 	
New Commercial/Remodel Re-Inspection 	$100.00 	
New Commercial/Remodel After Hours Inspections 	$100.00 	
COMMERCIAL BUILDING PERMITS — MISCELLANEOUS 	
Commercial Driveway/Flatwork/Paving 		
1,000 sq. ft. or less 	$80.00 	
1,001 sq. ft. — 3,000 sq. ft. 	$150.00 	
3,001 sq. ft. or more 	$250.00 	
Commercial Fence/Yard Wall 	$50.00 	
Commercial Retaining Wall 	$100.00 	
Commercial Accessory Structures 		
100 sq. ft. or less 	$60.00 	
101 sq. ft. or more 	$120.00 	
Garage/Carport/Workshop — New Commercial 	$0.10/sq. ft. 	
Commercial Land Clearing 	$120.00 	
Commercial Land Disturbance Permit (Grading/Cut and Fill) 	$50.00 	
Commercial Floodplain Development Permit 	$150.00 	
Commercial Floodplain Development Variance 	$800.00 	
Commercial Boat Dock 	$300.00 	
Commercial Roofing 	$150.00 	
Commercial Demolition 	$50.00 	
Commercial Irrigation 	$30.00 per zone up to ten zones + $5.00 per zone thereafter 	
OSSF — On-site sewage facility 	$500.00 	
Commercial Swimming Pool 	$250.00 	
Commercial Building Permit Amendment 	$100.00 	
Certificate of Occupancy — New Commercial 	$60.00 	
Certificate of Occupancy — Commercial 
Administrative/Change of Ownership 	$30.00 	
Work without a permit 	Up to 3 × fee (per adopted International Building Code) 	
Temporary Use Permit — Commercial 	$300.00 	
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION CONTROL (NPS) 	
NPS Exemption Fee — Residential 	$100.00 	
NPS Exemption Fee — Commercial 	$250.00 	
NPS Plan Review/Submittal Fee — Residential 	$100.00 	
NPS Plan Review/Submittal Fee — Commercial 	$250.00 	
NPS Permit Fee 		
Residential Subdivision 	$500.00 + $70.00 per acre up to 100 acres + $50.00 per acre for each acre over 100 acres 	
Multi-family Residential 	$500.00 + $350.00 per acre 	
Commercial 	$500.00 + $350.00 per acre 	
Utility 	$500.00 + $1.00 per linear foot (based on longest length of utility installed) 	
Roadways 	$500.00 + $2.00 per linear foot (add diameter of cul-de-sacs to length of street) 	
Best Management Practices (BMP) Operating 5-Year Permit 	$1,500.00 	
PLANNING AND LAND USE FEES 	
Development Agreement or Planned Development District (PDD) Zoning 		
0—5 Acres 	$2,000.00 	
6—10 Acres 	$2,500.00 	
11—15 Acres 	$3,500.00 	
16—20 Acres 	$4,500.00 	
Over 20 Acres 	$6,000.00 	
Development Agreement or PDD Amendment 	$2,000.00 	
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) 		
0—5 Acres 	$500.00 	
6—10 Acres 	$765.00 	
Over 10 Acres 	$1,015.00 	
Conditional Use Permit 	$500.00 	
Zoning Variance 	$500.00 	
Special Exception 	$500.00 	
Administrative Exception 	$100.00 	
Master Planned Community Review 	$500.00 + $30.00 per acre ($10,000.00 maximum) 	
Subdivision Platting 		
Development Plat 	$265.00 + $45.00 per lot or $35.00 per acre, whichever is more 	
Preliminary Plat 	$440.00 + $45.00 per lot 	
Final Plat 	$415.00 + $45.00 per lot 	
Plat/Replat 	$265.00 + $45.00 per lot 	
Minor Plat/Minor Replat/Amending Plat 	$215.00 + $45.00 per lot 	
Subdivision Waiver and Suspension 	$150.00 	
Subdivision Plat Vacation 	$265.00 	
Street/Alley/Easement Abandonment 	$250.00 	
Site Development Plan Review 		
Residential — 3,000 sq. ft. or less 	$50.00 	
Residential — 3,001 sq. ft. or more 	$150.00 	
Commercial — 10,000 sq. ft. or less 	$150.00 	
Commercial — 10,001—30,000 sq. ft. 	$300.00 	
Commercial — 30,001 sq. ft. or more 	$450.00 	
Tree Removal 	No fee 	
Landscaping Replacement 	$30.00 	
Mitigation Fees (Optional Fees in Lieu) 		
Downtown Parking Fee in Lieu 	$9,500.00 per parking space 	
Sidewalk Fee in Lieu 	$6.00 per square foot 	
Tree Replacement Fee in Lieu 	$150.00 per caliper inch removed 	
Voluntary Annexation/ETJ Extension 	$215.00 	
Chapter 245 Determination (Vested Rights) 	$200.00 + all City Attorney's Fees 	
SIGN FEES 	
Attached Sign (Non-Illuminated) 	$50.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Attached Sign (Illuminated) 	$60.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Monument Sign (Non-Illuminated) 	$50.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Monument Sign (Illuminated) 	$60.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Monument Sign, Multi-Tenant (Non-Illuminated) 	$150.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Monument Sign, Multi-Tenant (Illuminated) 	$175.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Monolith Sign (Non-Illuminated) 	$50.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Monolith Sign (Illuminated) 	$60.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Freestanding/Pole Sign (Non-Illuminated) 	$100.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Freestanding/Pole Sign (Illuminated) 	$150.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Electronic Message Sign, Monument 	$200.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Electronic Message Sign, Standard 	$300.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Window Signage 	$2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Retaining Wall Sign and Wall Sign 	$60.00 + $2.00 per sq. ft. 	
Sign Reface 	$30.00 	
Development Sign 	$500.00 annually 	
Directional Sign 	$30.00 per sign 	
Temporary Sign (all types) 	$10.00 	
Temporary Sign Annual Permit (Downtown District only) 	$40.00 annually 	
Landmark Sign (Application and Permit Fee) 	$500.00 	
Commercial Real Estate Sign 	No fee 	
Residential Real Estate Sign 	No fee 	
Commercial Contractor Sign 	No fee 	
Community or Public Service 	No fee 	
 
FIRE DEPARTMENT PERMITS AND FEES 
FIRE MARSHAL FEE SCHEDULE 
Initial through 2 nd Re-inspection 	No charge 
3 rd Re-inspection and thereafter, each 	$50.00 
Plan Review Fee 	$50.00 
Work commencing before permit issuance 	$200.00 
Nursing Home Inspection 	$100.00 
Hospital Inspection 	$100.00 
Foster Home Inspection 	$25.00 
Day Care Inspection 	$25.00 
Group Home Inspection 	$25.00 
All other required tests and inspections 	$50.00 
Inspections Outside the Marble Falls ETJ 	$100.00 
Fire Investigation 	$75.00/hr. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL/UNCONTROLLED BURN CLEAN UP FEES 

All costs incurred by the city to mitigate and abate hazard as defined in Ordinance No. 2017-O-08E and 2017-O-08D: To be calculated by the fire department 
Fire Engine 	$500.00/hr. 
Command or Staff Vehicle 	$125.00/hr. 
Brush Truck 	$250.00/hr. 
Additional Firefighter 	$35.00/hr. 
Fire Investigation 	$75.00/hr. 
PERMITS 
Automatic Fire Extinguishing Systems 	$100.00 
Battery systems 	$100.00 
Compressed gases 	$100.00 
Cryogenic fluids 	$100.00 
Emergency responder radio coverage system 	$100.00 
Explosives/Blasting 	$100.00 
Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment 	$100.00 
Fire Pumps and related equipment 	$100.00 
Fireworks 	$100.00 
Flammable and combustible liquids 	$100.00 
Hazardous materials 	$100.00 
Industrial ovens 	$100.00 
Installation of underground fire mains 	$100.00 
LP gas 	$100.00 
Open Burning (Permit Required) 	No charge 
Private fire hydrants 	$100.00 
Smoke control systems 	$100.00 
Solar photovoltaic power systems 	$100.00 
Spraying or dipping 	$100.00 
Standpipe systems 	$100.00 
Temporary membrane structures and tents 	$100.00 
All other permits required by code 	$50.00 
 
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS MAP REQUEST FEES 	
Standard Maps (24 x 36 inches) 	Digital 	Hardcopy 	
City Limit and ETJ 	$0.00 	$20.00 	
Subdivisions 	$0.00 	$20.00 	
Zoning 	$0.00 	$20.00 	
Floodplain 	$0.00 	$20.00 	
Future Land Use * 	$0.00 	$15.00 	
Thoroughfare Plan * 	$0.00 	$15.00 	
* No aerial included. $5.00 added to Hardcopy maps if aerial requested. 	
Custom Maps 	
Map Size 	Base Fee 	Additional Copies 	Digital Format (PDF) 	
8.5 x 11 in 	$3.00 	$1.00 each 	Base fee not 
applicable. GIS 
analysis charges 
apply. 	
11 x 17 in. 	$7.00 	$2.00 each 		
18 x 24 in. 	$15.00 	$3.00 each 		
24 x 36 in. 	$20.00 	$4.00 each 		
36 x 48 in. 	$25.00 	$5.00 each 		
42 x 54 in. 	$30.00 	$6.00 each 		
Custom Map with Aerial 	Additional $10.00 per Hardcopy map 	
GIS Analysis (applicable to all Custom Maps) 	$15.00 per 15-minute interval 	
 
IMPACT FEES 
Meter Size 	Living Unit 
Equivalents (LUEs) per Meter 	Water Impact Fee 	Wastewater Impact Fee 
¾" 	1.00 	$2,761.00 	$3,293.00 
1" 	1.67 	$4,611.00 	$5,499.00 
1.5" 	3.33 	$9,193.00 	$10,964.00 
2" 	5.33 	$14,715.00 	$17,549.00 
3" 	10.00 	$27,608.00 	$32,926.00 
4" 	16.67 	$46,022.00 	$54,887.00 
6" 	33.33 	$92,017.00 	$109,742.00 
8" 	53.33 	$147,233.00 	$175,594.00 
 
MUNICIPAL COURT FEES 
Building Security Fee 	$3.00 per violation 
Municipal Court Technology Fee 	$4.00 per violation 
Juvenile Case Manager Fee 	$5.00 per violation 
 
OPEN RECORDS REQUEST 
Public Information Request Charges are governed by the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 70 
 
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITY FEES 
Alcohol Consumption Permit 	$25.00 
Alcohol Sales Permit 	$100.00 
JOHNSON PARK 
Amphitheatre 	$10.00/hr. or $100.00/day 
Pavilions (3) 	$10.00/hr. or $100.00/day 
Ball Field 	$10.00/hr. or $100.00/day 
Lighting for night use (required) 	$7.50/hour 
Tournament Fee 	$200.00 
LAKESIDE PAVILION 
Group I — Use fee for Public Agencies and Non-Profits (Sun — Thurs) 	$200.00 
Group I — Use fee for Public Agencies and Non-Profits (Fri. — Sat.) 	$500.00 
Group II — Use fee for individuals, civic organizations, and social groups (Sun. — Fri.) 	$1,000.00 
Group II — Use fee for individuals, civic organizations, and social groups (Sat.) 	$1,500.00 
Group III — Use Fee for Commercial Groups (Sun. — Fri.) 	$1,500.00 
Group III — Use Fee for Commercial Groups (Sat.) 	$1,800.00 
	
Facility Deposit w/alcohol 	$1,000.00 
Facility Deposit w/o alcohol 	$500.00 
Cleaning Fee 	$500.00 
MUNICIPAL POOL 
Admission 	
Infant/Toddler — Under 3 	Free 
Child — Age 3—12 y/o 	$3.00 
Adult/Teen — Age 13 and up 	$4.00 
Annual Family Membership 	$100.00 
Discounted Season Pass (20 tickets) — Child (3—12) 	$48.00 
Discounted Season Pass (20 tickets) — Adult (13 and up) 	$64.00 
Swim Lessons 	
Member 	$50.00 
Non-member 	$62.00 
Pool Party Rental 	
1 — 25 persons 	$100.00 
26 — 50 persons 	$120.00 
51 — 75 persons 	$140.00 
76 — 100 persons 	$160.00 
101 — 125 persons 	$180.00 
WESTSIDE PARK 
Community Hall 	
Facility Deposit w/Alcohol 	$300.00 
Facility Deposit w/o Alcohol 	$150.00 
Rental Fee 4 hour minimum — Resident 	$30.00/hr. 
Rental Fee 4 hour minimum — Non-resident 	$45.00/hr. 
Pavilion 	$10.00/hr. 
$100.00/day 
 
PERMITS — MISCELLANEOUS 
Alarm License — Commercial 	$20.00 annually 
Alarm License — Residential 	$10.00 annually 
Handbill — Commercial Applicants 	$75.00 annually 
Handbill — Individuals (not for commercial purposes) 	$35.00 annually 
Handbill — Nonprofit Organizations 	$10.00 annually 
Peddler/Vendor/Solicitor — One Person 	$50.00 annually 
Peddler/Vendor/Solicitor — Two (2) or more persons 	$100.00 annually 
Special Event Permit 	No charge 
 
RETURNED CHECK FEE 	$30.00 
 
SOLID WASTE SERVICES — RESIDENTIAL 
Deposit Fee (one time) 	$35.00 
Trash and Recycle Collection (96 gallon cart) 	$19.82/month 
Additional Trash Bin (96 gallon cart) 	$6.61/month 
Additional recycling cart 	No charge 
Call-in bulky item collection — Large Furniture 	$25.00/each 
Call-in bulky item collection — Other furniture 	$15.00/each 
Call-in bulky item collection — Bags, boxes, bundles 	$3.00/ each 
Delinquent Fees — First Notice 	10% of delinquent bill 
Delinquent Fee — Failure to Remove 	Recovery Costs Determined by City 
 
SOLID WASTE SERVICES — COMMERCIAL 
Commercial Fees are determined by Sanitation Service Provider 
 
UTILITY 
SEWER 
Base Service Charge 	$18.88 
Usage Fee (per thousand gallons) 	$4.23 
Re-use water (per thousand gallons) 	One-half of water rate 

MONTHLY WATER BASE CHARGE AND WATER RATES 
Meter Size 	Base Charge 
¾" 	$25.21 
1" 	$35.94 
1-½" 	$64.38 
2" 	$111.27 
3" 	$238.25 
4" 	$421.82 
6" 	$746.60 
Consumption (gallons) 	Rate per 1,000 gallons 
0—10,000 	$4.78 
11,000—30,000 	$5.83 
31,000+ 	$7.14 
Water rate applied to monthly bill is based on total consumption. 
Establish a credit card fee for Utility Payments: 	Credit Card Fees $2.65 per transaction 
Irrigation Rates 	
0—10,000 	$4.00 
11,000—30,000 	$4.10 
31,000+ 	$4.25 
Delinquent Fees 	
First Notice 	10% of delinquent bill 
Reconnect Fee 	$30.00 
After Hours Reconnect Fee 	$75.00 
 
UTILITY SECURITY DEPOSITS (required to activate service) 
Meter Size 	Residential 	Residential 
Sprinkler 	Commercial 	Commercial 
Sprinkler 
¾" 	$150.00 	$50.00 	$150.00 	$150.00 
1" 	$200.00 	$0.00 	$200.00 	$200.00 
1½" 	$250.00 	$0.00 	$250.00 	$250.00 
2" 	$500.00 	$0.00 	$500.00 	$500.00 
3" 	$575.00 	$0.00 	$575.00 	$575.00 
4" 	$700.00 	$0.00 	$700.00 	$700.00 
 
VOLUNTARY EMERGENCY SERVICES FEES (VES) 
Voluntary Fire Rescue 	$1.50/month 
Volunteer EMS 	$1.50/month 
 
WASTEWATER TAP AND CONNECTION FEES 
Tap Size 	City Installed 	Contractor Installed * 
Regular 4" 	$800.00 	$125.00 
Commercial 6" 	$1,000.00 	$200.00 
* New Developments 		
 
WATER TAP AND CONNECTION FEES 
Meter Size 	City Installed 	Contractor Installed * 
¾" 	$800.00 	$150.00 
1" 	$900.00 	$225.00 
1½" 	Calculated by Public Works 	$500.00 
2" 	Calculated by Public Works 	$500.00 
4" 	Calculated by Public Works 	$500.00 
4" Compound 	Calculated by Public Works 	$500.00 
6" Fire Line 	$2,000.00 	$500.00 
8" Fire Line 	$4,000.00 	$500.00 
* New Developments 		
 
Every credit card transaction will be assessed a fee of $2.65 per transaction. 
( Ord. No. 2018-O-02D, § II, 2-6-2018 ; Ord. No. 2018-O-07B, § II, 7-17-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-O-10C , § III, 10-23-2018; Ord. No. 2018-O-11A , § II, 11-20-2018; Ord. No. 2019-O-01A , § II, 1-15-2019; Ord. No. 2019-O-10A , § II, 10-1-2019; Ord. No. 2019-O-11A , § II, 11-5-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-O-02D, § II, adopted February 6, 2018 , amended app. C in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Former app. C pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 2017-O-08I, § II, adopted September 5, 2017 . 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7. 

