CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF NASSAU BAY, TEXAS 
____________ 
CHARTER 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted, May 22, 1978 
Effective, July 22, 1978 
____________ 
Published in 1978 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF NASSAU BAY 
____________ 
Mark A. Denman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ashley Graves 
Bryce Klug 
John Mahon 
Don Matter 
Matt Prior 
Bob Warters 
Councilmen 
____________ 
Jason E. Reynolds 
City Manager 
____________ 
Dick H. Gregg, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sandra V. Ham 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
Part I of this volume contains the Charter of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, as amended, and a disposition of each enactment included herein, amending or relating to the Charter of the City. Part II contains a revision and codification of the ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City which were deemed appropriate to be included. 
Part II is an entire new codification and, as expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, supersedes all ordinances not included herein or expressly saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance. Only ordinances of a general and permanent nature prescribed for and affecting the public as a whole are included herein. Special ordinances or ordinances dealing with only a portion of the inhabitants of the City, rather than all of them, or relating to special purposes are not included herein. For an enumeration of the type of ordinances which are not included herein, see Section 3 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The source of each section is included in the history note in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 20 is 20-14. 
Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-4 and 4-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2, 4-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as Chapter 12.1. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in Section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and B. Meade White, Editor, Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to all city officers and employees for their supervision, cooperation and interest during the preparation of this Code. Special appreciation is due Mr. Howard L. Ward, City Manager, Mr. Dick Gregg, Jr., City Attorney, and Ms. Nancy Sweningson, City Secretary, for their efforts and assistance to the publisher. 
May, 1978 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 78-217 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Nassau Bay City Code; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided, and Providing for the Effective Date of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Nassau Bay, State of Texas: 
Section 1. That the Code, consisting of Chapters 1 to 20, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Nassau Bay City Code" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the city council on or before October 10, 1977, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the effective date of this ordinance, and the substantive provisions of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Nassau Bay, enacted on final passage on or before October 10, 1977, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. Resolutions of the City, not specifically mentioned, are not hereby repealed. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(b)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bond of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(c)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(d)  Any right or franchise granted by the city, whether or not all or portions of such franchises are set out in such Code; 
(e)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(f)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the State of Texas; 
(g)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(h)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes or other taxes not mentioned herein, or providing for an annual budget; 
(i)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(j)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(k)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(l)  Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations, not in conflict herewith; 
(m)  Any zoning ordinance, or any subdivision ordinance; 
(n)  Any administrative ordinance not in conflict with such Code; 
(o)  Any ordinance adopting or amending any building, electrical, gas, plumbing code, housing or any other construction code not in conflict herewith; 
(p)  Any ordinance prescribing personnel policies, procedures, or salaries and wages; 
(q)  Any ordinance prescribing rates or charges of utility companies, not included herein; 
(r)  The preambles, recitals and findings of facts contained in all ordinances included in such Code; 
(s)  Any ordinance enacted after October 10, 1977. 
Provided, this ordinance may be amended from time to time to incorporate any of the matters listed above into the Code of Ordinances, at which time said exception or exceptions will be deemed to be deleted, whether expressly done so or not. 
This ordinance shall not be construed to revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
Section 4. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), as provided in Section 1-6 of such Code. 
Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Nassau Bay City Code" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and Section 1-6 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended; unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary preserved in looseleaf form, or in such form as the city secretary may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city secretary, or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 8. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Nassau Bay to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
Section 9. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 10. That this ordinance shall become effective on the 22nd day of July, 1978. 
That the foregoing ordinance was read for the first time and passed to its second reading on this the 8th day of May, 1978. 
That the foregoing ordinance was read for the second time and passed finally on this the 22nd day of May, 1978, by the following vote: Unanimously, 7—0. 
PASSED AND APPROVED THIS the 22nd day of May, 1978. 
/s/ Richard Frutiger 
Mayor, City of 
Nassau Bay, Texas 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Nancy Sweningson 
City Secretary 
APPROVED: 
/s/ Dick H. Gregg, Jr. 
City Attorney 
CERTIFICATE 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF HARRIS 
I, the undersigned, City Secretary of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, do certify that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of Ordinance No. 78-217, passed and approved by the City Council on May 22, 1978, as same appears in the Official Records of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, of which I am the lawful custodian. 
WITNESSETH MY HAND and the Official Seal of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, this 22nd day of May, 1978. 
/s/ Nancy Sweningson 
City Secretary, City of 
Nassau Bay, Texas 
(SEAL)  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The charter, adopted at an election held on April 7, 1973, pursuant to Ord. No. 73-103, dated January 22, 1973, is set out herein as adopted. Amendatory enactments will be cited in parentheses following amended sections or subsections. Reference notes to state law herein have been added by the editor. 
 
PREAMBLE 
Effective government that protects individual freedom can best be achieved by encouraging and soliciting interest and participation by the citizens, by regulation and control of those functions essential to the general welfare, and by rejecting rules and regulations not consistent with the primary goals of the City. Accordingly, we the people of Nassau Bay, Texas, establish this Charter as the basic law of our City to provide for effective government, with latitude for our elected officials, and with safeguards to ensure the rights and general welfare of the people.  
ARTICLE I. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be of the council-manager form. The council, consisting of the mayor and councilmen elected by and responsible to the people, shall appoint a city manager, who shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of the affairs of the city.  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries of the city. 
The boundaries of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, shall be those described in the document "Description of the City Limits, City of Nassau Bay," as verified on the first day of December, 1970. These boundaries may be changed in annexation ordinances and proceedings of the city.  
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2.01. - Powers of the city. 
The city shall have all powers and rights of self government and home rule that exist now or may be granted to municipalities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. These powers and rights, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised, administered and enforced in the interest and welfare of individuals and corporations residing in or owning property within the boundaries of the city as prescribed by this charter, or in such manner as may be provided by resolution or ordinance enacted by the council in behalf of the city. 
The powers hereby conferred upon the city shall include, but not be restricted to the powers expressly conferred and permitted by chapter 147, page 307, of the Acts of the 33rd Legislature, Regular Session, enacted in 1913 pursuant to the home rule amendment of the constitution of the State of Texas known as the Enabling Act and including chapters 13 and 14 of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes of Texas as now or hereafter amended, all of which are adopted hereby, unless restricted elsewhere within this charter. 
As provided for by the state statutes, the city shall have the power: 
(A)  To fix its boundaries, to annex adjoining territory with or without the consent of the inhabitants or owners of the territory to be annexed, to acquire and own property within or outside of its corporate boundaries and to exercise the right of eminent domain when necessary to carry out powers conferred upon it by this charter. 
(B)  To cooperate with the government of the United States or any agency thereof, the government of Texas or any agency thereof, or with the government of any county, city or political subdivision for any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interests, safety, convenience and welfare of its inhabitants. 
(C)  To contract and be contracted with, to sue and be sued, to buy, sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests require. 
(D)  To lay out, open, establish, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleyways, sidewalks, parks, squares, public places, water mains, waterways, bridges, wharves, docks and regulate the use thereof, and require removal of all obstructions or encroachments of every nature and character upon said public streets, sidewalks or other public property. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79)  
Sec. 2.02. - Cost of improvements. 
The cost of development or improvement of streets or water and sewer lines and other improvements as appropriate may be paid partly by assessments levied as a lien against property abutting thereon and against the owners thereof, and such assessments may be levied in any amount and under any procedure not prohibited by state law. 
State Law reference— Street improvements and assessments, V.T.C.S. art. 1105b.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Selection and term of office. 
The legislative and governing body of the city shall be the council of the City of Nassau Bay and shall consist of a mayor and six (6) councilmen. 
(A)  The mayor and councilmen shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large for a two (2) year term. Each councilman shall occupy a position on the council, such positions being numbered 1 through 6. 
(B)  Each odd numbered year, three (3) councilmen shall be elected to fill positions 1, 3 and 5. Each even numbered year, the mayor and three (3) councilmen shall be elected with the councilmen filling positions 2, 4, and 6. 
(C)  No person shall be elected to council more than four (4) consecutive times.  
Sec. 3.02. - Qualification of members. 
The mayor and each councilman shall be a resident of the City of Nassau Bay, a qualified voter of the State of Texas, and shall have been a resident of the City of Nassau Bay for at least a year immediately preceding his election.  
Sec. 3.03. - Council to be judge of election and qualifications. 
The council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members.  
Sec. 3.04. - Remuneration. 
Members of the council shall serve without salary; however, they shall be entitled to reimbursement of expenses incurred in the performance of their official council duties. Reimbursement may take the form of a periodic allowance established by ordinance.  
Sec. 3.05. - Mayor and mayor pro-tem. 
The mayor shall be the official head of the city government. He shall preside at all meetings of the council, shall have a vote on all council actions, and shall, when authorized by the council, sign all ordinances, resolutions, and other official documents. He shall perform such other duties consistent with this charter or as may be imposed upon him by council. He shall not have the power of veto. 
The mayor pro-tem shall be a councilman elected by the council at the first regular council meeting following each regular city election. The mayor pro-tem shall act as mayor during the disability or absence of the mayor or if the mayor refuses to act, and in this capacity shall have the rights conferred upon the mayor. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79)  
Sec. 3.06. - Vacancies, forfeiture, filling of vacancies. 
(A)  Vacancies: The office of a councilman, mayor or mayor pro-tem shall become vacant upon his death, acceptance of his resignation by council, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, or forfeiture of his office. 
(B)  Forfeiture of office: A councilman or the mayor shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Fails to possess the qualifications for the office prescribed by this charter or by law; 
(2)  Violates any express prohibition of this charter, or fails to perform any duties imposed upon him by the charter; 
(3)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular council meetings without being excused by the council. 
(C)  Filling of vacancies: A vacancy in the council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, at the next regular election following not less than sixty (60) days after the occurrence of the vacancy; but the council by a majority vote of all its remaining members shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the person elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term takes office. If the council fails to make such an appointment within thirty (30) days following the occurrence of the vacancy, a special election shall be called to fill the vacancy until the expiration of the regular term. The special election shall be governed by the provisions of Article V of this charter, and shall be held on the next uniform election date following not less than sixty (60) days following occurrence of the vacancy. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79; Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 1, approved 5-6-89)  
Sec. 3.07. - Powers of the council. 
All powers of the city shall be vested in the council, except as otherwise provided by law or this charter. The council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed upon the city by law.  
Sec. 3.08. - Prohibitions. 
(A)  Holding other office: Except where authorized by law, no mayor or councilman shall hold any other city office or city employment during his term as mayor or councilman, and no former mayor or councilman shall hold any compensated appointive city office or city employment until one (1) year after the expiration of his term as mayor or councilman. 
(B)  Dictating appointments and removals: Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the city manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager information pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(C)  Interfering with administration: Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 3.14, the council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor its members, including the mayor, shall give orders to or reprimand any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. O2019-784, 4-8-19)  
Sec. 3.09. - Meetings of council. 
The council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the business of the city and its citizens. The council shall fix, by ordinance, the date, time and place of regular meetings. 
All meetings shall be open to the public, except for those purposes where the law specifically authorizes executive sessions. 
Special meetings of the council shall be held on the call of the mayor or of three (3) or more council members and, whenever practicable, upon no less than twelve (12) hours notice to each member. 
State Law reference— Texas Open Meetings Law, V.A.C.S. art. 6252—17.  
Sec. 3.10. - Rules of procedure. 
The council shall, by ordinance, determine its own rules and order of business and the rules shall provide that citizens of the city shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting with regard to any matter under consideration. The council shall provide for minutes being taken and recorded for all meetings, and such minutes shall be a public record. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and shall be recorded in the minutes. Four (4) council members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business. No action of the council, except as provided in sections 3.06 and 3.12, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by an affirmative vote of four (4) or more of the members of the council present. 
The mayor will establish the agenda for each council meeting. Any item requested by two (2) or more councilmen or by the city manager shall be placed on the agenda by the city secretary. The city secretary shall prepare the agenda, which shall be posted at least three (3) days prior to the stated time of the meeting. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79)  
Sec. 3.11. - Passage of ordinances in general. 
(A)  Form: The council shall legislate by ordinance only, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be, "Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Nassau Bay; State of Texas." Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in the written or printed form required for adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, but general appropriation ordinances may contain various subjects and accounts for which monies are to be appropriated. After adoption, an ordinance shall not be amended or repealed except by the adoption of another ordinance amending or repealing the original ordinance. 
(B)  Procedure: Any member of council may offer any ordinance in writing that has been placed on the agenda of a regular council meeting. Copies of proposed ordinances, in the form required for adoption, shall be furnished to members of council before first reading. Copies of the proposed ordinance, in the form required for adoption, shall be available at the city offices and shall be furnished to citizens, upon request to the city secretary, before first reading and, if amended, shall be available and furnished in the amended form for as long as the proposed ordinance is before council. 
A proposed ordinance, except an emergency and/or a budget/tax ordinance, shall be read at two (2) council meetings, with at least two (2) weeks elapsing between each reading. A proposed ordinance may be amended at any reading, but any ordinance amended in substance shall automatically be placed again on first reading at a subsequent meeting. Amendments involving such items as typographical, grammatical or spelling changes or renumbering of sections shall not be considered substantive. At any reading of a proposed ordinance persons interested shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Emergency ordinances shall be passed in accordance with section 3.12 and budget/tax ordinances in accordance with Articles VII and VIII. 
(C)  Effective date: Every ordinance shall become effective upon adoption, or at any later time specified in the ordinance, except that every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture shall become effective only after having been published, in its entirety or in summary form once in the official city newspaper. 
(D)  Reading: The reading aloud of the title and caption of the ordinance shall suffice as a reading, provided printed copies of the ordinance, in the form required for adoption, are in front of all members of council and a reasonable number of additional copies are available to citizens present at the meeting. If two (2) councilmen request that the ordinance be read in its entirety, it must be so read. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 2, approved 5-6-89)  
Sec. 3.12. - Emergency ordinances. 
The council may adopt emergency ordinances only to meet public emergencies affecting life, health, property, or the public peace. In particular such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant or renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. Neither shall they authorize the borrowing of money, except as provided in Article VII. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for ordinances, except that it shall be plainly designated in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance can be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of council present shall be required for adoption. After adoption, the ordinance shall be published as required for other adopted ordinances and shall become effective in the same manner. Every emergency ordinance so adopted, except one authorizing the borrowing of money as described herein, shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first day following the day on which it became effective, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance.  
Sec. 3.13. - Authentication, recording, codification, printing, distribution. 
(A)  Authentication and recording: The city secretary shall authenticate by signature and seal in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the council. All ordinances shall be numbered consecutively in the order in which adopted. This record shall be open for public inspection. 
(B)  Codification: At least every five (5) years, the council shall provide for the preparation of a codification of all general ordinances of the city. Every general ordinance enacted subsequent to such codification shall be enacted as an amendment to the code. For the purposes of this section, general ordinances shall be deemed to be those ordinances of a permanent or continuing nature which affect the residents of the city at large. The codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with this charter and any amendment thereto and with appropriate references to state statutes and constitution, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the Nassau Bay City Code and shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of such code or any part thereof being published in any newspaper. The caption, descriptive clause, and other formal parts of the ordinances of the city may be omitted without affecting the validity of such ordinances when they are published as a code. Copies of the code shall be furnished to city officers, placed in city offices and a public library designated by the council for free reference and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price fixed by the council. 
(C)  Printing of ordinances and resolutions: The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be distributed free or sold to the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Nassau Bay City Code and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for integration therein. 
A copy of each ordinance and resolution shall be placed in city offices for free reference. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Props. 3, 4, approved 5-6-89)  
Sec. 3.14. - Investigations by the city council. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3.08(C) of this charter the council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine which shall have been set by ordinance.  
Sec. 3.15. - Audits and examination of city books and accounts. 
The city council shall cause an independent annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the city. At the close of each fiscal year a complete audit shall be made by a certified public accounting firm, who shall be selected by the city council, and such audit shall include a recapitulation of all audits made during the course of each fiscal year. A report of fiscal issues and/or other significant problems found during the course of the audit shall be reported immediately to the city manager and a duplicate of the report sent to the mayor and members of city council within seventy-two (72) hours. A final report shall be filed with the city council for review and acceptance, and subsequently shall be available for public inspection and shall be made a part of the archives of the city. Notification shall be published in the official newspaper that the audit report is available for inspection in the city offices. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 1, approved 5-9-94)  
Sec. 3.16. - Bonds for city employees. 
The council shall require bonds of all municipal officers and employees who receive or pay out any monies of the city. The amount of such bonds shall be determined by the council and the cost thereof shall be borne by the city.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 4.01. - City manager. 
(A)  Appointment and qualifications: The council shall, by majority vote of the entire council, appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and who shall be responsible to the council for administration of all affairs of the city. The city manager shall be appointed solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the city; however, he shall become a resident of the city within six (6) months after appointment unless otherwise specifically excused by the council. 
(B)  Compensation: The city manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the council according to his qualifications and experience. He shall be bonded at city expense. 
(C)  Term and removal: The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The council may remove the city manager from office by majority vote of the entire council. 
(D)  Acting city manager. The city manager shall, within thirty (30) days after taking office, and at any subsequent time thereafter, designate by letter filed with the city secretary an alternate to perform the duties of city manager in the case of his absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another person to serve until the city manager shall return or his disability shall cease. No member of the council shall serve as acting city manager. 
(E)  Duties of the city manager: The city manager shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint, and when he deems necessary for the welfare of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Assure that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers and employees subject to his direction or supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(4)  Attend all council meetings and have the right to take part in discussions; however, he may not vote; 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the council the annual budget and capital program and administer the budget as adopted by the council; 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the council an annual report on the finance and administrative activities of the city, as of the end of each fiscal year. The report of independent annual audit, as required elsewhere [2] in this charter, shall be incorporated into the annual report submitted by the city manager; 
(7)  Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable or necessary; 
(8)  Make reports as the council may require concerning the operations of the city departments, offices or agencies subject to his direction or supervision; and 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the council and not inconsistent with this charter. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 2, approved 5-9-94) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Audit reports, § 3.15. 
 
Sec. 4.02. - Municipal court. 
(A)  Establishment: The council shall establish and cause to be maintained a municipal court, for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all the powers and duties as are now or may be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(B)  Judges of the court: The municipal court shall be presided over by a presiding judge. 
(C)  Appointment; removal; qualifications: The presiding judge and the associate judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years. The appointments of judges may be terminated for just cause after notice and hearing by the council. Each judge appointed shall be an attorney in good standing who is licensed to practice law in the State of Texas, who has had at least two (2) years['] experience as a practicing attorney. The judges of the municipal court shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the council and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the council, the premium to be paid by the city. 
(D)  Temporary judge: A temporary judge shall be appointed by the council to sit for the presiding judge, or for the associate judge, of the municipal court while such judge or judges are temporarily unable to act for any reason. Such temporary judge shall possess the same qualifications of the judge for whom he is sitting. Any temporary judge shall have all of the powers and duties of the judge for whom he is sitting while acting. 
(E)  Clerk of the court: The city manager shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court, and such deputy clerks as the council may deem necessary. The clerks shall be bonded at city expense, and shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the council. 
(F)  Powers of the clerk: The clerk and deputy clerks of the municipal court shall administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court, and perform all acts usual and necessary by a clerk of the court. 
(G)  Fines and penalties: All monies received as court-imposed fines or penalties shall be paid into the general fund of the city treasury. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79; Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Props. 5—7, approved 5-6-89; Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 3, approved 5-9-94; Res. No. R2014-2019, 11-18-14, Prop. 2, approved 11-18-14) 
State Law reference— For relevant provisions, see V.A.C.S. art. 1195 et seq.  
Sec. 4.03. - City secretary. 
(A)  Appointment: The city manager shall appoint, as provided in section 4.01(E) of the charter, and with the approval of the city council, a city secretary. 
(B)  Duties of the city secretary: The city secretary or deputy shall be required to: 
(1)  Give notice of, and attend all official public meetings of the council; 
(2)  Record the minutes and proceedings of all official public meetings of the council; provided, however, that only the title and caption of duly enacted ordinances shall be recorded in the minutes; 
(3)  Act as custodian of all official records of the council; 
(4)  Hold and maintain the seal of the City of Nassau Bay and affix this seal to all appropriate documents; 
(5)  Authenticate by signature and seal, and record in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances and resolutions of the city; and 
(6)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager, this charter, or the laws of the State of Texas and not inconsistent with other provisions of this charter. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Props. 4, 5, approved 5-9-94)  
Sec. 4.04. - City attorney. 
(A)  Appointment and qualifications: The city manager shall appoint, as provided in section 4.01(E) of this charter, and with the approval of the council, a competent and duly qualified and licensed attorney practicing in the State of Texas who shall serve as the city attorney. 
(B)  Duties of the city attorney: The city attorney shall be required to: 
(1)  Serve as the legal advisor to the council and to the city manager; 
(2)  Represent the city in litigation and legal proceedings; and 
(3)  Review and provide opinions as requested by the council or by the city manager on contracts, legal instruments, and ordinances of the city. 
(C)  Limitation: This section shall not be a constraint upon the right of the council to retain special counsel at any time that the council may deem necessary and appropriate.  
Sec. 4.05. - Administrative departments, offices and agencies. 
(A)  General provisions: 
(1)  The council may create or establish departments, offices or agencies in addition to those provided for by this charter and may prescribe the functions and duties of such departments, offices and agencies. 
(2)  The council may abolish, redesignate or combine any of the departments, offices or agencies it has established. 
(3)  The council shall take none of the foregoing actions until the recommendations of the city manager shall have been heard by the council. 
(B)  Director and supervision: Except as provided in section 4.02 of this charter, all departments, offices and agencies of the city shall be under the direction and supervision of the city manager and shall be administered by officers appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. The city manager may, with the consent of the council, serve as the head of one or more city departments, offices or agencies or appoint one person as the head of two (2) or more of them. 
(C)  City assessor-collector: The city manager shall appoint, as provided in section 4.01(E) of this charter, a person who shall serve as the assessor-collector for the city, and whose functions shall be those usual to the office; provided, however, that the council may prescribe such additional functions as may be appropriate for the city.  
Sec. 4.06. - Boards, commissions and committees. 
The council shall create, establish or appoint, as may be required by law, circumstance, or this charter, those boards, commissions and committees which are deemed necessary to carry out the functions and obligations of the city. The council shall prescribe the purpose, composition, function, duties, accountability, and tenure of each board, commission and committee, where such are not prescribed by law or this charter.  
Sec. 4.07. - Oath of office. 
Every appointive officer of the city, and every member appointed to a board, commission or committee under the provisions of this charter, before entering upon the duties of the office shall take and subscribe to the appropriate oath or affirmation prescribed in Article XI of this charter. Each such oath or affirmation shall be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary.  
Sec. 4.08. - Personnel system. 
(A)  Merit principle: Appointments and promotions of all city employees and appointive administrative officers shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence. 
(B)  Personnel rules: Personnel rules shall be prepared by the city manager and presented to the council which may by ordinance adopt them with or without amendment. The adopted rules shall govern the equitable administration of the personnel system of the city and shall provide for the following requirements, among others: 
(1)  A pay and benefit plan for all city positions; 
(2)  A plan for working hours, attendance regulation, and provision for sick and vacation leave; 
(3)  Procedures for the hearing and adjudication of grievances; and 
(4)  Other practices and procedures necessary to the equitable administration of the personnel system of the city. 
(C)  Any city employee may make a written request to the council for a review concerning a grievance, provided he has completed all steps of the grievance procedure outlined in the Personnel Policy and Drug Control Policy. Participation of an employee in such a discussion shall not reflect unfavorably on the employee's standing, performance, loyalty or desirability to the public service and shall be without fear of reprisal or recrimination. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 6, approved 5-9-94; Res. No. R2014-2011, Prop. 3, 8-11-14, approved 11-18-14)  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 5.01. - City elections. 
(A)  Regular elections: The regular city elections will be held annually on the first Saturday in May. The council shall fix the place for holding such an election. 
(B)  Special elections: The council may, by resolution, order a special election for ordinances, bond issues, charter amendments, filling vacancies in an existing elected office, or any other reason the council deems necessary; the council will fix the place and date for holding this type of election. 
(C)  Publicizing city elections: It is the responsibility of the council to inform the voters as to the time, place, date, purpose and filing period for the potential candidates, for the upcoming city election, as prescribed in the statutes of the State of Texas. The provisions for absentee balloting shall also be publicized at this time. Sample ballots shall be posted outside the city offices and shall be published in the official city newspaper as prescribed in the statutes of the State of Texas. 
(D)  Conduct and regulations of city elections: All city elections shall be governed by the constitution of the State of Texas, general laws of the state, this charter, and ordinances of the city, in the order named. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the election officials appointed and approved by the council. Sample ballots identical to the voting format for the specific election shall be posted in the voting place for the benefit of the voters. 
(E)  Voter qualification: All duly qualified electors under the laws of the State of Texas, who are residents of the city, shall be qualified to vote in any city election. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Props. 8, 9, approved 5-6-89) 
State Law reference— Date, time and place of elections, V.A.T.S. Election Code, art. 2.01; election precincts, art. 2.05; election judges, art. 3.01(b); voter qualifications, art. 5.01 et seq.; notice of elections, art. 4.06.  
Sec. 5.02. - Filing for office. 
(A)  Eligibility to file for office: Each candidate for an elective position in the City of Nassau Bay shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The candidate shall possess the qualifications prescribed in Article III, section 3.02. 
(2)  The candidate shall not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the city. 
(3)  No candidate may file for more than one office or position per election. 
(B)  Procedure for filing for office: Any qualified person (see section 5.02(A)) who desires to become a candidate for election shall file an application with the city secretary. Such an application shall clearly designate the office and position to which the candidate seeks election, and shall contain a sworn statement by the candidate that he or she is fully qualified under the provisions of this charter to hold the office sought. 
(C)  Councilman mayoral candidate: Any councilman who becomes a candidate for Mayor in a regular election shall vacate his position as councilman, if elected, upon the canvassing of the results of the election. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79; Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Props. 10, 11, approved 5-6-89; Ord. No. O2019-784, 4-8-19) 
State Law reference— Application of candidate, V.A.T.S. Election Code, art. 13.53.  
Sec. 5.03. - Official ballots. 
(A)  Candidates' names on ballots: The names of all candidates who have filed for office shall be printed on the official ballots without party designation. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates for each office or position shall be determined by lot in a drawing to be held under the supervision of the city secretary. 
(B)  Absentee balloting: Voting shall be governed by the election code of the State of Texas. 
(C)  Write-in votes: Provisions for write-in votes shall be governed by the election code of the State of Texas. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 12, approved 5-6-89) 
State Law reference— Official ballots, V.A.T.S. Election Code, art. 6.01 et seq.; absentee ballots, art. 5.05.  
Sec. 5.04. - Determination of election results. 
(A)  Canvassing: The returns of every municipal election shall be delivered by the election judges to the city secretary not later than twenty-four (24) hours after the closing of the polls. Returns of the elections, general and special, shall be presented to the council at their next meeting following the election, at which time the council shall canvass and declare the results of the election, which shall be recorded in the minutes of this meeting. 
(B)  Majority rules: The candidate for each place on the ballot who shall have received the majority of votes cast for such place shall be declared elected. In the event that no candidate for a designated office receives a majority of the votes cast for that place in the regular or special election, a runoff election shall be held between the candidates who received the two (2) greatest numbers of votes for such place. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 13, approved 5-6-89) 
State Law reference— See V.A.T.S. Election Code, art. 8.29a.  
Sec. 5.05. - Taking office. 
The city secretary shall promptly notify all persons elected to office. A candidate who is elected in a regular, special or runoff city election shall, after taking the oath of office as prescribed in Article XI, take office, and enter upon his duties at the next council meeting after the date of the election.  
ARTICLE VI. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 
 
Sec. 6.01. - General authority. 
(A)  Initiative: The qualified voters of the city shall have power to propose ordinances to the council, and, if the council fails to adopt an ordinance so proposed without any change in substance, to adopt or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of city officers or employees. Such initiative power may be used to enact a new ordinance, or to repeal or to amend sections of an existing ordinance. 
(B)  Referendum: The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the council of any adopted ordinance and, if the council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes. 
(C)  Recall: The qualified voters shall have the power to recall any elected official of the city on grounds of incompetency, noncompliance with this charter, misconduct or malfeasance in office. Such power shall be exercised by filing with the city secretary a petition, signed by currently qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least fifteen (15) per cent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election, demanding the removal of such elected official. The recall petition must specifically state each ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which he is charged. 
The provisions regulating initiation, certification, amendment, withdrawal of initiative and referendum petitions and submission to voters shall apply to recall petitions.  
Sec. 6.02. - Commencement of proceedings; petitioners' committee; affidavit. 
Any five (5) qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings by filing with the city secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioner's committee is filed the city secretary shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.  
Sec. 6.03. - Petitions. 
(A)  Number of signatures: Initiative and referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least fifteen (15) per cent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election. 
(B)  Form and content: All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be indelible and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(C)  Affidavit of circulator: Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered. 
(D)  Time for filing petitions: Referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the council of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. Initiative petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after issuance of the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee; additional time as specified in section 6.04 shall be allowed for amending petitions. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 7, approved 5-9-94)  
Sec. 6.04. - Procedure after filing. 
(A)  Certificate of secretary; amendment: Within ten (10) days after the petition is filed, the city secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the city secretary within five (5) days after receiving the copy of this certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (B) and (C) of section 6.03, and within five (5) days after it is filed the city secretary shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request council review under subsection (B) of this section within the time required, the city secretary shall promptly present his certificate to the council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(B)  Council review: If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within five (5) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the council. The council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the council's determination shall then be final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(C)  Court review; new petition: A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.  
Sec. 6.05. - Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. 
When a referendum petition is filed with the city secretary, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or 
(3)  The council repeals the ordinance, or 
(4)  Upon the certification of the election results by the election officials.  
Sec. 6.06. - Action on petitions. 
(A)  Action by council: When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative ordinance in the manner prescribed for enacting ordinances or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) days or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the city. 
(B)  Submission to voters: The vote of the city on a proposed or referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not more than one hundred and twenty (120) days from the date of the final council vote thereon. If no regular city election is to be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the council shall provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same time as such regular election, except that the council may in its discretion provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls and shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the city within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election. 
(C)  Withdrawal of petitions: An initiative or referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city by filing with the city secretary a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated.  
Sec. 6.07. - Results of election. 
(A)  Initiative: If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the council. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(B)  Referendum: If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results.  
Sec. 6.08. - Results of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against removal of the elected official named on the ballot, he shall continue in office. If the majority of the votes cast at the election be for the removal of the elected official named on the ballot, the city council shall immediately declare his office vacant and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this charter for the filling of vacancies.  
Sec. 6.09. - Limitation on recall. 
No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official within six (6) months after he takes office, and no elected official shall be subjected to more than one recall election during a term of office.  
Sec. 6.10. - Public hearing. 
The elected official whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the city council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.  
Sec. 6.11. - Failure of city council to call an election. 
In case all of the requirements of this charter shall have been met and the city council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge other duties imposed upon said council by the provisions of this charter with reference to such recall, then the county judge of Harris County, Texas, shall discharge any such duties herein provided to be discharged by the city secretary or by the council. In addition, any qualified voter in the city may seek judicial relief in the district court of Harris County, Texas, to have any of the provisions of this charter pertaining to recall carried out by the proper official.  
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end the last day of September. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.  
Sec. 7.02. - Submission of budget. 
On or before the fifth day of August of each year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year and the budget message. The council shall review the proposed budget and make any appropriate changes prior to publishing the final budget.  
Sec. 7.03. - Budget. 
(A)  Budget message: A budget message explaining the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs shall be submitted with the creation of the budget book. It shall outline the proposed financial programs of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, the capital program, and capital projects for five (5) fiscal years succeeding the budget year. It shall describe the important features of the budget and indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues including the reasons for such changes. It shall also summarize the city's debt position and contain such other material as the City Manager deems desirable. 
(B)  Budget scope: The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities and, except as required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the city manager deems desirable or the council may require. The budget shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and budgeted income and expenditure for the preceding fiscal year; budgeted and estimated income and expenditure for the current fiscal year; actual income and expenditure of the current fiscal year up to the time of preparation of the budget; and estimated income and expenditure for the next fiscal year. The total of the proposed expenditures for the budgeted year shall not exceed the total of the estimated income and surplus. 
(C)  Content: The budget shall contain in separate sections the following: 
(1)  A clear general summary of contents; 
(2)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of all funds, listed and itemized individually; 
(3)  An analysis and itemization of all estimated income of the city from surplus, miscellaneous income and taxes with miscellaneous income subclassified by source; 
(4)  Tax rates and collections for the preceding five (5) years; 
(5)  An itemized statement of expenditures for pending and proposed new capital projects. Included shall be the amounts appropriated from the budget, the amounts to be raised by issuance of bonds, and the amount required for down payment; 
(6)  The amount required for sinking funds, for maturing serial bonds, and for interest on the city's debts; 
(7)  The total amount of the city's outstanding debts, with a schedule of maturity on bond issues in an attachment; 
(8)  A detailed estimate of the operating expenses of each department, office or agency; 
(9)  Statement of estimated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned and operated by the city. A subsidiary budget for each utility shall be included giving details of income and expenditures; 
(10)  Such other information as is required by council or deemed desirable by the city manager; 
(11)  A contingency fund may be included not to exceed five (5) per cent of the general fund proposed expenditure; and 
(12)  Such dedicated reserves as may be required. 
(D)  Public notice and hearing: The council shall post in the city office a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public; and 
(2)  The time and place for a public hearing on the budget. 
(E)  Council action: 
(1)  The council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted at the time and place so advertised or at another time and place with seventy-two (72) hours['] notification. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either for or against any item of the proposed budget. 
(2)  After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. 
(3)  The council shall adopt the budget by ordinance on one reading. Adoption of the budget will require an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire council. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. 
(F)  Failure to adopt: If the council fails to adopt the budget by the twentieth day of September, the amounts appropriated for operation during the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax normally approved as part of the budget adoption will be set such that the tax receipts for the budgeted year shall equal the tax receipts of the current fiscal year. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Props. 14—16, approved 5-6-89; Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 8, approved 5-9-94; Ord. No. O2019-784, 4-8-19)  
Sec. 7.04. - Amendments after adoption. 
(A)  Supplemental appropriations: If during the fiscal year the manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council may carry the excess into the next fiscal year or by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations to retire indebtedness or to fund emergency appropriations as described in section 7.04(B). 
(B)  Emergency appropriations: To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may require emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
(C)  Reduction of appropriations: If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the city manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action that it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit. 
(D)  Transfer of appropriations: At any time during the fiscal year the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or agency. The council may require its approval of these transfers within departments above a limit established by the council. Upon written request by the City Manager, the council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another. 
(E)  Limitations: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance. 
(F)  Effective date: The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O2019-784, 4-8-19)  
Sec. 7.05. - Capital program. 
The city manager shall submit a five (5) year capital program as an attachment to the annual budget. The capital program shall include comments by the city manager. The program as submitted shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five (5) fiscal years succeeding the budget year, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
(Res. No. R2014-2011, Prop. 4, 8-11-14, approved 11-18-14)  
Sec. 7.06. - Public records. 
Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records and shall be made available to the public upon request.  
Sec. 7.07. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three (3) years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.  
Sec. 7.08. - Borrowing. 
(A)  The right to borrow: The city shall have the right and power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem to be in the public interest. 
(B)  General obligation bonds: The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by law, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds previously issued. 
(C)  Revenue bonds: The city shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by law, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from any or all city properties or interest pledged, or the income from the city properties, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. 
(D)  Borrowing in anticipation of property tax: In any budget year, the council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for the same year, whether levied or to be levied. Notes may be issued for periods not exceeding one (1) year and must be retired by the end of the budget year in which issued.  
Sec. 7.09. - Purchasing. 
The council may by ordinance confer upon the city manager general authority to contract for expenditures without further approval of the council for all budgeted items not exceeding limits set by council. All contracts for expenditures involving more than the set limits must be expressly approved in advance by the council. All contracts or purchases involving more than the limits set by council shall be let to the lowest bidder whose submittal is among those most responsive to the needs of the city after there has been opportunity for competitive bidding as provided by law or ordinance; provided that the council, or city manager in such cases as he is authorized to contract for the city, shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
Emergency contracts as authorized by law may be negotiated by the council, or city manager if given authority by the council, without competitive bidding. Such emergency shall be declared by the city manager and approved by council or may be declared by council. A report outlining the nature and timing of the emergency including a copy of the contract(s) and names of individuals involved shall be filed with the city within seventy-two (72) hours for inclusion in the financial records of the city. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 9, approved 5-9-94) 
State Law reference— Bids on public works contracts, V.A.C.S. art. 2368a.  
Sec. 7.10. - Administration of budget. 
(A)  Payments and obligations prohibited: No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the city manager or his designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation that sufficient funds are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal. Such action shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligations, and he shall also be liable to the city for any amount so paid. However, this prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, time warrants, certificates of indebtedness, certificates of obligations, or grants from other governmental bodies, or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance. All disbursements above a limit set by council shall require two (2) authorized signatures. The council shall designate those authorized to sign the disbursements. 
(B)  Financial reports: The city manager shall submit to the council each month a report covering the financial condition of the city. 
(C)  Annual audit: An annual audit shall be performed by a competent certified public accounting firm as provided in Article III.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TAX ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Tax assessor. 
A registered Texas assessor shall be appointed by the City Manager. The assessor shall calculate the effective tax rate, and represent the City in any matters pertaining to assessment with the appraisal review board (ARB) or appraisal district. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 17, approved 5-6-89; Ord. No. O2019-784, 4-8-19) 
Editor's note— Proposition 17, approved at an election held May 6, 1989, as set out in Res. No. R89-985, adopted May 8, 1989, deleted former § 8.01 and enacted a new § 8.01 as set out herein. Formerly, § 8.01 pertained to the division of tax administration and derived from the charter adopted April 7, 1973.  
Sec. 8.02. - Tax collector. 
At least one (1) "registered Texas collector" shall be employed by the city to collect taxes and maintain the tax records according to the state property tax laws and codes. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 18, approved 5-6-89) 
Editor's note— Proposition 18, approved at an election held May 6, 1989, as set out in Res. No. R89-985, adopted May 8, 1989, deleted former § 8.02 and enacted a new § 8.02. Former § 8.02 pertained to the power of the city to tax and derived from the charter adopted April 7, 1973.  
Secs. 8.03—8.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Proposition 19, approved at an election held May 6, 1989, as set out in Res. No. R89-985, adopted May 8, 1989, deleted former §§ 8.03—8.09 in their entirety. The deleted provisions pertained to assessment of taxes, tax liens, the board of equalization, etc., and derived from the charter adopted April 7, 1973.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Powers of the city. 
In addition to the city's power granted elsewhere in this charter, the city shall have power to buy, own, sell, construct, lease, maintain and operate public service within or without the city limits and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such service operation within or without the city limits. The city shall have such regulatory and other power as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. Public service shall include utilities or service to the public of every character.  
Sec. 9.02. - Power to grant franchise. 
The council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew and extend all franchises of a public service operating within the city and, with consent of the franchisee, to amend the same. No franchise shall be granted for a term of more than fifty (50) years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension.  
Sec. 9.03. - Ordinance granting franchise. 
Any ordinance granting, renewing, extending or amending a franchise shall not take effect until at least twenty-eight (28) days after its final passage. Within seven (7) days following the first reading of the ordinance, a summary of the ordinance shall be published one time in the official city newspaper, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the prospective franchisee. No franchise shall be exclusive.  
Sec. 9.04. - Transfer of franchise. 
No public service franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the council as expressed by ordinance. The term "transferable," as used herein, shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the franchisee from pleading said franchise assets as security for a valid debt or mortgage.  
Sec. 9.05. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
Franchises granted by the city shall be considered to be of no value in considering: 
(A)  The rates and/or charges for utilities or service within the city; and 
(B)  The compensation to be paid by the city for public service property which the city may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.  
Sec. 9.06. - Right of regulation. 
In granting public service franchises or in amending, renewing or extending them, the city shall have the following rights: 
(A)  To repeal the franchise by ordinance for failure of the franchisee to comply with its terms. Included is failure of the franchisee to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed. This power shall be exercised only after the franchisee has been given due written notice and opportunity for hearing, and a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days from hearing date to correct such failures. 
(B)  To require such expansion, extension, enlargement and improvements of facilities and services as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public, and maintenance of the facilities and service at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(C)  To impose reasonable regulation of service and quality of the product for the safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. 
(D)  To require the keeping of accounts in such form as will accurately reflect the cost of the property of each franchisee which is used and useful in rendering its service to the public and the expenses, receipts and profits of all kinds of such franchisees. It shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph if the franchisee keeps its accounts in accordance with the uniform system established by any federal or state agency for their service. 
(E)  To require the franchisee to restore at the franchisee's expense, all public or private property to a condition equally as good as or better than before disturbed by construction, repair or removal. 
(F)  To require every franchisee to furnish within a reasonable time to the city, without cost to the city, a general map, with updates outlining the location, character, size, length and terminals of all facilities of such franchisee in, over and under ground of property in the city and to provide detailed information on request. 
(G)  The city shall have the right to set rates of city and/or privately owned public services that are not set by state or federal law. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 10, approved 5-9-94) 
State Law reference— Utility Regulatory Act, V.A.C.S. art. 1446c.  
Sec. 9.07. - Extensions. 
All extensions of service within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the service, and shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this charter. The extension of the service shall be considered as part of the original grant and shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
Sec. 9.08. - Regulation of rates. 
(A)  Council, upon receiving a request from a public service desiring a change in rates, charges or fares, shall call a meeting for consideration of such change. 
(B)  The public service shall show the necessity for such change by establishing by clear, competent and convincing evidence: 
(1)  Cost of its investment properly allocable to service in the city; 
(2)  Amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with the rendering of such service; and 
(3)  Any additional evidence required by council. 
(C)  Council may, if not satisfied with the sufficiency of the evidence furnished by the public service, select and employ rate consultants, auditors and attorneys to investigate and, if necessary, litigate the requests for changes in rates, charges or fares. The public service shall reimburse the city for its reasonable and necessary expenses so incurred. 
(D)  The public service may, if not satisfied with the rate, charge or fare ordered by council, make a motion for rehearing within twenty (20) days of the entry of such order. Such motion will be deemed over-ruled if not acted upon by council within thirty (30) days, provided that council may by resolution extend such time for action on the motion to a maximum of sixty (60) days. 
(E)  No public service may institute legal action contesting such rate, charge or fare fixed by council until such public service has exhausted all remedies provided herein.  
Sec. 9.09. - Accounts of city owned public services. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public service owned or operated by the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of each such city ownership and operation. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the city of each public service owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered to any other city or governmental agency.  
ARTICLE X. - PLANNING 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Planning commission. 
There shall be a planning commission whose responsibilities are to accomplish the city planning and zoning functions to effect the orderly and desired growth, development and beautification of the city. The commission shall formulate and recommend to the city manager a comprehensive master plan and shall consult with other city departments regarding planning. The commission shall recommend any proposed zoning changes to council and shall act in an advisory capacity to the council on all matters affecting the development of the city. Such advisory activities include[,] but are not limited to [,] the assessment of specific use requests and architectural review of development plans for commercial ventures. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 11, approved 5-9-94)  
Sec. 10.02. - Organization, selection and term of office. 
The planning commission shall be composed of seven (7) members appointed by the council. Members shall serve for a term of two (2) years with four (4) members being appointed with terms beginning on January first of odd-numbered years and three (3) members appointed with terms beginning on January first of even-numbered years. Vacancies occurring in the commission, for whatever reason, shall be filled within sixty (60) days by appointment by the council, for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member of the planning commission shall hold concurrently another salaried or elected city office. Three (3) successive unexcused absences from the commission meetings, after a minimum five (5) day notice served by mail of the time, place and agenda of such meetings, shall terminate membership on the city planning commission. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary expense incurred as a result of their work. The planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership and shall have the power to make rules, regulations and by-laws for its own government, which shall be subject to approval by the council. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 12, approved 5-9-94)  
Sec. 10.03. - Comprehensive master plan. 
The planning commission shall formulate a comprehensive master plan for the development of the city, containing the commission's recommendations for growth, development and beautification of the city. This plan shall be updated at least every five (5) years and shall contain the planning considerations for the period of ten (10) years. This plan shall be forwarded to the city manager who shall submit it to the council with his recommendations thereon. The council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed comprehensive plan, or modification thereof, and shall thereafter adopt it by resolution with or without amendment. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Props. 20, 21, approved 5-6-89; Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 13, approved 5-9-94; Res. No. R2014-2011, Prop. 5, 8-11-14, approved 11-18-14)  
Sec. 10.04. - Plats and building codes. 
The planning commission shall approve or disapprove plats of proposed subdivisions submitted in accordance with city ordinances as adopted or hereafter amended. The commission shall recommend to the council, amendments, extensions or revisions of the building code, which shall include the minimum standards of construction for building, plumbing and wiring.  
Sec. 10.05. - Board of adjustment. 
The council shall appoint a board of adjustment which shall have the power to hear and determine appeals from the refusal of building permits, appeals resulting from administrative decisions by city building inspectors, and to permit exception to or variations from the zoning regulations in cases or situations in accordance with the principles, conditions and procedures specified in the zoning ordinance. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 14, approved 5-9-94)  
Sec. 10.06. - Organization, selection and term of office. 
The board of adjustment shall be composed of five (5) members and four (4) alternate members appointed by the council. Members and alternate members shall serve for a term of two (2) years with three (3) members and two (2) alternate members having terms beginning in one year and two (2) members and two (2) alternate members having terms beginning in alternate years. All cases to be heard by the board of adjustment will be heard by four (4) members and/or alternate members. Vacancies occurring in the board of adjustment for whatever reason shall be filed within sixty (60) days by the council for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member of the board of adjustment shall hold concurrently another salaried or elected city office. Three (3) successive unexcused absences from the meeting, after a minimum five (5) day notice served by mail of the time, place and agenda of such meeting, shall constitute cause for termination of membership on the board of adjustment. The members of the board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary expense incurred as a result of their work. The board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership and shall have the power to make rules, regulations and by-laws for its own government, which shall be subject to approval by the council. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79; Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Props. 15, 16, approved 5-9-94)  
ARTICLE XI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Publicity of public records. 
All records of the city shall be open to inspection except for any records the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose for which they are maintained. 
The records may be examined in the city office during normal office hours, and copies may be made available at reasonable rates as may be established by the council or city manager.  
Sec. 11.02. - Personal financial interest. 
No officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, or shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies or service, except on behalf of the city as an officer or employee. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall be subject to removal from his office or position. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the council shall render the contract involved voidable by the city manager or the council.  
Sec. 11.03. - Official newspaper. 
The council shall by resolution designate a public newspaper of general circulation in the City as the official organ thereof, and to continue as such until another is designated, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices and other matter required by this charter, by the ordinances of the City, or by the constitution and/or laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. O2019-784, 4-8-19)  
Sec. 11.04. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity, or within the third degree by consanguinity to any elected officer of the city, or to the city manager, shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or other service of the city, but this prohibition shall not apply to officers or employees who have been continuously employed by the city for not less than two (2) years prior to the election or appointment of the officer related in the prohibited degree.  
Sec. 11.05. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the city, whether elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take and subscribe to the appropriate oath or affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary: 
For elected officers: 
"I _______, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of _______, of the City of Nassau Bay, State of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and Laws of the United States of America and of this State and the Charter and Ordinances of this City. I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have not directly nor indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote at the election at which I was elected. So help me God." 
For appointed officers: 
"I _______, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of _______, of the City of Nassau Bay, State of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and Laws of the United States of America and of this State and the Charter and Ordinances of this City. I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have not directly nor indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward to secure any appointment or the confirmation thereof. So help me God."  
Sec. 11.06. - Prohibitions. 
(A)  No person shall be appointed to or removed from or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office because of race, sex, national origin, political or religious opinions or affiliations or physical or mental disabilities. 
(B)  No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment under the personnel provisions of this charter or the rules and regulations made thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of such provisions, rules and regulations. 
(C)  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(D)  No person who holds any compensated appointive city position shall make, solicit or receive any contribution for any candidate for public office in the city or take any part in the management, affairs or political campaign of such candidate, but he may exercise his rights as a citizen to express his opinions and to cast his vote. 
(E)  Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of subsections (A) through (D) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall pay such penalty as may be provided for by city ordinance or the statutes of the State of Texas. Any person convicted under this section shall be ineligible for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold any city office or position and, if an officer or employee of the city, shall immediately forfeit his office or position. 
(Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 17, approved 5-9-94)  
Sec. 11.07. - Assignment, execution and garnishment. 
The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable in garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors.  
Sec. 11.08. - Security and bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party, for any bond, including supersedeas bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law.  
Sec. 11.09. - Damage suits. 
Before the city shall be liable for any claim for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damages to property, the complainant or his authorized representative shall notify the city secretary. The notification shall be in writing and shall state specifically how, when and where the death, injury or damage occurred; the amount of loss claimed; and the identity of any witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim. The notification shall be filed within forty-five (45) days of the date of injury or damage or, in the case of death, within forty-five (45) days of the date of death. No action at law shall be brought against the city until at least sixty (60) days have elapsed since the date of notification; after this period, the complainant may then have two (2) years in which to bring an action of law. 
State Law reference— Tort Claims Act, V.A.C.S. art. 6252—19.  
Sec. 11.10. - Separability clause. 
If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Sec. 11.11. - Gender of wording. 
The masculine gender of the wording used throughout this charter shall always be interpreted to mean either sex.  
Sec. 11.12. - Amending the charter. 
Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended.  
Sec. 11.13. - Charter review commission. 
The council shall appoint at its first regular meeting in July of every fifth year after approval of this charter, a charter review commission of five (5) citizens of the city. 
(A)  Duties of the commission: 
(1)  Inquire into the operation of the city government under the charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision. To this end public hearings may be held; and the commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the city and require the submission of any of the city records which it may deem necessary to the conduct of such hearing. 
(2)  Propose any recommendations it may deem desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of the charter by the several departments of the city government. 
(3)  Propose, if it deems desirable, amendments to this charter to improve the effective application of the charter to current conditions. 
(4)  Report its finding and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the council. 
(B)  Action by the council: The council shall receive and announce that any report presented by the charter review commission is available for review by interested citizens during regular hours at city hall, shall consider any recommendations made, and if any amendments be presented as part of such report, may order such amendment or amendments to be submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended. 
(C)  Term of office: The term of office of such charter review commission shall be six (6) months, and at the completion of such term a report shall be presented to the council, and all records of the proceedings of such commission shall be filed with the city secretary and shall become a public record. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 22, approved 5-6-89)  
ARTICLE XII. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
 
Secs. 12.01, 12.02. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former §§ 12.01 and 12.02 were deleted pursuant to propositions 23 and 24, approved at an election held May 6, 1989, as set out in Res. No. R89-985, adopted May 8, 1989. The deleted provisions pertained to the transition schedule and appointive officers and employees, and derived, unchanged, from the charter adopted April 7, 1973.  
Sec. 12.03. - Effect of the charter on existing law. 
(A)  All codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force in the City on the effective date of this charter, and not in conflict with the provisions thereof, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the council. Emergency ordinances enacted before the adoption of this charter shall not be affected by the provisions of Article III, section 3.12, of this charter. Any code, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which conflicts with the provisions of this charter is repealed to the extent that it is inconsistent or will interfere with the effective operation of this charter or ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. 
(B)  All taxes, assessments, liens, encumbrances and demands, of or against the city, fixed or established before the effective date of this charter, or for the fixing or establishing of which proceedings had begun prior to such date, shall be valid when properly fixed or established under the law in force at the time of the beginning of such proceedings or under the law after adoption of this charter and subsequent revisions thereto. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 25, approved 5-6-89; Ord. No. O2019-784, 4-8-19)  
Sec. 12.04. - Pending matters. 
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, franchises and legal or administrative proceedings in existence or pending on the effective date of this charter, and subsequent revisions thereto, shall continue until consummation. All new or renewal rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, franchises and legal or administrative proceedings initiated after the effective date of this charter shall conform to the requirements and provisions thereof. 
(Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Prop. 26, approved 5-6-89)  
Sec. 12.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 12.05 was deleted pursuant to proposition 28, approved at an election held May 6, 1989, as set out in Res. No. R89-985, adopted May 8, 1989. The deleted provisions pertained to the submission of the charter to the town and derived, unchanged, from the charter adopted April 7, 1973.  
Sec. 12.06. - Schedule for revised charter. 
It is contemplated that any revisions and amendments to the charter will be presented to the voters on the ballot of the next regular election following their approval by the council. The revisions and amendments adopted by the voters at that election will take effect on the first day following adoption. 
(Res. No. 79-604, 2-26-79, approved 4-9-79; Res. No. R89-985, 5-8-89, Props. 28—30, approved 5-6-89; Res. No. R94-1219, 5-9-94, Prop. 18, approved 5-9-94)  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited; formal parts of ordinances continued in effect. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Nassau Bay City Code," and may be so cited. 
This Code shall not be deemed to repeal any preamble, recital or finding of fact contained in any ordinance included herein, but all such matters shall be deemed incorporated in the sections herein derived from such respective ordinances. 
Charter reference— Codification, § 3.13(B). 
State Law reference— Authority to publish a code of civil and criminal ordinances, V.T.C.S. art. 1176a.  
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-3. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section in this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Sec. 1-4. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-5. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules contained in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
City. The word "city" or "municipality" shall mean the City of Nassau Bay, in Harris County, Texas. 
City secretary, chief of police or other city officers or departments. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or words designating any other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "Nassau Bay City Code," City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding or step in a proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding or step in a proceeding is to be had shall not be counted; except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code. 
Council. The words "the council" or "the city council" shall mean the mayor and councilmen acting as the city council of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
County. The word "county" shall mean Harris County, Texas. 
Fire and police departments or divisions. The words "fire department" or "police department" shall mean, respectively, the fire division or police division. The terms "fire division" or "police division" shall be deemed to mean the fire department or police department within the meaning of state laws referring to municipal fire or police departments. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway," when used in this Code, shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month, except as otherwise specified in this Code. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land, except as otherwise defined in this Code. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property, and "mixed" if the sense used so indicates. 
Real property. The words "real property" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic and that portion of a street used for drainage. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Sidewalk area. The term "sidewalk area" shall mean the space between the lateral line of the roadway and the boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, culvert, underpass, overpass, tunnel, causeway or other public way in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
V.A.C.S., V.A.T.S., V.T.C.S., V.A.P.C., V.T.P.C., V.A.C.C.P., V.T.C.C.P. Such abbreviations shall mean and include Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Penal Code, Vernon's Texas Penal Code, Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, Vernon's Texas Code of Criminal Procedure and other portions of such codification of the Texas Statutes and Rules as indicated. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation, other than oral, of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except as otherwise provided in this Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance that governs and regulates fire, safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation other than vegetation and litter violations shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), nor exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations; provided, however, that where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by state law. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 84-312, 1-9-84; Ord. No. 87-357, 10-12-87) 
State Law reference— Authority to prescribe penalties, V.A.C.S., art. 1176a, para. 1; punishment for violation of statute, art. 1195; powers of city council, art. 1011, municipal court criminal jurisdiction, art. 1195, V.A.C.C.P. arts. 4.01, 4.14; authority to imprison in default of payment of fine, art. 43.09.  
Sec. 1-7. - Liability of corporate officers for penalty. 
Whenever a corporation or association violates any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, manager or any agent or employee of such corporation or association shall be severally liable for the penalty prescribed for such violation.  
Sec. 1-8. - Use in evidence of copies of Code provisions. 
In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, the Code or a copy of such provision, certified by the city secretary, may be admitted in evidence without further proof and shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and regular enactment of such provision, without the necessity of introducing in evidence the entire Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Burden of proving exception; excuse, etc., in prosecution for violation of Code. 
In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, upon proof of the provision of the Code, it shall not be necessary to negate any exception, excuse, provision or exemption contained in the Code and the burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, provision or exemption shall be upon the defendant.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative services, Art. IV. 
Cross reference— Court and criminal procedures, Ch. 6; creation of office of treasurer, § 7-1; office of fire official created, § 8-20; parks and recreation commission, § 13-2 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 14; sign appeal board, § 16-9. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Publication of ordinances by caption, summary and penalty. 
All ordinances required to be published by law may be published by publishing only the descriptive caption or title of said ordinance, stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 70-14, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-2. - Authorization prior to drafting ordinances. 
It shall be the policy (but not a legal condition precedent to the validity of an ordinance) of the city that no ordinance except an emergency, election, budget or tax ordinance or an ordinance requiring less than thirty (30) minutes of research or drafting time, shall be drafted by the city attorney or the city office staff until the proponent of the ordinance has obtained prior authorization from a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 76-160, 1-12-76) 
Charter reference— Passage of ordinances, § 3.11.  
Sec. 2-3. - Intracounty expense allowance of mayor and councilmen. 
The mayor and councilmen of the city shall receive an expense allowance as follows: The allowance shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month for the mayor and fifty dollars ($50.00) per month for each councilman. It is intended that this allowance shall be in lieu of any reimbursement of intracounty mileage for official city business and to assist in defraying nonreimbursable obligations that public office tends to generate. The reimbursement of any extracounty travel or related expenses for official city business shall not be precluded by this section. This allowance is not intended to be based upon any average number of meetings per month or any average volume of work, but is intended to be a constant monthly figure. 
(Ord. No. 71-41, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-337, 3-10-86) 
Charter reference— Authorized, § 3.04.  
Sec. 2-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the instruction of the city § 2-4 was deleted from the Code as it is the city's intent to no longer publish official holidays in the Code. Former § 2-4 pertained to official holidays and derived from Res. No. 73-256, adopted Oct. 22, 1973; and Res. No. R2012-1936, adopted Jan. 9, 2012.  
Sec. 2-5. - Destruction of city records. 
The city secretary is hereby authorized to destroy records, following the period of retention, as shown on the schedule below: 
	Description of Record 	Period of Retention 
(1) 	Cash receipt books (blue copies) 	Two (2) years 
(2) 	Meter read book 	Two (2) years 
(3) 	Water bill payment stubs 	Two (2) years 
(4) 	Single-family residential building plans 	Two (2) years 
(5) 	Tape recordings of official city meetings 	Five (5) years 
(6) 	Invoices, voucher checks (third copy) and purchase orders (third copy) 	Five (5) years 
(7) 	Ledgers and journals: 	
	Disbursement journals 	Seven (7) years 
	Cash reports 	Seven (7) years 
	Trail balances 	Two (2) years 
(8) 	Financial reports: 	
	Monthly financial statements 	Five (5) years 
	Equipment cost and depreciation records 	Three (3) years 
(9) 	Audit reports: 	
	Budget working papers 	Two (2) years 
	Expenditures or encumbrance records 	Two (2) years 
(10) 	Accounts payable: 	
	Receipts (following payment) 	Three (3) years 
	Numerical checks (following payment) 	Three (3) years 
(11) 	Accounts receivable: 	
	Receipts 	Three (3) years 
	Daily cash reports 	Three (3) years 
(12) 	Banking records: 	
	Bank records 	Five (5) years 
(13) 	Bonds: 	
	Certificates and coupons (after retirement of whole issue) 	Two (2) years 
(14) 	Taxation: 	
	Appraisal rolls 	Three (3) years 
	Property cards 	(As long as administratively valuable) 
	Daily tax rolls 	(As long as administratively valuable) 
	Tax rate calculation (effective tax rate) 	Three (3) years 
	Tax receipts 	Five (5) years 
	Tax certificates 	Two (2) years 
	Annual tax collection receipts 	Five (5) years 
	Monthly tax collection receipts 	Three (3) years 
	Tax correspondence 	Three (3) years 
	Franchise tax files 	Three (3) years 
	Sales tax records 	Two (2) years 
	Tax daily cash report 	Three (3) years 
(15) 	Grants: 	
	Grant report and financial report (after submitting final expenditure report) 	Five (5) years 
	Revenue sharing (after submitting final report) 	Three (3) years 
(16) 	Police: 	
	Arrest/criminal history files (adult): 	
	Class B or C misdemeanors 	Ten (10) years 
	Class A misdemeanors and all felonies except murder 	Thirty (30) years 
	Murder 	Seventy-five (75) years 
	Arrest/criminal history files (Juveniles) 	Until court ordered or twenty-fifth birthday of individual 
	Booking records (adult) 	If duplicated in arrest/criminal files (adult), two (2) years 
	Booking records (juvenile) 	If duplicated in arrest/criminal files (juvenile), two (2) years 
	Offense records: 	
	Solved cases 	Ten (10) years 
	Unsolved cases 	Until statute of limitations has run out 
	Incident reports 	Five (5) years 
	Field interrogation cards 	One (1) year 
	Accident records 	Three (3) years 
	Communication logs or taps 	Thirty (30) years 
	Complaint cards 	One (1) year 
	Complaint logs 	One (1) year 
	Criminal history dissemination records 	Three (3) years 
	Inquiry records 	As long as administratively valuable 
	Teletype files 	Fourteen (14) days 
	Crime analysis files 	As long as administratively valuable 
	Jail records 	Two (2) years 
	Officer call activity reports 	One (1) year 
	Work schedules 	As long as administratively valuable 
	Training records (class) 	One (1) year 
	Impounded and abandoned vehicle records 	Three (3) years 
	Property records 	Four (4) years 
	Property sale records 	Four (4) years 
	Pawn shop tickets 	As long as administratively valuable 
	Wrecker service records 	One (1) year 
(17) 	Municipal court: 	
	Dockets—Docket books which record proceedings and judgments in a municipal court. 	Five (5) years 
	Case papers—Complaints, citations, served processes, correspondence, and other supporting documentation pertaining to adjudicated cases of a municipal court, except those involving parking offenses. 	Three (3) years after final disposition of the case. 
	Parking tickets (cleared)—Parking tickets that have been cleared by dismissal, payment, or other action. 	Six (6) months after being cleared. 
	Traffic violations history cards—Cards or similar records providing an index to traffic and/or parking citations issued, showing name, address, date of offense, type of offense, and disposition of the case. 	Three (3) years after the last offense noted on the record. 
	Fee books—Books or ledgers providing an account of all fees charged for services in any court action or proceeding showing the number and style of the proceeding for which costs are charged, and similar records of fee refunds occasioned by reversals of judgment on appeal. 	Three (3) years. 
	Statutory warnings: 	
	Traffic warning citations 	Six (6) months 
	Warnings based on non-traffic statutes and municipal ordinances 	Five (5) years providing no litigation is pending. 
	Reports to state agencies—Copies of reports submitted to state agencies on a scheduled or special basis, including those submitted to the criminal justice planning fund and the office of court administration. Does not include abstracts submitted to the department of public safety. 	Five (5) years. 
 
(Ord. No. 80-254, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 81-270, 3-23-81; Ord. No. 86-348, 12-8-86; Ord. No. 89-377, 1-8-89) 
Cross reference— Destruction of scheduled and unscheduled records, §§ 2-63, 2-64.  
Sec. 2-6. - Claims against city; notice and verification required. 
(a)  The City of Nassau Bay shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death injury, shall within sixty (60) days from the date the damage or injury was received give notice in writing to the mayor and city council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount of each claimant's demand. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(b)  No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the City of Nassau Bay unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(c)  All notices required by this section shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following location: City Hall, 1800 Nasa Road 1, Nassau Bay, Texas; and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(d)  Neither the mayor, a city councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  The written notice required under this section shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 85-330, §§ 1—5, 10-14-85) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-330, §§ 1—5, adopted Oct. 14, 1985, did not specify manner of codification; hence, said provisions have been included herein as § 2-6, at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 2-7. - Indemnification of officers and employees. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term "officer" shall include any elected or appointed official of the city, and the term "employee" shall include all employees of the city. 
(b)  Officers and employees entitled to indemnification. Any officer or employee who is liable for the payment of any claims or damages, excluding punitive damages, arising out of the course and scope of employment shall be entitled to indemnification by the city, provided that the acts or omissions resulting in such liability were done in good faith and without malicious or felonious intent. For the purposes of this section, the term "arising out of the course and scope of employment" shall not include any action which occurs during a period of time in which the officer or employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the city. Whether the acts were done in good faith, without malicious or felonious intent, and within the course and scope of employment shall be determined by the city, and such determination shall be final for the purposes of the representation and indemnity of this section; provided, however, that in the event such representation and indemnity have been denied by the city, if upon a trial on the merits the city determines that the officer or employee was acting in good faith, without malicious or felonious intent and within the scope of employment the indemnification hereunder shall be granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. The city shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its consent, and the city reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient. 
(c)  Legal representation. The city shall have the right and duty to provide legal representation through the city attorney or, in its discretion, through the selection of outside legal counsel, to any officer or employee sued in connection with any claim for damages or other civil action against such person arising out of the course and scope of employment, provided that such officer or employee is entitled to indemnification as set forth in this ordinance. Such legal representation shall be provided at no cost to the officer or employee, and any officer or employee may have his or her own counsel assist in the defense at the sole expense of the officer or employee. The officer or employee shall cooperate fully with the city in preparation and presentation of the case, and the failure to cooperate shall waive such officer's or employee's right to representation and indemnity under this section. 
(d)  Governmental immunity; statutory limits on indemnity. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving the city's defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought against the city or such officer or employee. For any suit or claim arising under the Texas Tort Claims Act, the indemnity provided by this section shall be limited to the statutory limits applicable to the city provided in the Act, as amended. 
(e)  Application of provisions. The provisions of this section shall apply only where the city has been given notice of the action brought against any city officer or employee within ten (10) days of service of process upon the office or employee. 
(f)  Disciplinary action by city. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking disciplinary action against any officer or employee for conduct defended or indemnified by the city under this section, either before or after conclusion of the civil suit. 
(g)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall require the city to indemnify any officer or employee for recoveries made against him or her in suits by or on behalf of the city. The city council may, however, authorize the city attorney to represent any officer or employee in a suit brought against an officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 89-372, §§ 1—7, 8-14-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-372, adopted Aug. 14, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—7 § 2-7 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 2-8—2-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 2-20. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, a council member, or member, is defined to be either the mayor or any one of the six (6) elected councilmen. 
(Ord. No. 73-113, § 1, 6-11-73)  
Sec. 2-21. - Days, time and place of regular council meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall meet regularly on the second and fourth Monday of each calendar month; provided however, should any regularly scheduled meeting of the city council fall on officially designated city holidays, said holidays being prescribed in section 2-4, such meeting will automatically be rescheduled for the next day following such holiday. 
(b)  Regular meetings of the city council shall begin at 7:00 p.m. 
(c)  Regular meetings of the city council shall be held in the council members at the city offices, 1800 Nasa Road 1, Nassau Bay, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 74-136, 5-28-74; Ord. No. 80-258, 4-28-80) 
Charter reference— Required to be fixed by ordinance, § 3.09.  
Sec. 2-22. - Notice to council members of special council meetings. 
The members of the city council will be notified by telephone of all council meetings, other than the regular meetings that are established by ordinance, by the city secretary; and when unable to speak directly to the member of the city council, the city secretary will have the notification of such meetings served to the residential address of the council member. 
(Ord. No. 74-145, 12-11-74) 
Charter reference— Calling special meetings, § 3.09.  
Sec. 2-23. - Quorum. 
Four (4) council members shall constitute a quorum to do business but any less number of members may adjourn, recess or take measures to obtain a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 2, 9-28-70; Ord. No. 73-113, § 2, 6-11-73) 
Charter reference— Quorum, § 3.10.  
Sec. 2-24. - Assuming chair, opening meeting. 
At the hour of the meeting the mayor shall assume the chair, call the meeting to order, determine that a quorum is present, and proceed with the order of business. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 3, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-25. - Mayor pro tem; temporary presiding officer. 
In the absence or inability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside over the council, or in the absence or inability of both, a quorum being present, a temporary presiding officer may be chosen from among the council members. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 4, 9-28-70) 
Charter reference— Mayor pro tem, § 3.05.  
Sec. 2-26. - Order of business of regular meetings. 
The order of business for regular council meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Invocation; 
(3)  Pledge of allegiance; 
(4)  Roll call; 
(5)  Presentation of minutes of previous meetings; 
(6)  Opening remarks; 
(7)  Council recognition and proclamations; 
(8)  Reports of officials, employees and committees; 
(9)  Public hearing for citizens; 
(10)  Old business; 
(11)  New business; 
(12)  Other business; 
(13)  Adjournment. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 5, 9-28-70; Ord. No. 73-113, § 3, 6-11-73; Ord. No. 95-447, 3-13-95) 
Charter reference— Prescribing, § 3.10.  
Sec. 2-27. - Recognition of, and remarks by, council member. 
When a member wishes recognition, he shall address himself to the presiding officer, but shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized by the chair. He shall then confine his remarks to the question before the council. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 6, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-28. - Order and decorum. 
While a member is speaking other members shall not hold private discourse. Interruptions of the member shall not be permitted except in special circumstances as described in Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised. In all discussions disrespectful language and personalities shall be avoided. Disturbance, transgressions of the rules or disorderly conduct in the council chamber may cause the transgressor to be removed from the chamber. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 7, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-29. - Calling member to order; appeal. 
A member may be called to order for committing a breach of order and shall immediately desist from speaking unless permitted to explain. If the member appeals to the council from the decision of the chair, the council shall decide the matter without debate. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 8, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-30. - Voting required, exceptions. 
Every member who shall be present when a question is stated by the chair shall vote thereon unless excused by the council or unless he has a direct personal interest in the question, in which case he shall abstain. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 9, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-31. - Motion required to bring business before the meeting. 
Business shall be brought before the meeting by a motion of a member. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 10, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-32. - Reducing motion or resolution to writing; withdrawing motion or second. 
Any motion or resolution shall be reduced to writing if desired by the presiding officer or any member. A motion or a second of the motion may be withdrawn only before it is stated by the chair. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 11, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-33. - Order of privileged and subsidiary motions; inadmissibility of main motion. 
(a)  The order of importance of privileged motions is as follows in descending order of importance: Set time and place of next meeting, adjourn, recess, question of privilege, and order of business. 
(b)  The order of importance of subsidiary motions is as follows in descending order of importance: Lay on the table, close debate, limit debate, postpone to a certain time, refer to committee, amend, postpone indefinitely. 
(c)  A main motion is inadmissible while any other motion is pending. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 12, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-34. - Debatable motions. 
The only motions that are debatable are: Postpone to a certain time, refer to committee, amend, postpone indefinitely and the main motion. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 13, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-35. - Admissibility of motion to request rules enforcement. 
A motion to request that the rules be enforced or that the order of business be followed may be made when another member has the floor. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 14, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-36. - Motions not requiring vote or second; ruling thereon. 
No vote is required on motions to adhere to the order of business or to enforce the rules. The presiding officer shall rule on these motions. No second is required on motions to adhere to the order of business, enforce the rules, and motions on questions of privilege. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 15, 9-28-70)  
Sec. 2-37. - Applicability of Robert's Rules of Order. 
For situations not covered by this article, the rules of order in Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 70-18, § 16, 9-28-70)  
Secs. 2-38—2-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-396, adopted Mar. 11, 1991, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify the manner of inclusion; designation of the provisions as Art. III, §§ 2-51—2-65, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Destruction of city records, § 2-5. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Municipal records described. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video records, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 1, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-52. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates and/or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial statutes of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-60. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-57. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-55. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-58. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 2, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-53. - Municipal records declared public property. 
All municipal records as defined in section 2-51 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 3, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-54. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 4, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-55. - Records management officer—Designated. 
The city secretary, and the successive holders of such office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 5, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-56. - Same—Duties. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the municipality; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officer and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of the municipality is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the value of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 8, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-57. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
A records management committee, consisting of the city manager, assistant to the city manager, police chief and city treasurer is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 6, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-58. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 7, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-59. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned by this ordinance, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 9, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-60. - Records liaison officers—Designated. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that, in the best interest of the records management program, more than one (1) records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 10, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-61. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conducting of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 11, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-62. - Records control schedules—Development; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 12, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-63. - Same—Implementation; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-58 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 13, 3-11-91) 
Cross reference— Destruction of city records, § 2-5.  
Sec. 2-64. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet not been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 14, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-65. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-58, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan development under section 2-58. 
(Ord. No. 91-396, § 5, 3-11-91)  
Sec. 2-66. - Records retention schedules. 
The following Texas State Library and Archives Commission Local Records Retention Schedules are hereby adopted: 
(1)  Local Schedule EL (Schedule for Records of Elections and Voter Registration)—Effective February 1, 1992. Records series include: election records; records of candidacy and campaign finance; and voter registration records. 
(2)  Local Schedule GR (Schedule for Records Common to All Governments, 3rd edition)—Effective November 1, 1995. Records series include: administrative records; financial records; personnel and payroll records; support services records; and electronic data processing records. 
(3)  Local Schedule HR (Schedule for Records of Public Health Agencies)—Effective November 1, 1994. Records series include: records common to public health agencies; records of local public health authorities; records of local public hospitals; vital statistics records; county indigent health care records; animal control and health records; and records of the county inspector of hides and animals. 
(4)  Local Schedule LC (Schedule for Records of Justice and Municipal Courts)—Effective February 1, 1992. Records series include: civil and criminal records, inquest records; vital statistics records and miscellaneous records. 
(5)  Local Schedule PS (Schedule for Records of Public Safety Agencies)—Effective November 1, 1994. Records series include: records common to public safety agencies; law enforcement records; records of county medical examiners; records of firefighting and emergency medical service agencies; records of community supervision and corrections (adult probation) departments; and records of county, district, and criminal district attorneys. 
(6)  Local Schedule PW (Schedule for Records of Public works and Services)—Effective November 1, 1995. Records series include: general records; planning and zoning records; building permit and inspection records; public transportation and engineering records; soil and water conservation records; records of agriculture extension agents; environmental hazards records; records of weight and measures; library and museum records; parks and recreation records; zoo records; public broadcasting records; social services records; veterans service officer records; and gaming records. 
(7)  Local Schedule TX (Schedule for Records of Property Taxation, 2nd edition)—Effective February 15, 1993. Records series include: appraisal records; property tax collection records; motor vehicle and boat licensing and registration records; liquor licensing records; occupation tax records; and miscellaneous records of county tax assessor-collectors. 
(8)  Local Schedule UT (Schedule for Records of Utility Services)—Effective November 1, 1994. Records series include: general records; water and wastewater records; solid waste and hazardous waste management records; electric utility records; and gas utility records. 
A complete copy of the above local schedules is on file in the office of the records management officer. 
(Ord. No. 96-460, 1-8-96)  
Chapter 2.3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-707, adopted May 13, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 2.3, §§ 2.3-1—2.3-27, and enacted a new Ch. 2.3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 2.3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-590, §§ 1—27, adopted Jan. 10, 2005. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; false alarm reward, § 12-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2.3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm means a burglary, robbery, fire, or other emergency alarm that will cause action by an official or volunteer agency organized to deal with emergencies. 
False alarm means an alarm that is known to be false or baseless. 
Person means an individual, corporation, or an association. 
(Ord. No. O2013-707, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 2.3-2. - False emergency alarm. 
A person commits an offense if he/she recklessly: 
(1)  Initiates a false alarm; or 
(2)  Maintains or operates an alarm in a manner that a reasonable and prudent person would believe to cause one or more false alarms; or 
(3)  Allows an alarm that person owns or maintains in his control to sound an outside audible alarm for more than fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Ord. No. O2013-707, 5-13-13)  
Sec. 2.3-3. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable of a fine no lower than the minimum and no higher than the maximum allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. O2013-707, 5-13-13)  
Chapter 2.5 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency powers of mayor to close establishments, § 12-23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2.5-1—2.5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 82-284, adopted March 22, 1982, amended the Code, but did not specify the manner of inclusion. At the editor's discretion, therefore, the provisions of Ord. No. 82-284 have been codified as Art. II, §§ 2.5-16—2.5-23, of a new Ch. 2.5. 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, § 11-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2.5-16. - Required. 
The following State of Texas alcoholic beverage licenses and permits for premises within the City of Nassau Bay shall require compliance with this article and payment of fees set out herein. The state alcoholic beverage licenses and permits referred to are: 
(1)  Retail dealers off-premises beer; 
(2)  Retail dealers on-premises beer; 
(3)  Wine and beer retailers off-premises; 
(4)  Wine and beer retailers permit on-or off-premises; 
(5)  Wine only package store permit; 
(6)  Package store permit; 
(7)  Mixed beverage permit; 
(8)  Late hours (addition to other permit); 
(9)  Beverage cartage permit; and 
(10)  Any other license or permit: Fee as allowed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 2.5-17. - Applications. 
All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses named above (beer license, either on-premises or off-premises, city package store permit, city beer and wine permit, either on-premises or off-premises, city beer on-premises with state license for late hours, or city wine only package store permit) shall be filed with the city secretary. The city secretary shall take each application for a city license and post same, or a reasonable facsimile thereof, at the city hall for a period of five (5) days and shall publish same in the official newspaper of the City of Nassau Bay at least once. Such applications shall consist of a copy of all applications required to be filed with the State of Texas and, if such premises to be licensed by the city are to be used for on-premises consumption, then such application shall contain letters from the offices of the fire official, building inspector and health officer, which letters shall state that the premises to be used by the applicant complies with all city ordinances of the City of Nassau Bay. No city license or renewal thereof shall be issued to any applicant without such letters of approval. 
In addition, no city license or renewal thereof shall be issued to any applicant unless: 
(1)  The location is in a nonresidential district; 
(2)  Evidence is provided that the location for the sale of alcoholic beverage is not within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital. This distance shall be measured from the door by which the public may enter the place of business to the nearest property line of a church, public or private school, or public hospital, along street lines and directly across intersections; 
(3)  Retail sale in closed containers is for off-premises consumption only; 
(4)  Evidence is provided that alcohol sales do not exceed fifty (50) percent of gross receipts of the premises for the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages; and 
(5)  No alcoholic beverage is sold or consumed on any premises where any obscene, indecent, or immodest dance, show or exhibition of nudity, specifically the absence of adequate clothing on the human torso, is presented, which offends the contemporary community standard of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. As used in this section, "adequate clothing" shall be defined in accordance with the contemporary standards of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
If conditions (1) through (5) above are met, the responsible city official may approve issuance or renewal of an alcoholic beverage license. If any of conditions (1) through (5) are not met, a specific use permit must be approved by city council in accordance with subsection 5-1300(B) [of Appendix A]. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13; Ord. No. O2014-724, § V, 3-10-14)  
Sec. 2.5-18. - Objections and public hearings. 
During the five-day waiting period, written objections, if any, shall be received by the city secretary. Objections may be made by persons residing or doing business within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed location. If as many as five (5) persons object to the granting of the city license, then, in such event, a public hearing shall be held by the city council to determine whether or not, in its opinion, the application should be approved or disapproved. Under no circumstances will a city beer, city package store, or city wine license be issued to a dealer where the place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of any church, public school or hospital. The action of the council shall be reduced to writing by the city secretary and mailed forthwith to the county judge and to the alcoholic beverage commission. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 2.5-19. - Existing city licenses. 
Those establishments holding a state license, but not licensed by the city, at the time of passage of this article shall have thirty (30) days in which to obtain their city license on a prorated basis. Currently issued city licenses which have experienced an increased fee will remain valid, at no increase in fee, until their renewal date at which time the higher fee shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 2.5-20. - Renewal. 
Those city licenses being renewed require a renewal application but do not require a publication for renewal. In no event shall any renewal be granted unless such renewal application be posted at city hall for a period of five (5) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 2.5-21. - Inspection. 
In order to ensure continued compliance with the health and safety ordinances of the city, any premises licensed for on-premises consumption under this article is subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the fire official, building inspector and health officer during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 2.5-22. - Revocation. 
Upon complaint by any person, the city council may revoke any city license upon a hearing and finding thereon that the premises licensed by the city hereunder is in violation of any ordinance of the city, or that the fees required hereunder have not been paid. City licensees shall be entitled to ten (10) days' notice of any such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82)  
Sec. 2.5-23. - Duration, fee and exemptions. 
All licenses issued by the City of Nassau Bay shall be valid for a maximum duration of twelve (12) months and are renewable at the end of the calendar year. A fee payable to the City of Nassau Bay shall accompany each application for said city license or renewal of same. The fee for such city license or renewal shall be one-half (½) of the state fee as allowed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
In accordance with state law, private clubs are exempt from paying a license fee to the City of Nassau Bay. 
(Ord. No. 82-284, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 84-313, 1-9-84)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS, FOWL AND BIRDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Article XX of Ord. No. 81-276, enacted Oct. 12, 1981, repealed Ord. No. 71-43, enacted April 26, 1971, from which Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-61, concerning animals, fowl and birds was derived. Articles I—XVI of said Ord. No. 81-276 enact provisions relative to the same subject matter which have been included as a new Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-69. 
Cross reference— Pets in parks, § 13-10(5). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as prescribed below: 
Animal control officer. The person or persons designated by the city manager to enforce this chapter. 
At large. An animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is not located on the property of its owner and is not under restraint as defined hereinbelow. 
City pound. Any premises designated by the city manager as the appropriate premises for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found to be at large in violation of this chapter or suspected of being rabid or known to be rabid. 
Dangerous and/or vicious animal. Any animal that constitutes a physical threat to humans or other domestic animals. 
Humane manner. Care of an animal to include, but not limited to, ventilation and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water, consistent with normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Impoundment fee. A fee assessed to defray city expenses associated with the feeding and housing of impounded animals. 
Nuisance. An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; or chases vehicles, or molests, attacks, or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property, or on private property other than that of its owner. 
Restraint. An animal is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter if he is controlled by a leash not more than six (6) feet long or a retractable leash of not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in length, or is in a cage, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. I, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 91-406, 7-8-91)  
Sec. 3-2. - Number of dogs and cats limited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or have control over more than three (3) dogs or more than three (3) cats, or any combination of dogs or cats, amounting to a total of [more than] three (3) animals, in any one household within the corporate limits of the city. It shall further be unlawful for any head of the household within the limits of the city to permit within his household or upon his residential premises the harboring of more than three (3) dogs or three (3) cats, or any combination of dogs or cats amounting to a total of [more than] three (3) animals. Dogs and cats under the age of four (4) months are excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. II, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 86-336, 4-7-86)  
Sec. 3-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2016-744, § 3, adopted July 11, 2016, repealed the former section 3-3 in its entirety, which pertained to animals at large—on public property, and derived from Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX A, § 1, adopted October 12, 1981.  
Sec. 3-4. - Animal at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, or person having control over, or having custody of any animal, to permit or allow such animal to be at large at any location within the territorial limits of the city, other than the owner's real property, motor vehicle, golf cart, or boat. Nothing herein should be construed to prohibit allowing an animal to be at large within a fenced area with the permission of the owner of the premises. Fencing may be structured or virtual (electronic shock to a collared animal activated when property boundary approached). 
(b)  Penalty. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined a sum not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense. The minimum fine for a first offense shall be at least one hundred dollars ($100.00). The minimum fine for a second offense within a two-year period from the prior offense shall be at least two hundred dollars ($200.00). The minimum fine for a third offense (or more) within a two-year period from the prior offense shall be at least three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). 
(Ord. No. O2016-744, §§ 3, 4, 7-11-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2016-744, § 3, adopted July 11, 2016, amended section 3-4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 3-4 pertained to animals at large—on private property, and derived from Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX A, § 2, adopted October 12, 1981.  
Sec. 3-5. - Seizure by private citizen of animals subject to impoundment. 
Any person may take up and deliver to the city pound or the animal control officer any animal which is required to be impounded by the animal control officer under the provisions of this chapter. Any animal found trespassing or at large upon any private property may be taken up by the owner of said property and delivered to the city pound or the animal control officer. Every such person who takes up any animal under the provisions of this chapter shall immediately thereafter give notice thereof to the animal control officer. The animal control officer shall thereupon proceed in his duties as though such animal had been found at large and impounded by him. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. X A, § 1, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-6. - Surrender of animal for impoundment. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons, firm, or corporation to fail or refuse to surrender for impoundment, upon demand by lawful authority, any animal required to be impounded by the animal control officer under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. X A, § 2, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-7. - Redemption of impounded animal. 
Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of an impoundment fee as defined herein. Payment of the impoundment fee is not considered to be in lieu of any fine, penalty or license fee. If veterinarian, medication, or injection charges are incurred by the city, the owner of said animal shall reimburse the city for said costs. The owner of any unlicensed dog or cat impounded may redeem such animal at any time prior to sale or destruction by having such animal duly licensed, vaccinated against rabies, and payment of an impoundment fee and other expenses as heroin provided. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. X A, § 3, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-8. - Dangerous dog; municipal court hearing. 
If any dog either (1) makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own, or (2) commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in with the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person, the animal control authority may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority determines the dog is a dangerous dog, the animal control authority shall notify the owner in writing of the determination. The owner of the dog determined to be dangerous may appeal the decision of the animal control authority to the city municipal court, or another court of competent jurisdiction, not later than the 15th day after the date that the owner is notified that the dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog. To file an appeal, the owner must file a notice of appeal of the animal control authority's dangerous dog determination with the court; attach a copy of the determination from the animal control authority, and serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the animal control authority by mailing the notice through the United States Postal Service. The hearing, subsequent appeals, and any final determinations shall be made or conducted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 822. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. X B § 1, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 98-489, 5-11-98; Ord. No. O2016-743, § 2, 7-11-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2016-743, § 2, adopted July 11, 2016, changed the title of section 3-8 from "Dangerous and/or vicious animals; municipal court hearing" to "Dangerous dog; municipal court hearing." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 3-9. - Sanitary requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation keeping or harboring any animal(s) to fail to keep the premises where such animal(s) are kept free from offensive odors to the extent that such odors are disturbing to the person(s) residing within reasonable proximity to the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to allow premises where animals are kept to become unclean and a threat to the public health by failing to diligently and systematically remove all animal waste from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. XI, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-10. - Humane care. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to harbor or maintain within the corporate limits of the city any animal in other than a humane manner as defined in section 3-1 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. XII, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-11. - Barking and howling dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep on his premises or under his control any dog which by loud and frequent barking, howling, or baying disturbs the peace, rest, quietude, or comfort of any person of normal nervous sensibilities who may reside within reasonable proximity of the place where such dog is kept. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. XIII, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-12. - Animals as a nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation harboring or having custody or control of any animal within the corporate limits of the city to allow such animal to cause a nuisance as defined in section 3-1 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. XIV, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-13. - Unlawful to kill, harm or injure except in defense against attack. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally kill, cut, maim, harm or injure in any manner any dog, cat, or other domestic animal or any domestic or wild bird, including, but not limited to, ducks, or any squirrel, within the city, unless actions are conducted in defense against an attack by said animal upon some person or persons. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. XV, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-14. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or molest the animal control officer in the performance of any duty as herein prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. XVI, 10-12-81) 
Cross reference— Authority and duty of animal control officer, § 3-60 et seq.  
Sec. 3-15. - Tethering. 
(a)  Any person owning and/or controlling dogs, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, licensed or unlicensed, shall not allow said animal to be tied or chained to a fixed object. 
(b)  No person shall at any time fasten, chain, or tie any dog or cause such dog to be fastened, chained, or tied while such dog is on the owner's property, or on the property of dog owner's landlord, or on any property within the territorial limits of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(c)  Any dog confined within a fenced yard must have a minimum exercise area of one hundred (100) square feet per dog. Provided further that where dogs are kept or housed on a single family residential property without a fenced yard, the owner or persons having custody of such dogs shall provide an enclosure for such dogs meeting the one hundred (100) square foot per dog dimensions. Such enclosure shall be constructed of chain link or similar type materials with all four (4) sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be of sufficient height to prevent the dog from escaping from such enclosure. The top of such enclosure shall be covered with materials to provide the dog with shade and protection from the elements. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners or others from walking dogs with a handheld leash or temporarily tethering their dog so long as the owner is immediately present and the animal is not left unattended for no more than five (5) minutes while tethered. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners from allowing dogs to be attached to overhead runs (i.e. leash or chain attached to an overhead wire at least ten (10) feet long that allows the dog to move unheeded). 
Penalty for violation. Any person who violates any of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. 
Enforcement. Police officers and the city's animal control officer shall the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-661, 2-8-10)  
Secs. 3-16—3-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 3-25. - Licenses issued by animal control officer. 
Dog and cat licenses shall be issued by the animal control officer upon payment of the license fee and application made upon printed forms provided for such purpose, which application shall state the name and address of the owner or keeper of such dog or cat and the name, breed, color and sex of the dog or cat being licensed. The animal control officer shall keep a current record of all licenses issued. The dates of each license issued by the animal control officer shall run concurrently with the animal's rabies vaccination certificate, obtained from a licensed veterinarian, which the owner shall present at the time a city-issued license tag is sought. At the expiration and subsequent renewal of the rabies vaccination certificate through a licensed veterinarian, the owner shall also obtain a renewal license from the animal control officer. Upon payment of the license fee, the animal control officer shall issue to the owner a license certificate. Also a metallic tag shall be issued for each dog or cat so licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the date (day, month and year) the license will expire, said date based upon the expiration date of the animal's rabies certificate. Additionally, the number corresponding with the number on the city-issued certificate will also be stamped on the tag. The animal control officer shall not issue any license for any dog or cat or license tag for any dog or cat until the owner or the person in charge of such animal shall have obtained and presented to the animal control officer a certificate from a veterinarian, licensed to practice veterinary medicine, that such dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies during the calendar year for which the license is applied. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. III, § 1, 10-12-81; Ord. No. O2013-706, 5-13-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-706, adopted May 13, 2013, changed the title of § 3-25 from "Licenses issued by city secretary" to "Licenses issued by animal control officer."  
Sec. 3-26. - License and duplicate tag fees. 
There is hereby levied on each dog and cat more than four (4) months of age, which is kept, harbored or maintained by the owner thereof in the city, a license fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each animal neutered or spayed and there is hereby levied a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each animal not neutered or spayed. Proof of neutering or spaying shall be furnished by the owner or person in charge of such animal at the time the license is issued. The expiration date of each license will be engraved upon the metallic tag and will be the same date as the expiration date of the animal's rabies vaccination certificate. Duplicate tags may be obtained upon payment of a fee of two dollars ($2.00). 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. III, § 2, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 86-336, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 97-485, 11-10-97; Ord. No. O2013-706, 5-13-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-706, adopted May 13, 2013, changed the title of § 3-26 from "Annual license and duplicate tag fees" to "License and duplicate tag fees."  
Sec. 3-27. - Exemptions from licensing. 
The following dogs and cats are exempt from the licensing provisions of this article: 
(a)  Dogs or cats under the age of four (4) months, if kept within a sufficient enclosure. 
(b)  Dogs or cats owned by, or in the custody or under the control of persons who are nonresidents of the city, traveling through the city, or temporarily visiting therein for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
(c)  Dogs or cats brought to the city exclusively for the purpose of entering the same in any dog or cat show, field trial, or exhibition, and which are actually entered in and kept at such shows or exhibitions. 
(d)  Dogs duly and properly trained to aid or assist blind persons and used for the purpose of aiding or assisting such blind persons in going from place to place. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. III, § 3, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 86-336, 4-7-86)  
Sec. 3-28. - Collar or harness with license tag attached required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep a dog or cat more than four (4) months of age on any premises within the corporate limits of the city unless such animal wears a collar or harness to which is securely attached a license tag showing said animal has been licensed by the city secretary of the city for the current year. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. III, § 4, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 86-336, 4-7-86)  
Sec. 3-29. - Unlawful to remove collar or harness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person without lawful authority to willfully remove from any dog or cat a collar or harness or any tag or tags attached to a collar or harness. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. III, § 5, 10-12-81)  
Secs. 3-30—3-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Vaccination of dogs and cats required for licensing, § 3-25. 
 
Sec. 3-40. - Rabies vaccination tag required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain or keep a dog or cat more than four (4) months of age on any premises within the corporate limits of the city unless such animal wears a collar or harness securely attached to its body to which shall be securely attached a tag issued for said animal by a licensed veterinarian, showing such animal has been vaccinated for rabies. The owner or custodian of each domestic dog or cat shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies by four months of age. The animal must receive a booster within the 12-month interval following the initial vaccination. Every domestic dog or cat must be revaccinated against rabies at a minimum of at least once every three (3) years with a rabies vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture; however, nothing in this section prohibits a veterinarian and owner or custodian from selecting a more frequent rabies vaccination interval. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. V, § 1, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 86-336, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 2003-566, 6-9-03)  
Sec. 3-41. - Surrender of animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies. 
A person having knowledge of an animal that the person suspects of being rabid shall report the animal to the animal control officer. The owner, upon demand made by the animal control officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies for quarantine, rabies treatment, or disposal if necessary. Expenses for any or all of these options shall be borne by the owner. If the owner can prove to the satisfaction of the animal control officer that the animal has a current rabies vaccination, the animal control officer may, at his option, allow the owner to seek veterinary treatment for the animal or hold the animal in quarantine in the owner's residence a period of ten (10) days. The owner shall within five (5) days of the exercise of the above option by the animal control officer supply the officer with proof of treatment of the animal by a licensed veterinarian or a statement by a licensed veterinarian that the animal is, in his opinion, free of rabies. In the event that the owner does not present proof of treatment by a licensed veterinarian or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that the animal is, in his opinion, free of rabies and the owner further fails to keep the animal quarantined for the required ten (10) days, the animal control officer shall demand surrender of the animal as provided hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. V, § 2, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-42. - Pathological examination of rabid animals. 
When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination, and shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of human contacts, and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. V, § 3, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-43. - City-wide quarantine. 
When a report by the state health department or a laboratory examination approved by the health department gives a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer may recommend a city-wide quarantine for a period of thirty (30) days and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such period of rabies quarantine, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be surrendered to the animal control officer for treatment by a veterinarian licensed in the State of Texas, quarantine or disposal, if necessary. Expenses for any and all of the above options shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. V, § 4, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-44. - Failure or refusal to quarantine animal or surrender animal for quarantine or disposition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to fail or refuse to quarantine or surrender for quarantine or disposition under the provisions of this article his animal upon notification by the animal control officer of the necessity therefor. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. VI, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-45. - Cost of treatment and/or quarantine and/or disposal. 
The owner of an animal treated, quarantined or disposed of under this article shall pay to the animal control officer the reasonable costs of such treatment, quarantine or disposal and the animal control officer may bring suit to collect those costs. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. VIII, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-46. - Unlawful to kill or dispose of rabid animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, or dispose of by burial, incineration or other means, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal having bitten a human, except as herein provided, or remove same from the city limits without written permission from the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. V, § 5, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-47. - Surrender of dead animal exposed to rabies. 
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. V, § 6, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-48. - Disposition of animal infected with rabies. 
The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. V, § 7, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-49. - Exposure of individuals to rabies. 
A person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch or other attack on an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies shall report the incident to the animal control officer and the animal shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer for a period of ten (10) days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the animal control officer. Such quarantine may be conducted on the premise of the owner, if the owner of the animal can display a valid rabies vaccination certificate issued within the twelve-month period next preceding the biting incident; or, at the owner's option and expense, at the shelter designated as the city pound; or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. Owners of animals, however, for which no valid rabies vaccination certificate issued within the twelve-month period next preceding the biting incident can be displayed or presented, shall have their animals quarantined, at the owner's option and expense, at a veterinarian hospital of their choice, or, at the owner's option and expense, at the shelter designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IV, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-50. - Duty to report. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch or other attack on an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, or of an animal that the person suspects is rabid, to fail to report the incident or animal to the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. VII, 10-12-81)  
Secs. 3-51—3-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Interference with animal control officer, § 3-14. 
 
Sec. 3-60. - Seizure and impoundment of dogs and cats. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to seize and impound all dogs and cats found at large within the corporate limits of the city and such animal control officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any dog or cat running at large thereon. When dogs or unlicensed cats are found at large and their ownership is known to the animal control officer, such dogs or cats need not be impounded, but may be, at the discretion of the animal control officer, returned forthwith to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 1, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-61. - Registry and notice of impoundment. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, upon receiving or apprehending any animal for impoundment, to make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such animal and whether licensed and the place and time of taking into custody. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to post notice at City Hall describing each of such animals, whether bearing a license tag or not, and giving the number of the tag and the name of the person who licensed the animal in each case where the animal bears a license tag. In case the animal bears a license tag, then in addition to posting notice at City Hall, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to give notice of impoundment by letter, postal card, or telephone to the person to whom such license tag was issued. The mailing of said letter or postal card shall be deemed sufficient notice, whether the person addressed shall receive same or not. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 2, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-62. - Required term of impoundment. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all unclaimed, licensed animals for a period of two hundred forty (240) hours or ten (10) days from the date of the impounding. If at the expiration of said period of time, and after reasonable efforts to notify the owner such animal has not been redeemed, it shall be sold or destroyed or disposed of as hereinafter provided. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all unclaimed animals for a period of ninety-six (96) hours or four (4) days. If at the expiration of said period of time, and after reasonable efforts to notify the owner, if determinable, such animal has not been redeemed, it shall be destroyed, sold, or disposed of as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 3, 10-12-81; Ord. No. 86-336, 4-7-86)  
Sec. 3-63. - Disposition of animals impounded and not redeemed or reclaimed. 
At any time after the expiration of the period of time for redemption for impounded animals, the animal control officer may without further notice and without advertising in any manner, sell at private sale for cash any animal not redeemed or reclaimed. All animals impounded and not redeemed, reclaimed or sold after the period of time for redemption has expired shall forthwith be destroyed in the most practical humane manner by the animal control officer. Provided, however, in lieu of destruction of said animal by the animal control officer, said officer is authorized to sell or donate said animals to recognized medical research facilities maintained or sponsored by the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, or place said animal in a home. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 4, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-64. - Records of animal control officer. 
The animal control officer shall keep or cause to be kept records as are required to show in detail the disposition of all animals impounded and the money collected by him and such other records as are required by the city secretary. All money collected shall be delivered to the city secretary, who shall cause same to be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 5, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-65. - Rabies control. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to enforce the provisions of article III of this chapter and to perform the duties prescribed therein. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art IX B, § 6, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-66. - Injured animals. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, and he is hereby authorized, in the case of injured animals found at large, to return such animals to their owners forthwith. When the owner of such animal is unknown or cannot be located after reasonable efforts to do so, the animal control officer is hereby authorized to secure necessary medical treatment for such animal, including destruction in the most humane manner possible, should such action be recommended by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 7, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-67. - Inspection to determine license and vaccination status. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and he is hereby authorized, at any reasonable time, to inspect any dog or cat to determine if said animal is licensed and vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 8, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-68. - Citation of violators. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to issue citations for violations of the provisions of this chapter and to file appropriate complaints in the municipal court for the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 9, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-69. - Setting impoundment fee. 
At the direction and subject to the approval of the city manager, the animal control officer shall each October first prescribe the dollar amount of the impoundment fee defined and assessed under the provisions of this chapter. Said dollar amount shall reflect the city's cost to house and feed impounded animals. 
(Ord. No. 81-276, Art. IX B, § 10, 10-12-81)  
Sec. 3-70. - Management of dog park. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to manage the dog park in David Braun Park. 
(Ord. No. O2017-764, 12-11-17)  
Sec. 3-71. - Dog park rules. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to define rules for the dog park in conjunction with the city manager. The rules shall be posted at the dog park. The city's animal control officer, police officers, and any other designee of the city shall have the power and authority to enforce these rules. Violation of the rules can result in the offender being removed from the park and/or barred from use of the dog park. 
(Ord. No. O2017-764, 12-11-17)  
Sec. 3-72. - Management of the peninsula. 
It shall be the duty of the public works parks manager to manage the peninsula. 
(Ord. No. O2017-764, 12-11-17)  
Sec. 3-73. - Peninsula rules. 
It shall be the duty of the public works parks manager to define rules for the peninsula in conjunction with the city manager. The rules shall be posted at the entrance to the peninsula. The public works parks manager and city police officers shall have the power and authority to enforce these rules. Violations of the rules can result in the offender being removed from the peninsula and/or barred from the peninsula. 
(Ord. No. O2017-764, 12-11-17)  
Secs. 3-74—3-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BIRD SANCTUARY 
 
Sec. 3-80. - Bird sanctuary 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city shall be and is designated as a bird sanctuary, and the animal control officer is hereby authorized to erect appropriate signs and markers at highway entrances to the city and at other places to evidence the declaration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wildfowl or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests within the corporate limits, except those determined by the animal control officer or the city manager to be a nuisance as defined elsewhere in this chapter. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to use humane methods in dealing with birds and fowl that are deemed to be a nuisance. 
(c)  In no case will birds or fowl listed as endangered or threatened by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department be disturbed. 
(d)  Enforcement. Police officers and the city's animal control officer shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and perform all duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person found to violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. No. 2003-571, 11-10-2003)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, Ch. 8.5; rat preventive measures, §§ 9-31—9-34; dangerous structures, § 9-35; abandoned construction, § 9-36; sewer connections, § 9-71; sign construction, § 16-8; safety inspection of installations in streets, § 17-30; building permits, App. A, 17-100, App. B, Art. VIII, § 1. 
State Law reference— Authority generally, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(25). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Building code adopted. 
(a)  Certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary, the building official, and the fire marshal of the City of Nassau Bay, being marked as 
(1)  2012 International Property Maintenance Code; 
(2)  2012 International Building Code; 
(3)  2012 International Residential Code; 
(4)  2012 International Plumbing Code; 
(5)  2012 International Mechanical Code; 
(6)  2012 International Fuel Gas Code; 
(7)  2015 International Energy Conservation Code; 
(8)  2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code; and 
(9)  2011 National Electrical Code (NFPA 70). 
be and are hereby adopted to be known collectively as the Building Code of the City of Nassau Bay for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all referred to, adopted, and made part hereof, as if fully set out in the ordinance with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  [Amendments.] 
(1)  Paragraph R313.2, 2012 International Residential Code, one and two family dwellings - automatic fire systems, is deleted. 
(2)  Wood shingles or wood shakes are not allowed for roofing. 
In case of conflict between other ordinances and the building code, the more stringent interpretation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 79-241, 2-12-79; Ord. No. 83-294, 1-10-83; Ord. No. 83-297, 3-14-83; Ord. No. 89-370, 5-8-89; Ord. No. 90-395, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 91-408, 8-12-91; Ord. No. 95-444, 2-13-95; Ord. No. 96-464, 4-8-96; Ord. No. 2001-544, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2003-559, § 1, 2-10-03; Ord. No. 2006-610, §§ 1, 3, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2006-611, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. O2013-708, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-13; Ord. No. O2016-745, § 1, 8-8-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-241, adopted Feb. 12, 1979, added provisions not specifically amendatory of the Code. At the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been codified herein as §§ 4-1—4-3.  
Sec. 4-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-379, adopted Feb. 12, 1990, deleted former § 4-2 in its entirety, which section pertained to amendments to the Standard Building Code, 1988 edition, and derived from Ord. No. 79-241, adopted Feb. 12, 1979, and Ord. No. 89-370, adopted May 8, 1989.  
Sec. 4-2.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The provisions of § 4-2.1 were deleted with the consent of the city inasmuch as such section pertained to amendments to the Standard Plumbing Code, 1982 edition, and Ord. No. 91-408 adopted the 1991 edition of the code. The deleted provisions derived from Ord. No. 87-353, adopted Aug. 10, 1987.  
Sec. 4-3. - Enforcing officer. 
The appropriate officer of the City of Nassau Bay, who has duties corresponding to those assigned to named or designated officers in all or any of the codes adopted in section 4-1, shall be deemed the responsible official for the performance of said duties and enforcement of requirements specified in said codes. 
(Ord. No. 79-241, 2-12-79) 
Note— See editor's note following § 4-1.  
Sec. 4-4. - Elevators required, where; specifications. 
(a)  All buildings, other than single-family residences, over one story in height shall have at least one elevator capable of providing access to every floor, and this elevator shall be designed so as to accommodate one emergency ambulance stretcher (minimum size twenty-two (22) inches by seventy-eight (78) inches in full horizontal), and the stretcher shall be permitted to enter the elevator car without shortening or tilting. 
(b)  In order to insure access for emergency medical personnel, the following requirements relating to elevators and car access are stipulated: 
(1)  Each newly constructed structure, other than single-family residences, with two (2) or more stories shall have at least one elevator which shall be identified for emergency medical service use. 
(2)  The emergency medical service elevator shall have the following design criteria: 
a.  The inside car dimension shall be not less than fifty-one (51) inches by eighty-two (82) inches; 
b.  The door access into the elevator shall be not less than forty-two (42) inches wide and positioned on the long axis of the car at one end or the other. 
c.  The elevator provided with these requirements shall be clearly marked and have key control for recall by the emergency medical personnel. 
(Ord. No. 82-287, 7-12-82) 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 82-287, adopted July 12, 1982, has been included herein as § 4-4 at the discretion of the editors.  
Secs. 4-5—4-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 4-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-241, adopted Feb. 12, 1979, specifically amended the Code by repealing § 4-20, which had pertained to the adoption of a building code. Said section had been derived from Ord. No. 70-23, § 1, 10-12-70, and Ord. No. 78-222, adopted July 10, 1978.  
Secs. 4-21—4-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 4-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-241, adopted Feb. 12, 1979, specifically amended the Code by repealing § 4-30, which pertained to the adoption of an electrical code. Said section had been derived from Ord. No. 70-34, § 1, 11-23-70, and Ord. No. 78-222, adopted July 10, 1978.  
Secs. 4-31—4-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 4-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-241, adopted Feb. 12, 1979, specifically amended the Code by repealing § 4-100, which pertained to the adoption of a gas code. Said section had been derived from Ord. No. 70-35, § 1, 11-23-70, and Ord. No. 78-222, adopted July 10, 1978.  
Secs. 4-101—4-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2005, deleted Art. V, §§ 4-150—4-159, in its entirety and enacted a new Art. V, §§ 4-150-4-159, to read as set out herein. Former Art. V, §§ 4-150—4-159, pertained to heating, air conditioning and boiler code, and derived from Ord. No. 70-36, §§ 1—3, 5, 6, adopted Nov. 23, 1970; and Ord. No. 71-70, adopted Nov. 8, 1971. 
 
Sec. 4-150. - Short title; purposes. 
This article shall be known as "Contractor Registration and Building Department Fees" of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas," and may be cited as such. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for municipal regulation of persons and companies intending to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system and to provide for collection of fees for contractor registrations, construction permits, and reinspection fees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, 9-12-05)  
Sec. 4-151. - Technical standards; other licenses required. 
The standards for the work to be performed under a registration or permit under this article are set forth in the building code, the plumbing code, the gas code, the mechanical code and the electrical code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, 9-12-05)  
Sec. 4-152. - Registration and insurance. 
(a)  Every person involved in the above named disciplines shall be required to register with the city on an annual basis providing the herein described criteria are met. It shall be the duty of every applicant to register his name, business address, and applicable state or city trade license with the building department. It shall be his further duty to accompany his application for registration with a certificate of liability insurance made out to the city. Cancellation or expiration of any policy of insurance shall automatically cause revocation of the registration granted under this article. 
(b)  In addition to the preceding requirements set forth for registration, the applicant must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  A registration fee must be tendered by said applicant to the city in an amount adopted by the city council by resolution, as amended from time to time, said schedule of registration fees to be maintained in the city office. 
(2)  Plumbing, air conditioning, electrical and mechanical contractors shall provide a current copy of their licenses to the city. General contractors shall provide a copy of their state registration for residential jobs valued over fifth thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(c)  However, nothing herein shall deny any home owner in the city the right to work on his own home so long as it is designated as a homestead. The insurance requirements of subsection (1) of this section are not applicable to such resident restricted to such home. Proof of home ownership and or designation as a Texas homestead may be required by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, 9-12-05)  
Sec. 4-153. - Permits—Required, exception; fees; failure to obtain. 
(a)  Persons and companies intending to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system shall pay permit and reinspection fees in an amount adopted by the city council by resolution, as amended from time to time, said schedule of fees to be maintained in the city office. 
(b)  Should any construction or installation of equipment begin without the person responsible having obtained a permit in accordance with this article, the fee for such a permit shall be doubled. 
(c)  Failure to obtain a required permit after shall be grounds for the revocation of a contractor's registration and shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, 9-12-05)  
Sec. 4-154. - Same—Application, plans and specifications; issuance. 
Two (2) sets (three (3) for commercial projects) of plans and specifications shall be submitted with each application for a permit. The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official, verifying such plans and specifications for compliance with codes and ordinances under city jurisdiction. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans filed therewith conform with the requirements of this article and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees in an amount adopted by the city council by resolution, as amended from time to time, said schedule of fees to be maintained in the city office, have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, 9-12-05)  
Sec. 4-155. - Same—Effect of issuance. 
(a)  The issuance of a permit or the approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No permit presuming to give authority to violate the provisions of this article shall be valid, nor shall a permit presuming to cancel any of the provisions of this article be valid except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. 
(c)  The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building operations from being carried on thereunder when in violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance of the city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, 9-12-05)  
Sec. 4-156. - Inspections. 
The building official shall establish a system of inspection which shall be conducted by a building inspector, authorized and directed by the building official. At the discretion of the building official, a reinspection fee may be assessed in an amount adopted by the city council by resolution, as amended from time to time, said schedule of fees to be maintained in the city office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-594, § 1, 9-12-05)  
Secs. 4-157—4-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 4-160. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-241, adopted Feb. 12, 1979, specifically amended the Code by repealing § 4-160, which pertained to the adoption of a plumbing code. Said section had been derived from Ord. No. 70-33, § 1, 11-23-70, and Ord. No. 78-222, adopted July 10, 1978.  
Secs. 4-161—4-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SWIMMING POOLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Backflow preventers on existing installations, § 9-77; repair of breaks in sewers, § 9-74. 
State Law reference— Sanitation of swimming pools, V.A.C.S. art. 4477—1, § 15. 
 
Sec. 4-180. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Private residential swimming pool: Any swimming pool located on private residential property under the control of the head of the household there residing, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing by members of such household or their invited guests. 
Public swimming pool: Any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, operated or designed to be used collectively by numerous people for swimming or bathing purposes, whether the admission of said persons is free of charge or not. 
Swimming pool: Any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing a body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing and having a depth of two (2) feet or more at any point. 
(Ord. No. 72-95, § 1, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 72-100, § 1, 11-27-72; Ord. No. 78-220, § 1, 6-12-78)  
Sec. 4-181. - Fence and gate. 
Any person, firm or corporation in possession of land within the corporate limits of the City of Nassau Bay, either as owner, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool, including public swimming pools and private residential swimming pools, shall at all times maintain upon the lot or premises on which the swimming pool is located and completely surrounding the swimming pool, a fence, wall or a solid structure designed to prevent small children from inadvertently wandering into the pool, said fence, wall or structure to be not less than four (4) feet in height, with no opening therein of a width greater than four (4) inches, except for doors or gates. All doors or gates opening into such enclosure shall be kept closed and securely latched when not used for access to or egress from the pool area. The latching devices shall be fixed to the gates or doors no less than three and one-half (3½) feet above the ground. 
Provided, however, if the pool is inaccessible in any manner except through the living quarters of a building there need be no other enclosure and such gates or doors as may exist in such living quarters enclosure need not be so equipped as hereinabove otherwise required. Provided, further, that such a building, dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure, whether fence, wall or solid structure, around a swimming pool. Provided, however, that property abutting a natural or man-made waterway, such as lake, lagoon, creek, bayou, canal or similar body of water, with a depth greater than two (2) feet, may use such water barrier in lieu of a wall. 
Provided, further, that swimming pools in existence on the effective date of this section shall be enclosed in accordance with the requirements hereinabove set forth on or before the first day of December, 1978, and thereafter, any person, firm or corporation, who shall maintain any swimming pool in the corporate limits of the City of Nassau Bay, which pool is not enclosed in accordance with the requirements of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
Provided, however, any owner of premises containing a swimming pool fence, wall or other solid structure, which is in existence on the effective date of this article, but fails to comply with all requirements of this article, may be issued a letter of exception by the city building official and relieved of the obligation of complying with a specific portion of this article, if in the judgment of the building official the exception otherwise complies with the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 72-95, § 2, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 78-220, § 2, 6-12-78)  
Sec. 4-181.1. - Variances. 
The board of adjustments shall hear and render judgment on an appeal when it is alleged there is hardship to the applicant as a result of any requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 78-220, § 3, 6-12-78)  
Sec. 4-182. - Construction. 
In order to protect the public from hazard, all excavations for the construction of swimming pools shall, when unattended, be adequately guarded with barricades completely surrounding said excavations and adequately lighted during hours of darkness. 
(Ord. No. 72-95, § 4, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 78-220, § 5, 6-12-78)  
Sec. 4-183. - Equipment and material—Generally. 
All types of equipment and material shall be of such design and construction necessary to comply with the building code and the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 72-95, § 3, 10-9-72; Ord. No. 78-220, § 4, 6-12-78)  
Sec. 4-184. - Same—Lifesaving equipment. 
(a)  Every person possessing a tract of land within the city as owner, occupier, tenant, lessee or licensee upon which is located a public swimming pool shall equip the premises with at least one of the following items of swimming pool lifesaving equipment: 
(1)  A ring buoy not more than fifteen (15) inches in diameter to which shall be attached a three-sixteenth inch rope no less than sixty (60) feet long; or 
(2)  A life pole or shepherd's crook type of pole having blunted ends with a minimum length of twelve (12) feet; or 
(3)  A throwing line of one-quarter-inch rope with a length no less than one and one-half (1½) times the maximum width of the pool. 
(b)  At all times, such equipment shall be mounted in accessible conspicuous locations no more than twelve (12) feet from the pool water's edge and shall be kept in a state of good repair and in usable condition. 
(c)  No person shall remove any equipment described in subsection (a) of this section from its established poolside location for any purpose other than its intended lifesaving function or for repairs. 
(Ord. No. 72-100, §§ 2, 3, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 4-185. - Lifesaving and emergency information signs. 
Every person possessing a tract of land as owner, occupier, tenant, lessee or licensee, upon which is situated a public swimming pool shall cause to be placed in a conspicuous poolside location a sign or signs which shall state: 
(1)  Descriptive information, through the use of words or drawings or both, about the proper method to use in administering mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. 
(2)  The current telephone numbers of (1) the Nassau Bay Police Force, (2) the Nassau Bay Volunteer Fire Department, and (3) one ambulance service that provides service to Nassau Bay citizens. 
(Ord. No. 72-100, § 4, 11-27-72)  
Secs. 4-186—4-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-324, §§ 1—8, adopted May 13, 1985, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification herein as §§ 4-190—4-193 was at the editor's discretion. 
Previously, Ord. No. 78-206, adopted March 14, 1978 and included herein as Ch. 8.5, Flood Damage Prevention, was codified as superseding former Art. VIII, §§ 4-190—4-196, relative to flood damage protection and derived from Ord. No. 77-188, §§ 1—7, enacted March 28, 1977. 
 
Sec. 4-190. - Definition. 
Satellite dish: A freestanding device that is used or intended to be used to receive, broadcast and/or transmit television signals from or to communications satellites in outer space. 
(Ord. No. 85-324, § 1, 5-13-85)  
Sec. 4-191. - Protective enclosures required; exceptions. 
Any person, firm or corporation in possession of land within the corporate limits of Nassau Bay, either as owner, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a satellite dish, shall at all times maintain upon the lot or premises on which the satellite dish is located and completely surrounding the satellite dish, a fence, wall or a solid structure designed to prevent small children from viewing (from adjoining properties) or inadvertently wandering into the immediate vicinity of the structure, said fence, wall or structure to be opaque and not less than six (6) feet in height, with no opening thereon of a width greater than two (2) inches, except for doors or gates. All doors or gates opening into such enclosure shall be kept closed and securely latched when not used for access or egress from the satellite dish area. The latching device shall be fixed to the gates or doors no less than three and one-half (3½) feet above the ground. No portion of any such fence, wall or solid structure shall encroach upon an area encircling said satellite dish within a radius of ten (10) feet from the base of the satellite dish. 
Provided, however, if the satellite dish is inaccessible in any manner except through the living quarters of a building, there need be no other enclosure and such gates or doors as may exist in such living quarters enclosure need not be so equipped as hereinabove otherwise required. Provided, further, that such a building, dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
Provided, further, that satellite dishes in existence on the effective date of this article [May 13, 1985] shall be enclosed in accordance with the requirements hereinabove set forth on or before the first day of August, 1985, and thereafter, any person, firm or corporation who shall maintain a satellite dish in the corporate limits of the City of Nassau Bay, which satellite dish is not erected and enclosed in accordance with the requirements of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
Provided, however, any owner of premises containing a satellite dish fence, wall or other solid structure, which is in existence on the effective date of this article but fails to comply with all requirements of this article, may be issued a letter of exception by the city building official and relieved of the obligation of complying with a specific portion of this article, if in the judgment of the building official the exception otherwise complies with the intent of this article. 
Nothing herein shall require additional enclosures around a satellite dish if the structure is located in a larger enclosed area, such as a residential yard, which larger area's fence, wall or solid structure otherwise complies with this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-324, §§ 2, 3, 5-13-85)  
Sec. 4-192. - Height, materials and building standards. 
(a)  Height. No satellite dish shall be erected or installed on any lot unless said structure is securely mounted upon a concrete slab of a minimum thickness of four (4) inches, nor shall the overall height of said structure, measured from grade, exceed six (6) feet. 
(b)  Equipment and material. All types of equipment and material shall be of such design and construction necessary to comply with the building code and the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(c)  Construction. In order to protect the public from hazard, all excavations for the construction of satellite dishes shall, when unattended, be adequately guarded with barricades completely surrounding said excavations and adequately lighted during hours of darkness. 
(Ord. No. 85-324, §§ 4, 7, 8, 5-13-85)  
Sec. 4-193. - Compliance with subdivision and zoning ordinances; variances. 
(a)  Nothing herein shall repeal or amend or affect in any manner any zoning approval, including but not limited to the requirement for a specific use permit, mandated by any other ordinance of this city. Furthermore, no satellite dish shall be placed, located, erected or constructed in any location on any lot or premises in such a manner that any portion of the structure encroaches upon any setback line established by subdivision plat or ordinance. For clarification, this article is not affected by and shall not affect the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, Ordinance No. 80-255, as amended. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal when it is alleged there is hardship to the applicant as a result of any requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-324, §§ 5, 6, 5-13-85)  
Secs. 4-194—4-196. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - BULKHEADS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-244, Arts. I-V, adopted May 14, 1979, did not specifically amend the Code. Codification herein as Art. IX, §§ 4-197—4-201 was, therefore, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4-197. - Permit required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall construct, replace or alter any bulkheading on unimproved land within the City of Nassau Bay unless and until a permit for such construction, replacement or alteration has been issued by the City of Nassau Bay. 
(Ord. No. 79-244, Art. I, 5-14-79)  
Sec. 4-198. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein:] 
(a)  Bulkhead: Any structure designed to resist pressure, prevent erosion, and act as a retaining wall along a waterfront. 
(b)  Unimproved land: Any lot or parcel without a permanent building which conforms with the requirements of the Southern Building Code, as adopted and amended by Nassau Bay, or any lot or parcel without a permanent building completed prior to the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 79-244, Art. II, 5-14-79)  
Sec. 4-199. - Permit application procedure; issuance of permit; denial. 
(a)  To obtain a permit for newly constructing, altering or replacing a bulkhead on unimproved land, the following steps must be followed: 
(1)  The property owner shall complete the application for permit to construct, alter or replace bulkheading on unimproved land, which may be obtained at the Nassau Bay city offices. 
(2)  The property owner shall obtain a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and approval from such other governmental offices as may exercise jurisdiction over tidal lands. 
(3)  The property owner must obtain a certified engineering drawing and report that certifies with sufficient back-up data that the planned bulkheading is designed to be and shall be constructed of materials of sufficient strength and installed in such a manner as to retain the embankment together with anticipated surcharge loads for a minimum of ten (10) years. 
(4)  The Nassau Bay application, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit, any approval obtained from other governmental offices exercising jurisdiction over tidal lands, the certified engineering drawing and engineer's report shall be submitted to the planning commission. 
(5)  Within seven (7) days after receipt of the application, the planning commission shall give notice by mail to the owners of adjoining waterfront property of the public hearing on the application. 
(6)  The next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission that is held more than ten (10) days after the adjoining landowners have been notified, shall provide a public hearing on the application. 
(7)  The planning commission shall relay its findings from the public hearing to the city building official. 
(b)  The city building official shall issue a permit unless within twenty-one (21) days the city building official or the planning commission has given written notice to the applicant, copy of which shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission, that a controverting engineering report has been or will be requested. 
(1)  Upon proper notice, the time for granting or denial of a permit shall be extended for ninety (90) days. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the controverting engineering report or the running of six (6) weeks since the giving of notice of intent to request such a report, the planning commission shall, at a regularly scheduled meeting, consider engineering reports and the facts gathered at their public hearing and make a recommendation to the city council. 
(3)  The final decision concerning the issuance of a disputed permit shall be made by the city council within six (6) weeks following the receipt of the controverting engineering report or the running of the ninety-day extension of the time triggered by the notice of intent to request or of the request of a controverting engineering report. 
(4)  The failure of the city council to grant or refuse issuance of a permit within the time prescribed hereinabove shall entitle the applicant to a bulkheading permit. 
(Ord. No. 79-244, Art. III, 5-14-79)  
Sec. 4-200. - Protection of adjoining property. 
All excavation and construction site work shall be protected so that the soil and bulkheading, if any, of the adjoining property will not cave or settle, or suffer increased erosion as a result of said excavation or construction site work. 
(Ord. No. 79-244, Art. IV, 5-14-79)  
Sec. 4-201. - Bulkheads required to be maintained in safe condition; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who shall own or occupy any waterfront lot or lots, tract or tracts, in the City of Nassau Bay to permit or allow the bulkheads on said lot or tract to be in a state of disrepair or to fail to fill the land behind the bulkhead to a level within ten (10) inches of the top of the bulkhead within ten (10) days after the substantial completion of the piling and planking of the bulkhead thus allowing water to accumulate between the bulkhead and the adjacent land, unless covered with a substantial material in such a manner as to deny access to the water which may accumulate behind the bulkhead. This section shall not apply when a land owner has been forbidden to fill behind his bulkheading by any state or federal agency. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-260, 8-11-80) 
Editor's note— Ordinance Nos. 80-260 and 80-261, adopted Aug. 11, 1980 and Aug. 26, 1980, respectively, while not specifically amending the Code, added new material pertaining to Art. IX, Bulkheads. To better facilitate the inclusion of this new material, the editor, at his discretion, has numbered the provisions of said Ord. Nos. 80-260 and 80-261 as §§ 4-201 and 4-202, and renumbered the provisions of former § 4-201 as § 4-203.  
Sec. 4-202. - Bulkheads not to block storm sewers; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct a bulkhead or other structure in such a manner or permit a bulkhead or other structure to remain in such a condition as to block the flow from a storm sewer or cause a storm sewer to be blocked, either partially or completely by a buildup of silt and debris. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-261, 8-26-81) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 4-201.  
Sec. 4-203. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise specifically stated, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, per day. 
(Ord. No. 79-244, Art. V, 5-14-79) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 4-201.  
Secs. 4-204—4-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION REFUSE 
 
Sec. 4-211. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, to regulate the operation and maintenance of commercial and residential construction or demolition sites (hereafter known as "site" or "sites") within the city. This article shall publish and inform contractors or site owners of site maintenance requirements, building permit requirements, regulations that prevent site refuse from entering streets and waterways, and penalties for violations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-518, § 1, 6-12-2000)  
Sec. 4-212. - Site maintenance and monitoring. 
(a)  The owner of and the construction or demolition contractor on a site shall ensure that all exposed trash and scrap materials are placed in appropriate containers at all times. The construction site shall be maintained in a neat and workmanlike manner. All loose wood, metal, and other construction scrap material shall be placed in suitable containers. Scrap material such as paper, plastic, wrappers, cans, drums, buckets, boxes, and similar materials shall be contained in a manner to prevent their being blown about the site by the wind, being carried by flowing water, or releasing fluids that would contaminate surrounding soil. Garbage, food waste, and similar rapidly biodegradable materials shall be contained in closed, covered containers. Building materials stored on site shall be neatly stacked out of the mud and water and shall be secured against movement by wind and flowing water. 
(b)  Garbage and refuse shall be removed from the construction site no less than twice weekly. Scrap materials shall be removed from the site once every other week. Commercial vehicles used for the purpose of removing scrap materials are not to remain on public property or adjoining streets for any consecutive 72-hour weekday period or any consecutive 24-hour weekend period. 
(Ord. No. 2000-518, § 2, 6-12-2000)  
Sec. 4-213. - Construction site barrier requirements. 
The owner and the construction or demolition contractor on all building sites within one hundred (100) feet of a creek, bayou, or lake shall place and maintain a forty-eight-inch or higher flexible construction fencing around the construction site. Fence perforations shall not exceed a one-inch width. Such fencing may be required, at the discretion of the Nassau Bay Building Official, on construction sites beyond one hundred (100) feet from any creek, bayou, or lake if said official determines that refuse from the site has a probability of reaching a creek, bayou, or lake and notifies the owner or contractor in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2000-518, § 3, 6-12-2000)  
Sec. 4-214. - Construction site refuse container requirements. 
The owner and the construction or demolition contractor for the owner shall maintain on site during construction or demolition a trash container constructed of solid wall materials. Chicken wire or similar open type materials shall not suffice. 
(Ord. No. 2000-518, § 4, 6-12-2000)  
Sec. 4-215. - Public rights-of-way and adjoining private property. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of the property on which construction or demolition is being performed and the construction or demolition contractor performing the work to allow trash, debris, construction and demolition materials, sand, silt, chemicals, paint, fill material, or spilled concrete to escape the site onto street rights-of-way, public property, or nearby private property. Such material shall be promptly removed from the site by owner and contractor, and the street right-of-way shall be swept daily by the owner and contractor. In addition, siltation and erosion control measures and devices shall be continuously utilized and maintained by the owner and the construction or demolition contractor to prevent infiltration of sediment and debris into any storm water drainage system and onto public and private nearby property. 
(Ord. No. 2000-518, § 5, 6-12-2000)  
Sec. 4-216. - Enforcement. 
The site or job superintendent of a contractor responsible for the construction or demolition on a site shall be the person directly responsible for the contractor's compliance with this article and shall become a person to be charged with a violation by a contractor. The Nassau Bay Police Department and the Nassau Bay Building Official shall be responsible for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-518, § 6, 6-12-2000)  
Sec. 4-217. - Penalty for violations. 
For any and every violation of the provisions of this article, and for each and every day that such violation continues, said violation(s) shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each day any such violation continues shall be considered to be a separate offense. If said owner or contractor receives a notice of violation (or citation) of any of the above provisions and steps are not taken within a 24-hour period to correct conditions that led to the violation, the building official is directed to post a stop work order at the building site until proper site conditions are met. Conviction for three (3) violations of any of the above provisions may result in a cancellation of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2000-518, § 7, 6-12-2000)  
Chapter 4.5 - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, Ch. 11. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 4.5-1—4.5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-400, adopted June 10, 1991, added provisions to the code, but did not specify the manner of inclusion; designation of the provisions as Art. II, §§ 4.5-21—4.5-28, was at the discretion of the editor. Pursuant to § 10 of the ordinance, the provisions became effective on the sixty-first day following adoption and publication. 
 
Sec. 4.5-21. - Purpose. 
The City of Nassau Bay, by virtue of granting cable television franchises, recognizes its responsibility to implement all measures considered necessary to ensure satisfactory and efficient customer service in the delivery of such cable services. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 1, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-22. - Policy statement. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to ensure that the citizens of Nassau Bay receive a satisfactory level of service from cable television franchisees. It is the express intent of the city council to establish a minimum level of acceptable customer service which promotes the use, value, and quality of cable television service. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 2, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-23. - Telephone responsiveness. 
(a)  The franchisee shall maintain toll-free telephone customer service on a twenty-four-hour basis, with customer service representatives (CSR) available at least during normal business hours. 
(b)  Under normal conditions, telephones must be answered within thirty (30) seconds; subscribers calling should reach a CSR within two (2) minutes in all cases. 
(c)  Telephone calls to the franchisee shall not exceed a ten-per cent abandonment rate (Callers that give up on hold, or receive busy signals). 
(d)  Less than three (3) per cent of callers should ever encounter a busy signal. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 3, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-24. - Business office. 
(a)  The franchisee shall maintain a customer service office within ten (10) miles of the city that is capable of accepting payments, adjusting bills, responding to repair, installation, or other service calls. 
(b)  The Nassau Bay area office shall be open at least a minimum of forty (40) hours per week. Of that time, there shall be a minimum of four (4) hours on Saturday between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and at least one day per week in which the office is open from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and one day per week in which the office is open between 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 4, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-25. - Service and repair calls. 
(a)  Once a system is in place, all normal service installations must be made within seven (7) business days. 
(b)  Repair or other service requests must be acknowledged within twenty-four (24) hours. Repair or any other normal service must be completed within seventy-two (72) hours under normal operating conditions, and within seven (7) days in unusual circumstances. 
(c)  The franchisee must respond to reports of major service outages (any time two (2) or more subscribers experience loss of reception on one or more channels) within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  Subscribers experiencing service outages shall, upon request, be credited with one day's service for each cumulative four-hour outage within a single day. 
(e)  Subscribers shall be provided, upon request, with either a time-specific appointment or a predesignated block of time (not to exceed four (4) hours) for the service call. 
(f)  Technical service calls will be available starting at 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays until 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 5, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-26. - Billing practices. 
(a)  Each subscriber bill must itemize each category of service, or other fees, and clearly state the charge for each. 
(b)  Each bill shall clearly state: 
(1)  The due date for payment; 
(2)  The amount of late payment fees; and 
(3)  A telephone number for billing inquiries. 
(c)  Upon initial installation, and at least once annually, and at such times as there is a change in the information, each subscriber shall receive written notice of: 
(1)  All equipment and services available and the rates/charges for each; 
(2)  Disconnect policies; 
(3)  Procedures for handling billing disputes; 
(4)  Notice that complaints not satisfactorily handled by the franchisee may be referred to the city manager's office (telephone number must be provided); and 
(5)  Availability of parental lock-out devices. 
(d)  Subscribers are to be notified of rate changes or channel changes at least thirty (30) days in advance. 
(e)  The city is to be notified of rate changes or channel changes at least forty-five (45) days in advance. 
(f)  Involuntary disconnects must be given ten (10) days advance written notice, and cannot be less than forty-five (45) days after the bill's due date. 
(g)  Subscribers may request disconnection at any time without charge. Disconnection and removal of the franchisee's equipment must be done within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 6, 6-10-91)  
Secs. 4.5-27. - Enforcement. 
The city manager, or his duly authorized representative, shall administer and enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 7, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-28. - Penalty. 
Any franchisee who violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 91-400, § 8, 6-10-91)  
Secs. 4.5-29—4.5-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FEE FOR USE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-401, adopted June 10, 1991, did not specifically amend this code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—3 as Art. III, §§ 4.5-41—4.5-43, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, taxes, etc., Ch. 11; rental of streets, sidewalks and other public places by utilities, § 17-20 et seq.; taxation generally, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 4.5-41. - Purpose. 
The City of Nassau Bay, through franchise ordinances, grants the nonexclusive right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain in and upon, along, and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places in the city, wires, poles, cables, underground conduits, conductors and other such fixtures and equipment necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable television system. In consideration for the rights and privileges granted in those agreements, the company agrees to pay the city a fee in lieu of any license, charge, rental or other character of charge for the use and occupancy of the streets, alleys or public ways of the city or any occupation or privilege tax. In all existing cable television franchise ordinances, the city has reserved the right to alter the fee and impose the greatest charge authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 91-401, § 1, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-42. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
City is the City of Nassau Bay. 
Cable television shall be synonymous with community antenna television system or CATV system, and shall mean a system for the interception, receipt, sale, transmission and distribution of television and radio signals. 
Grantee is anyone who has been granted a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain a cable television system, or anyone who succeeds to such a franchise. Grantee is also referred to herein as company. 
(Ord. No. 91-401, § 2, 6-10-91)  
Sec. 4.5-43. - Payment to city. 
In consideration for the rights and privileges granted by a cable television franchise, the grantee shall pay, on or before each February 1, May 1, August 1, and November 1, the sum equal to five (5) per cent of the gross company revenues received by the company for rendition of television or radio signals, advertising, equipment rentals, late charges, and other fees and service charges for products and services provided within the city during the three-month period ending with the last day of the second month preceding each such date. 
(Ord. No. 91-401, § 3, 6-10-91)  
Chapter 5 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-660, §§ 1—8, 10, adopted Jan. 11, 2010, amended Ch. 5 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-591, §§ 1—8, 10, adopted Feb. 15, 2005. 
Cross reference— Emergencies and public disturbances, § 12-20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Organization. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Nassau Bay, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Nassau Bay, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law, is hereby created. 
(2)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director; 
(3)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these duties, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(4)  The operational emergency management organization of the City of Nassau Bay shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 1, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-2. - Emergency management director—Powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Surveying actual or potential hazards that threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures that would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Nassau Bay and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary; 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives that is necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary; 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city; 
(7)  Maintenance of liaisons with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations; 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with Harris County in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes; 
(12)  Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein; and 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Chapter 418 of the Government Code). 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 2, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-3. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management (TDEM) of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 3, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-4. - Inter-jurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Harris and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Harris, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an inter-jurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Nassau Bay. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 4, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-5. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 5, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-6. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and the City of Nassau Bay, the agents and representatives of said city, any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, and any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, to the extent permitted by Texas and federal law as amended, be protected from liability for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 6, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-7. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 7, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the office of emergency management of the City of Nassau Bay, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, without authorization to do so from the director or his designee, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or such maximum amount as is set forth by section 418.173(b) of the Texas Government Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 8, 1-11-10)  
Sec. 5-9. - Limitations. 
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-660, § 10, 1-11-10)  
Chapter 6 - COURT AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Establishment of municipal court and of appointment of judges confirmed. 
(a)  For the purpose of clarification and emphasis, the establishment of a municipal court in and for the city for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all the powers and duties prescribed by law, is hereby confirmed. 
(b)  All judges now holding office over such municipal court and heretofore appointed in accordance with the provisions of the charter or ordinance of the city are hereby declared to be duly constituted and appointed and shall hold office until their successors shall have been duly selected in accordance with the provisions hereof and shall have qualified according to law. 
(Ord. No. 77-201, 10-10-77) 
Charter reference— Establishment required, § 4.02(A). 
Cross reference— Punishment for violation of Code or ordinance, § 1-6. 
State Law reference— Establishment, V.A.C.S. art. 1194; jurisdiction, V.A.C.S. art. 1195, V.A.C.C.P. art. 4.14; form of complaint, arts. 45.01, 45.16, 45.17; summoning jury, art. 45.25; rules of procedure, art. 33.01 et seq.; conduct of proceeding by city attorney, art. 45.03; execution of arrest warrants, art. 45.04.  
Sec. 6-2. - Judges—Appointment; removal; qualifications. 
(a)  The presiding judge and the associate judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the city council; provided, however, the appointment of either judge may be terminated for just cause after notice and hearing by the council. Such appointments shall be made by a majority vote of the council and shall be recorded in the minutes of the proceedings of the council. 
(b)  Each judge appointed shall be an attorney in good standing who is licensed to practice law in the State of Texas, or any sister state, who has had at least two (2) years' experience as a practicing attorney. 
(Ord. No. 77-201, 10-10-77) 
Charter reference— Appointment, § 4.02(B) 
State Law reference— See V.A.C.S. art. 1196(a).  
Sec. 6-3. - Same—Compensation and bond as fixed. 
The presiding judge and the associate judge of the municipal court shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the council and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the council, the premium to be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 77-201, § 3, 10-10-77)  
Sec. 6-3.1. - Same—Relief judges. 
Two (2) or more relief judges shall be appointed by the council to sit for the presiding judge, or for the associate judge, of the municipal court, while such judge or judges, any or all, are temporarily unable to act for any reason. Such temporary or relief judge shall possess the same qualifications required of the judge for whom he is sitting. Any temporary or relief judge shall have all the powers and duties of the judge for whom he is sitting while so acting. 
(Ord. No. 77-201, 10-10-77)  
Sec. 6-3.2. - Divisions of court. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be divided into a criminal division and a traffic division. The criminal division shall be presided over by the presiding judge and the traffic division shall be presided over by the associate judge. 
(b)  Such court, its divisions and the judges thereof, may transfer cases from one division to another; and either judge may exchange benches and preside over the other division and each division of the municipal court may be in concurrent and continuous session, either day or night. 
(c)  The presiding judge shall distribute the complaints that are filed with the municipal court clerk in such a manner as to provide equal distribution among the division of such court and in any manner he sees expedient. 
(Ord. No. 77-201, 10-10-77)  
Sec. 6-4. - Clerk of court. 
The clerk of the municipal court shall be appointed with all powers and duties prescribed by law and the charter for the city; provided, however, the council may, when circumstances warrant, by a majority vote of the council, which shall be recorded in the minutes of proceedings of the council, appoint one or more persons to serve as deputy clerks of the court, with all the powers and duties prescribed therefor by law and the charter for the city to serve during the absence or disability of the regularly appointed clerk of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 77-201, § 4, 10-10-77) 
State Law reference— As to clerk, see V.A.C.S. art. 1200.  
Sec. 6-5. - Failure of defendant to appear. 
It shall be unlawful for any person charged in the municipal court in a criminal case arising under an ordinance of the city or charged in the municipal court in a criminal case arising under the criminal laws of the state to fail to appear after ten (10) days' written notice of the time said case is set for trial. Such failure to appear shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 71-42, 4-12-71)  
Sec. 6-6. - Collection of fines, special expenses. 
(a)  The municipal court of the City of Nassau Bay shall follow the rules and procedures set out in articles 45.50 through 45.54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure governing the imposition and collection of fines assessed by the court. 
(b)  A special expense of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid into the city treasury for issuance and service of each warrant of arrest for offenses under section 38.11 of the Penal Code, section 149 of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), or as described in article 17.04 of the Code of Criminal Procedure dealing with personal bonds. The special expense imposed is to be paid by the defendant after release following arrest for offenses committed on or after September 1, 1983. 
(Ord. No. 84-320, 11-12-84) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 84-320, adopted Nov. 12, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 6-6 was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 6-7. - Adopting justice and corporation court rules for the municipal court. 
(a)  Rules adopted. The rules of practice and procedures for the Justice and Corporation Courts of the State of Texas are hereby adopted as the rules of practice and procedure for the municipal court of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(b)  Warrant expenses. A special expense of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the issuance and service of each warrant of arrest under section 38.11 of the Texas Penal Code, or under section 149 of the Texas Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), or article 17.04 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure is hereby authorized, which special expense shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 94-439, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-94)  
Sec. 6-8. - Municipal Court Building Security Fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created as a fund in the city budget a Municipal Court Building Security Fund. Such fund shall be used to pay for security devices and procedures as authorized by Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, section 102.017. 
(b)  Persons, convicted of a misdemeanor offense at a trial in the Nassau Bay Municipal Court shall be assessed and required to pay a three-dollar security fee. This fee shall be assessed as a cost of court and collected in the same manner and procedure as other costs of courts assessed by the city Municipal Court Building Security Fund. 
(Ord. No. 97-477B, §§ 1, 2, 8-11-97; Res. No. R2001-1533, 8-13-01)  
Chapter 7 - FINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, Art. VII. 
Cross reference— Obligations under defense and disaster relief regulations, § 5-13; occupational license taxes, § 11-1; taxation generally, Ch. 18; parks and recreation commission expenditures, § 13-4; planning expenditures, § 15-5(4). 
State Law reference— General authority, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(10). 
 
Sec. 7-1. - City treasurer. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of city treasurer for the city. 
(b)  The duties of the city treasurer shall be as prescribed by law and the ordinances of this city. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of section 4.05 of the charter, the city treasurer shall be appointed by and be subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 74-133, 4-22-74)  
Sec. 7-2. - Purchasing policy. 
(a)  The city manager shall act as the city's purchasing agent to secure all merchandise, materials and supplies needed by the city. The city manager is authorized to make purchases in amounts not exceeding, for any one expenditure, the dollar limit, as established by law, requiring competitive bidding. 
(b)  Whenever required by law, purchasing shall be made by competitive bidding. Whenever possible, purchasing not requiring competitive bidding will also be made on a basis giving opportunity for competition. 
(c)  Purchases will normally be controlled by a purchase order. 
(d)  The city manager will approve all purchase orders. 
(Ord. No. 73-121, 11-26-73) 
Charter reference— Purchasing, § 7.09. 
State Law reference— Competitive bidding on public works contracts, V.A.C.S. art. 2468a.  
Sec. 7-3. - Bill payment policy. 
(a)  The city manager shall authorize payment of bills. 
(b)  Payments will be made only for authorized expenditures. 
(c)  All payments (except those from petty cash) will be paid by check. 
(d)  All supporting documents (such as purchase orders, receiving reports, invoices, etc.) shall be attached to checks when submitted for signature. 
(e)  Two (2) signatures will be required on all checks. Checks shall be co-signed by the city manager and the city treasurer. In the absence only of the city manager or city treasurer, checks shall be countersigned by the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 73-121, 11-26-73) 
Charter reference— Authorized disbursement signatures to be prescribed, § 7.10(A).  
Sec. 7-4. - Petty cash policy. 
(a)  A petty cash fund of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is established. This fund shall be treated as an imprest fund. 
(b)  The fund shall be maintained by the city treasurer or his designee. 
(c)  Appropriate supporting documentation such as receipts shall be kept with the fund for all expenditures. 
(d)  The fund shall be replenished as required, subject to the above limitations. 
(Ord. No. 73-121, 11-26-73)  
Sec. 7-5. - Expense policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to reimburse officials, employees and committee members for the reasonable and necessary expenses incurred on city business. 
(b)  Written expense reports shall be submitted outlining each type of expense by day with receipts attached for lodging, transportation, and any other item over twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The expense report shall show place and reason for the expense. Mileage amounts shall include locations and number of miles for each date. Entertainment expense shall be supported with names of individuals entertained and reason for entertainment. Travel allowances are as follows: 
(1)  Automobile mileage shall be paid at the standard mileage rate as set, from time to time, by the Internal Revenue Service. Said rate shall be monitored by the finance director and reimbursement of automobile mileage at said rate shall be paid accordingly. 
(2)  Reasonable lodging shall be reimbursed at cost. 
(3)  Subsistence shall be reimbursed at cost. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  In specific instances where the attendance of spouses is included at official functions, reasonable and necessary expenses shall be reimbursed at cost. 
(Ord. No. 73-121, 11-26-73; Ord. No. 76-168, 5-10-76; Ord. No. 81-277, 11-9-81; Ord. No. 2001-533, 4-9-01)  
Sec. 7-6. - Policy for authorization of service of the city attorney, city engineer and city financial advisor. 
From time to time, the need may arise when council members need the advice of the city attorney, city engineer or city financial advisor in order to make proper decisions on policy matters. In this event, council should inform the city manager afterwards, so that he may account for funds expended. 
(Ord. No. 73-121, 11-26-73)  
Chapter 8 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— See also App. A, § 7-500 (7-504). 
State Law reference— Authority, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(25), (27). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Arson reward—Offer. 
The city offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash for the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the city, which reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
Cross reference— False alarm reward, § 12.1 
State Law reference— Crime of arson, V.A.P.C. § 28.02.  
Sec. 8-2. - Same—Placards; furnishing copies of offer. 
The city secretary is directed to have made and printed placards eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches in size, containing the language in section 8-1, which are to be encased in wooden frames under glass, and posted inside of not less than six (6) public buildings throughout the city at different prominent locations; and also to furnish a certified copy of said section, a copy of one of the placards, and a list of the buildings where placards have been posted, to the state board of insurance.  
Secs. 8-3—8-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, enacted Sept. 27, 1976, repealed Ord. 70-9, enacted Aug. 24, 1970; hence, §§ 8-3—8-6, derived from § 8-11 of said Ord. No. 70-9, and pertaining to the maintenance of certain fire hazards, have been deleted. In addition, said sections have been deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. 78-223, enacted July 10, 1978, included herein at Art. III, §§ 8-30—8-33.  
Sec. 8-7. - Burning rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful to burn rubbish or trash of any kind, whether in an incinerator or not, unless the incinerator has prior approval of the fire official, except where such burning shall be under the direction or supervision of the fire official or the chief of the fire department. All burning within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to the current regulations to control air pollution adopted by the Texas Air Control Board. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 25(C), 10-26-76) 
State Law reference— Texas Clean Air Act. V.A.C.S. art. 4477—5.  
Sec. 8-8. - Fire lanes—Definition. 
A "fire lane" is defined, for the purposes of sections 8-9 through 8-11, to mean any area appurtenant to the entrance or exit of a building deemed by the fire official to be necessary for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency, designated by him as such, and may, in the discretion of the fire official include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near the entrances or exits to any building. 
(Ord. No. 71-58, § 1, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 8-9. - Same—Designation. 
The fire official is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on private property appurtenant to buildings or the entrances or exits to any store, groups of stores or buildings including but not limited to apartment buildings, office buildings, hospitals and schools, where, in his opinion, such areas must be kept free of parked vehicles and other obstructions to provide ready access to stores, groups of stores, or buildings, in case of fires or other emergency. The designation by the fire official of such fire lanes shall never be held to make the city responsible for the maintenance of such fire lanes on private property, but the owner of such private property shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area. The official record of the designation by location of any such fire lanes shall be kept in the city office, and under the custody and control of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 71-58, § 2, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 8-10. - Same—Posting signs. 
Upon the designation of a fire lane on private property, and upon notice thereof by the fire official to the owner of such property, the owner shall cause signs (furnished by the city) to be posted at either extremity, or where designated fire lane is more than one hundred (100) feet long, signs shall be placed at one hundred (100) foot intervals for the total length of such fire lanes, lettered "NO PARKING—FIRE LANE—CITY ORDINANCE". Such signs shall be of a standard size, color and of standard lettering and mounting, such standards to be adopted by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 71-58, § 3, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 8-11. - Same—Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle of the city in any fire lane where the signs provided for herein have been erected. Provided, however, if the signs provided for herein are not in proper position and not sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, it shall be a defense to any alleged violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 71-58, § 4, 9-13-71) 
Cross reference— Parking in fire lanes, § 19-24.  
Sec. 8-12. - Mobile service units—Definition. 
A "mobile service unit" is a vehicle, a tank truck, or other mobile device from which flammable liquids used as motor fuels may, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle parked on an off-street parking facility. It is a mobile gasoline filling station which either parks or roams around on the parking lot of a shopping center or other public or private off-street parking facility and from which the driver or operator make sales of gasoline to shoppers or customers whose vehicles are parked on the parking lot or off-street parking facility. 
(Ord. No. 71-55, § 1, 8-23-71)  
Sec. 8-13. - Same—Prohibited. 
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, individually or through agents or employees, to operate a mobile service unit within the city. This prohibition of mobile service units is promulgated under the power of the city to make such regulations or prohibitions as are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-55, § 2, 8-23-71) 
State Law reference— Service station regulations, V.A.C.S. art. 9201.  
Secs. 8-14—8-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE OFFICIAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Duties as to hazardous conditions, §§ 8-3, 8-4; duties as to fireworks displays, § 8-43 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-20. - Office created; appointment; removal; term. 
The office of fire official is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, the fire official reporting directly to the city manager. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the city manager, for an indefinite term, and shall be removed for cause. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78)  
Sec. 8-21. - Investigation of fires—Required; record. 
The fire official shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire official shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78)  
Sec. 8-22. - Same—Taking testimony; prosecution of arsonists, etc. 
The fire official, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78) 
State Law reference— Required investigation before payment of loss, V.A.T.S. Ins. Code, art. 5.43.  
Sec. 8-23. - Summoning witnesses; subpoena power. 
The fire official shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire official is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78)  
Sec. 8-24. - Offenses by witnesses. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire official, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire official in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire official to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such demeanor shall be fined as authorized by law; provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78)  
Sec. 8-25. - Investigations in private authorized. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire official may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78)  
Sec. 8-26. - Right of entry—Where fire has occurred. 
The fire official shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this chapter, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has recently occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78)  
Sec. 8-27. - Same—Where no fire has occurred recently. 
The fire official, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, or without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty to regularly and periodically enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Where there has been no fire recently, he shall first obtain the owner's permission before entering the building or premises. If the owner does not grant permission, the fire official shall obtain a search warrant from the court having jurisdiction before entering. Provided, however, if an extreme emergency exists he may enter without a warrant and halt the operation or condition that is creating the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 76-180, § 11, 9-27-76; Ord. No. 78-223, 9-10-78) 
Cross reference— Right of entry of fire chief, § 8-33(1.06); inspections by fire chief, § 8-33(1.07). 
State Law reference— Reports to state fire marshal, V.A.T.S. Ins. Code, art. 5.43.  
Secs. 8-28, 8-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION CODES 
 
Sec. 8-30. - 2012 Edition of the International Fire Code. 
The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements providing regulations consistent with nationally recognized practices for the reasonable protection of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion due to the storage, use, or handling of hazardous materials, substances, and devices, and to minimize hazards to life and property due to fire and panic, there is hereby adopted that certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the fire marshal, known as the 2012 International Fire Code, amendments, and appendices thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-611, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. O2013-718, 10-14-13)  
Sec. 8-31. - Amendments. 
For the purpose of this section, all Reference Standards and Appendices of the 2012 International Fire Code are adopted as code. Any further amendments will be adopted and reviewed at a following date with approval from the Nassau Bay City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-611, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. O2013-718, 10-14-13)  
Sec. 8-32. - Life Safety Code. 
(a)  Adopted and incorporated by reference as code. The current issue and amendments of the Life Safety Code, 2006 edition, including all subsequent amendments thereto, published by the National Fire Protection Association. Three (3) copies of which are on file in the fire marshal's office, building department, and city secretary's office and hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, subject to and including by reference such amendments and additions as shall appear in this article, to be enforced by the fire official. 
(b)  Conflicts. In the event of conflict between the provisions of the Life Safety Code incorporated by reference and any other code or ordinance, the more stringent interpretation of the code shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2006-611, § 1, 10-9-06)  
Sec. 8-33. - General penalty for violations of codes. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided thereof, the violation of any such provision or the failure to perform any such act shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in all cases arising under ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all other cases arising under an ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any such violation or failure to perform such act shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court of the city shall have the authority to promulgate, from time to time, a schedule of minimum fines for such violations, offenses or failure to perform, as described in subsection (a) of this subsection. A copy of the current schedule of fines shall be made available to the city council, and a copy shall be on file in the office of the clerk of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-611, § 1, 10-9-06; Ord. No. 2009-645, §§ 2, 3, 1-12-09) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A, Government Code § 29.003; Code of Criminal Procedures, Art. 4.14. Jurisdiction of Municipal Court.  
Sec. 8-34. - Fire sprinkler systems—New construction. 
(a)  The installation of an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be required in any new commercial building or commercial structure three (3) stories or more in height or buildings exceeding seven thousand five hundred (7,500) gross square feet constructed or erected within the city limits pursuant to a building permit issued after the effective date of this section or when required by the current adopted City of Nassau Bay Building and/or Fire Codes. 
(b)  All approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be monitored and supervised in accordance with all applicable codes. 
(c)  The installation of an approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall provide complete coverage in all areas of the structure, except as approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(d)  The installation of an approved fire sprinkler system shall comply with all applicable adopted city codes and ordinances, including all NFPA references and or codes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-626, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 8-35. - Fire protection—Installation and maintenance of fire protection systems and appliances. 
Article 1. Fire sprinkler systems—Existing structures. 
(1)  The type of systems, all elements thereof and its installation shall meet the requirements and specifications of the current edition of the International Fire Code, Life Safety Code and the National Fire Codes. 
(2)  All such fire sprinkler systems so installed shall be maintained in working order by the owner, occupant or other person charged with responsibility for the management, care, and maintenance of such building or structure at all times. 
(3)  All approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be monitored and supervised in accordance with all applicable codes. 
Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide a reasonable degree of safety to persons occupying existing buildings by providing for the installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems in such buildings that do not already have such systems. 
Application. This article shall apply to the term "existing buildings or structures" and shall be construed to mean buildings constructed prior to the passage of this section, which are located within the corporate limits of the City of Nassau Bay. 
Article 2. Building Group Classifications: Where Required. 
(1)  Group B—Business, having three (3) or more stories in height or total gross square footage greater than forty thousand (40,000). 
Compliance schedule. 
Compliance check points. Owners of existing buildings in the corporate limits of the City of Nassau Bay shall comply with the following schedule for installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
1.  On or before July 01, 2010, three (3) years after adoption of this code, a water supply in accordance with NFPA 13 shall be installed to all floors of the building, and the owner shall provide the fire marshal's office written plans, which document compliance with the code. 
2.  On or before July 01, 2011, or within four (4) years after the adoption of the code, a minimum of fifty (50) per cent of the structure shall be equipped with an operational automatic fire sprinkler system. 
3.  On or before July 01, 2012, or within five (5) years after the adoption of the code, the total square footage of the building shall be equipped with an operational automatic fire sprinkler system. 
(2)  Group R—Multi-family residential. Any multi-family dwelling which is constructed with enclosed corridors used for access or egress from any livable space or dwelling unit shall be protected by a complete supervised automatic fire sprinkler system. The system shall provide coverage to the entire structure. 
Compliance schedule—Multi-family. 
Compliance check points. Owners of existing buildings in the corporate limits of the City of Nassau Bay shall comply with the following schedule for installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems: 
On or before one (1) year after adoption of this code, engineering plans, conceptual drawings, and hydraulic calculations for an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be submitted to the Nassau Bay Fire Marshal's Office for review. The plans and an application for permit must be submitted for approval by a licensed fire sprinkler contractor prior to any installation of such system. 
On or before two (2) years after adoption of this code, fifty (50) per cent of the structure shall be equipped with an approved automatic operational fire sprinkler system. 
On or before three (3) years after adoption of this code, one hundred (100) per cent of the structure shall be equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system that is operational and approved by the Nassau Bay Fire Marshal's Office. 
(Ord. No. 2007-627, 7-9-07; Ord. No. 2007-629, 8-13-07)  
Secs. 8-36—8-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Maximum permitted noise levels, § 10-5. 
State Law reference— Fireworks regulations, V.A.C.S. art. 9205. 
 
Sec. 8-40. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Fireworks: Any firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, cannon crackers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display and shall include all articles or substance within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks whether herein specially designated and defined or not. Sparklers are expressly excluded from the provision of this article. 
Person: As defined in section 1-5, and shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and administrators. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 1, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-41. - Sale, use or possession prohibited generally. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall sell, offer for sale, possess, use or explode any fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 2, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-42. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to signal flares of the type and kind commonly used as safety flares by motorists in distress; nor shall this article apply to any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried by a vessel at sea for its own use; nor shall this article apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use; nor shall the penal provisions of this article apply to persons who have been issued a permit for the supervised display of fireworks authorized by this article. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city, any civic group or any responsible person from being eligible for a permit if all requirements of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 3, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-43. - Display permit—Authorized; conditions generally; nontransferable. 
A permit to stage a fireworks display under supervised conditions may be granted by the fire official of the city. Each such display shall be conducted by a competent operator with adequate assistants. The determination of the competency of the operator and the number of assistants to such operator to be required shall be matters solely within the discretion of the fire official, but he shall establish guidelines and administer this section uniformly for all applicants. Each such display shall be conducted, located and of such character that, in the opinion of the fire official, after proper inspection, it shall not be hazardous to individuals or to property. Should such a permit be granted, the possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be restricted to the approved site (unless in transit to or from said site), the approved time (excluding a reasonable time for preparation for the allotted display time and a reasonable time thereafter) and the approved purpose for such display. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 4, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-44. - Same—Financial responsibility. 
Before any permit for a fireworks display shall be issued, the person making application therefor shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to property or for damages for personal injury to individuals arising from any act or omission on the part of such person, his representative, agent or employee. The amount, character and form of such proof of financial responsibility shall be determined by the fire official, but in no event shall such amount be less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Permits shall be granted only for National Independence Day and special events that are formalized by a proclamation by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 4, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-45. - Same—Application; fee. 
(a)  Application for a permit to operate a display of fireworks in conformance with the terms of this article shall be made in writing on forms provided by and submitted to the fire official. Such application shall set forth: 
(1)  The name of the organization sponsoring the display, together with the names of persons actually in charge of the firing of the display. 
(2)  Evidence of financial responsibility as required by this article. 
(3)  The date and time of day at which the display is to be held. 
(4)  The exact location planned for the display. 
(5)  A description setting forth the age, experience and capabilities of the persons who are to do the actual discharging of the fireworks. 
(6)  The number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged. 
(7)  The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to the display, if such fireworks are stored or are to be stored within the city. 
(8)  A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all buildings, residences, streets and other lines of communication, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, and the location of all nearby trees or other overhead obstructions. 
(b)  A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) must accompany the application before a permit will be issued by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 4, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-46. - Same—Conditions preventing issuance. 
No permit shall be granted for any display of fireworks where the discharge, failure to fire, faulty firing, or fallout of any fireworks or other objects would endanger persons, buildings, structures, forests or brush, nor in any case where the point at which the fireworks are to be fired is less than two hundred (200) feet from the nearest permanent building, public highway, street or other means of travel or fifty (50) feet from the nearest aboveground utility line, street light, tree or other overhead obstruction, nor in any case for a display to be fired within five hundred (500) feet of a school, church, hospital or similar institution. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 6, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-47. - Temporary storage. 
All fireworks temporarily stored in the city for purposes of a fireworks display shall be stored in a manner and in a place secure from fire, accidental discharge and theft, and in a manner approved by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 6, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-48. - Investigation of site; conference with police. 
Upon receipt of such an application, at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date set for the display, the fire official shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation of the site for the proposed display for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this article are complied with in the case of the particular display. He shall confer with the police authorities of the city about the application and whether issuance of a permit would be consistent with public safety. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 5, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-49. - Restraint of spectators. 
Spectators at a display of fireworks shall be restrained behind lines or barriers as designated by local authorities, but in no case less than two hundred (200) feet from the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged. Only authorized persons and those in actual charge of the display shall be allowed inside these lines or barriers during the unloading, preparation, or firing of fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 6, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-50. - Direction of projectiles. 
All fireworks that fire a projectile shall be so set up that the projectile will go into the air as nearly as possible in a vertical direction, provided that where such fireworks are to be fired beside a lake or other large body of water, they may be directed in such a manner that the falling residue from the deflagration will fall into said body of water. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 6, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-51. - Persons conducting display—Qualifications. 
The person in actual charge of the firing of the fireworks in a display shall be able-bodied, at least twenty-one (21) years of age, competent for the task, and so certified by the fire official. Such operator shall have his certificate of competency in his possession when engaged in conducting a display and shall exhibit the same on request of any authorized person. Authorized persons shall include but not be limited to the mayor, the city manager, any councilman, the fire official, the fire chief or any police authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 7, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-52. - Same—Number required. 
There shall be at all times no fewer than two (2) individuals conducting the display. Such individuals shall be on duty during the discharge and at least one (1) of those individuals shall be certified. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 8, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-53. - Firemen on duty. 
The person to whom a permit has been issued shall arrange for the detailing of one (1) member of the local fire department or such larger number as may be deemed necessary by the chief of the fire department. Fire department personnel shall be on duty from the time the fireworks are delivered at the site until the termination of the display and the removal of all fireworks and debris from the site. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 10, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-54. - Display in windstorm. 
No fireworks display shall be held during any windstorm in which the wind reaches a velocity of more than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 6, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-55. - Fire protection and extinguishing equipment. 
Fire protection and extinguishing equipment shall be provided as required by the fire official and/or the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 9, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-56. - Disposal of unfired fireworks, and debris. 
Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of or removed in a manner safe for the particular type of fireworks. The debris from the discharged fireworks shall be properly disposed of by the operator before he leaves the premises. The operator, upon the conclusion of the display, shall make a complete and thorough search for any unfired fireworks or pieces which have failed to fire or function and shall dispose of them in a safe manner. Such search shall be instituted at the earliest possible time following the conclusion of the display but in no event later than the first period of daylight which follows. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 6, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-57. - Seizure, etc., of contraband fireworks. 
The fire official is directed by this article to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held or in any other manner possessed in violation of this article. The disposition of seized, taken or removed fireworks, following conviction of such violation, shall be the responsibility of the fire official and shall be accomplished in such manner as not to disrupt or alarm the public. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 11, 11-23-70)  
Sec. 8-58. - Punishment for violation. 
Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, sell, or offer for sale any fireworks shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-6. 
Any person who shall use, discharge or cause to be discharged, possess, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action without a city fireworks display permit any fireworks shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-6. 
Any parent or guardian of a minor child below the age of fourteen (14) years who permits or allows such minor child to use, discharge, possess, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 70-32, § 12, 11-23-70)  
Chapter 8.5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-511, adopted May 8, 2000, enacted new flood damage prevention provisions. Said provisions have been included herein as superseding former flood damage prevention provisions derived from Ord. No. 87-351, adopted May 11, 1987; and Ord. No. 96-470, adopted Oct. 14, 1996. 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, Ch. 4; planning and development, Ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public ways, Ch. 17; utilities and services, Ch. 20; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8.5-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Texas has, in V.T.C.A., Water Code section 16.318, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. I, § A, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-2. - Findings of fact. 
The flood hazard areas of Nassau Bay are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. I, § B, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area and the uses available to that property. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. I, § C, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. I, § D, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE, or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Coastal high hazard area means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building: 
(i)  Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and 
(ii)  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway met the standards of section 60.3(e) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "Flooding"). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of correction and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for garaging vehicles, storage purposes or for access only is not a "habitable floor." 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to quality as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(i)  Built on a single chassis; 
(ii)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(iii)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(iv)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 2, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 3, § A, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 2007-621, 4-9-07)  
Sec. 8.5-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by Federal Emergency Management Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Map 48201C109OL, dated June 18, 2007, with accompanying flood boundary-floodway maps and any revisions hereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 3, § B, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 2000-524, 9-11-00; Ord. No. 2007-621, 4-9-07)  
Sec. 8.5-8. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 3, § D, 5-8-00)  
Sec. 8.5-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 3, § E, 5-8-00)  
Sec. 8.5-10. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 3, § F, 5-8-00)  
Sec. 8.5-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 3, § G, 5-8-00)  
Sec. 8.5-12. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, and in addition shall pay all court costs. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Nassau Bay from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, 5-8-00)  
Secs. 8.5-13—8.5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8.5-21. - Floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Designation. The building official is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for building permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 8.5-7, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 4, §§ A, B, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-22. - Establishment of development permit. 
A building permit and/or a site development plan shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 3, § C, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-23. - Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a building permit and/or site development plan shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in triplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 8.5-32(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 8.5-21(b)(1). 
(2)  Approval or denial of a building permit and/or its development plan by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 4, § C, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-24. - Review of proposed map and floodway revisions. 
Prerequisite requirements by the city to allow review and evaluation of a possible map and floodway revision shall be as follows: 
(1)  Revisions to FIRM. When the developer requests a revision to the effective FIRM, the revision request must include "as-built" plans of the channel improvements, certified by a registered engineer, and the hydraulic data listed below: 
a.  Revised water surface profiles of the ten-, fifty-, 100-, and 500-year floods, including a zone determination: 
1.  The methodology and starting parameters for the revised profiles should be consistent with the present effective flood insurance study; i.e., same discharges and hydraulic model as used in the effective Flood Insurance Study (FIS) have been superseded by more current and technically superior data and analysis (FEMA approval should be obtained before deviating from the effective FIS parameters). 
2.  If only a portion of the existing profiles is revised, the upstream and downstream portions of the revised profiles should coincide with the effective FIS profiles; i.e., hydraulic calculations should be continued for a great enough distance upstream and downstream of the revised area until water surface elevations coincide with those in the effective FIS. 
b.  The floodway hydraulic backwater models should be submitted. The first model should reflect current conditions on the stream. The second model should incorporate proposed changes in stream geometry and may reflect a revised floodway configuration: 
1.  The methodology and parameters for the revised floodway should be consistent with the effective FIS; i.e., equal conveyance reduction to establish encroachment limits, unless changes as specified in subsection (1)a, above, have been approved by FEMA. 
2.  If only portions of the floodway are revised then it must tie into the effective FIS floodway upstream and downstream of the revised area without causing surcharges in excess of one foot above the original 100-year flood elevation, or the surcharge established in the effective FIS, whichever is less. 
c.  Delineation of the 100- and 500-year flood boundaries, and the location of alignment of cross-sections and flow line used in the hydraulic model: 
1.  This information should be shown on a map of suitable scale and topographic definition to provide reasonable accuracy. 
2.  All items should be labeled for easy cross-reference to hydraulic model and summary data. 
d.  Evidence indicating that the community has agreed to maintain the channel improvements, in the form of an ordinance which specifies the maintenance activities to be performed, the frequency of their performance, and the community ties to be performed, the frequency of their performance, and the community official(s) responsible for their performance. If the detail or complexity of such maintenance activities precludes their incorporation into an ordinance, the ordinance should reference a maintenance plan document, which contains such details. 
(2)  Floodway predevelopment regulations: 
a.  The developer shall submit to the city plans and specifications to be used to construct any structure, roadway, water channel or other object including any fill or grading within the Cow Bayou and Clear Creek floodways. Said floodways are defined on the Federal Emergency Management floodplain map. Community panel numbers are: City of Nassau Bay, Map No. 485491, Panel No. 1090, City of League City, Map No. 485488, City of Webster, Map No. 485516, Panel 1070. 
b.  The city shall hold three (3) public hearings, one by the planning and zoning commission and two (2) by the city council. The two (2) city council meetings shall be held not less than twenty-eight (28) days apart. The city shall publish in the official newspaper a one-half-page notice of the meeting at least once each week during the four weeks between city council meetings. The cost of the notices shall be borne by the person or persons requesting construction within the floodway. 
c.  Planning commission requirements. The planning commission, acting as a fact-finding body for the city council, and after reviewing the information and conducting the appropriate public hearing, shall make recommendation as to the effects upon the city of the proposed floodway diversion or alteration project. In order to conduct this task the prospective developer shall require the following be submitted to the city offices no less than fourteen (14) working days prior to the scheduled meeting date: 
1.  Detailed drawings, including plan & profiles, indicating the present elevation of all natural obstructions presently within the floodway. 
2.  Detailed drawings, including plan and profiles, showing proposed improvements the developer wishes to construct (this shall include sewer and water lines, streets and other public-owned improvements). 
3.  An engineering study showing the additional floodwater elevation, if any, the new construction will cause. 
4.  Bulkhead, canal and waterway releases as may be required by the Corps of Engineers, Texas Land Office, Texas Water Resources, Texas Wildlife Agency and any other agencies that may have an interest. This shall include any environmental impact studies as required to obtain the above permits and releases. 
d.  City council requirements. The city council shall require the same information as the planning commission and a favorable recommendation from the planning commission. 
e.  Upon the passage of a favorable review by both the planning commission and city council, a request shall be forwarded to the Federal Emergency Management Agency in Denton, Texas, that indicates that the city has reviewed the proposed floodway project and that the developer's request for floodway construction should be considered by FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 4, § E, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-25. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgement on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgement on an appeal only when it is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in district court. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 8.5-23(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 8.5-3). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(i)  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination to not grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  Variances for new construction shall not be issued where the lowest habitable floor elevation is below the base flood elevation as defined on the city FIRM. 
e.  Variances may only be granted where the lot in question is in a developed neighborhood, and where the lot in question is one of not more than four (4) contiguous vacant lots, and where hardship to the owner and severe structural or drainage problems would be caused by strict enforcement of the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
f.  Variances for substantial repairs to residences damaged as a result of natural disasters or fires may be granted in accordance with the procedures described herein above. In no event shall any variance be granted allowing substantial repair to a structure whose first floor is more than twenty-four (24) inches below base flood elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(i)  The criteria outlined in section 8.5-25(1)—(9) are met; and 
(ii)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 4, § E, 5-8-2000)  
Secs. 8.5-26—8.5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 8.5-31. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, § A, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-32. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 8.5-7, (ii) section 8.5-21(8), or (iii) section 8.5-33(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction—New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification of the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 8.5-23(1)a. is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction—New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level and twenty-four (24) inches above the BFE, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practiced outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures—New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without any restriction. 
(4)  Manufactured homes: 
a.  Manufactured Homes shall not be placed on any lot, parcel or tract of land in the city. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles—Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
(i)  Be on the site fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
(iii)  Meet the permit requirements of section 8.5-23(1). A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, § B, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 2000-524, 9-11-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-33. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with sections 8.5-2, 8.5-3, and 8.5-4 of this chapter. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions shall meet site development requirements of section 8.5-22 and the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 8.5-7 or section 8.5-22(b)(8) of this chapter. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, § C, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-34. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8.5-7 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade, at least as high as twenty-four (24) inches above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures: 
(i)  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade, at least as high as twenty-four (24) inches above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. 
(ii)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects and buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 8.5-23(1)a. are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures or slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, § D, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-35. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 8.5-7 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. No fill shall be allowed except by special permit through the board of adjustment. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article III. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, § E, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-36. - Coastal high hazard areas. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 8.5-7 are areas designated as Coastal High Hazard Areas (zones V1-30, VE, and/or V). These areas have special flood hazards associated with high-velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, in addition to meeting all the provisions outlined in this chapter, the following provisions must also apply: 
(1)  The following information shall be obtained: elevation in relation to mean sea level of the bottom of the lowest floor, excluding pilings and columns, of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
(2)  All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on pilings and columns so that: 
(i)  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor, excluding the pilings or columns, is elevated to or above the base flood level; 
(ii)  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of subsections (3)(i) and (ii) of this section. 
(4)  All new construction and substantial improvements have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of twenty (20) pounds per square feet (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed will meet the following conditions: 
(i)  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
(ii)  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards. Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be used for human habitation. 
(5)  The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited. 
(6)  Man-made alteration of sand dunes, which increase potential flood damage, is prohibited. 
(7)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's FIRM either: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
(iii)  Meet the requirements in section 8.5-22 of this chapter and paragraphs (1) through (6) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, § F, 5-8-2000)  
Sec. 8.5-37. - Areas between limits of 100-year flood and 500-year flood (shaded zone X). 
All new construction and substantial improvement of residential and nonresidential structures within shaded zone X designations shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated twenty-four (24) inches above the nearest adjacent A zone base flood elevation specified in feet on the community flood insurance rate map, as determined by the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated twenty-four (24) inches above the nearest adjacent A zone base flood elevation specified in feet on the community flood insurance rate map, as determined by the floodplain administrator; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level of the nearest adjacent A zone the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this subsection as proposed in section 8.5-23(1)c. are satisfied. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or registered public surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 8.5-23(1) are satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2000-511, Art. 5, § G, 5-8-2000)  
Chapter 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noise, dust, etc., prevention, App. A, § 7-500. 
State Law reference— Office of health officer, V.A.C.S. art. 4425. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 9-1—9-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLEANLINESS, SANITATION AND SAFETY OF PREMISES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste disposal, § 20-20 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-20. - Abandoned refrigerators, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or other structure, or within any warehouse or storage room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building or other structure, under such circumstances as to be accessible to children, any icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or more and an opening of fifty (50) square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid shut. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 10, 9-13-71) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.A.C.S. art. 9203.  
Sec. 9-21. - Scattering materials from vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in transporting garbage, trash, refuse or dirt, sand, cement or other building supplies to permit any of the hauled material to be scattered or thrown into the streets, and it shall be the duty of each person so transporting such materials to so modify his equipment and to so operate his equipment that such spillage and scattering shall not occur. It shall further be the duty of such person, should such scattering or spillage occur, to immediately remove the same from the city streets upon notification by the city health officer or his duly authorized representative or any peace officer, including but not limited to the chief of police and any deputy sheriff or the county. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 25(d), 10-26-76) 
Cross reference— Parking vehicles or parts of vehicles on residentially zoned property, § 12-6; prohibited of garbage removal contractor, § 20-29.  
Sec. 9-22. - Depositing trimmings on property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, dump or deposit any lawn trimmings, hedge trimmings or any other cuttings or trimmings of weeds, flowers or other vegetation, on driveways, lawns, vacant or improved lots, or any other private property or in any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb, alley or any other public property of the city, including storm drains. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 25(a), 10-26-76)  
Sec. 9-23. - Depositing garbage, junk, etc., on property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, dump or deposit garbage, trash, ashes, rubbish, paper, old automobile parts or junk of any nature on any gutter, street, alley, sidewalk, curb, driveway, parkway, or between any curb and sidewalk or on any other public property, including storm drains, of the city or on driveways, lawns, vacant or improved lots, or any other private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 25(b), 10-26-76) 
Cross reference— Polluting waters of fountains in parks or lake, § 13-10(2).  
Sec. 9-24. - Depositing of petroleum products in storm drains. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the storm drains of the city for the purpose of disposing of any oil, gasoline or any other petroleum product. Products such as these must be removed from the city and disposed of by the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the building, business or premises where such wastes originate and the city health officer shall have the power to determine what other liquid wastes constitute a health hazard to the city and fall within this classification of liquids that may not be poured into the storm drains and which are subject to the requirement that they be removed and disposed of at the expense of the user. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 25(e), 10-26-76)  
Sec. 9-25. - Depositing obnoxious matter or substance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or throw or permit to accumulate in such a manner as to emit noxious, disagreeable and offensive smells, or permit or cause to be placed, deposited or thrown any garbage, trash or refuse of any kind on public or private property outside of any house, building, town house, apartment, hotel, motel, church or school or similar structure, unless the same has been deposited in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 25(f), 10-26-76) 
State Law reference— Accumulations constituting nuisance, V.A.C.S. art. 447—1, § 2(f).  
Sec. 9-26. - Unsanitary animal, vegetable or mineral matter remaining on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be or remain in or upon any public premises, any animal, vegetable or mineral matter, or any composition or residue thereof, which is in an unsanitary condition or is injurious to public health. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 25(g), 10-26-76)  
Sec. 9-27. - Stagnant water—Holes, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, who shall own or occupy any lot or tract of land in the city to permit or allow holes, places or locations on said lot or tract where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit the same to remain on said premises. Lakes are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 1, 9-13-71) 
Cross reference— Holes in parking lots, § 9-41.  
Sec. 9-28. - Same—Accumulations prohibited on private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot or tract of land in the city to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 2, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-29. - Accumulations of impure or unwholesome matter generally on private premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or tract of land in the city to permit or allow any carrion, filth, animal matter, waste food products or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 3, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-573, adopted Nov. 10, 2003, deleted § 9-30 in its entirety. Former § 9-30 pertained to accumulation of weeds, rubbish, etc., on private premises and derived from Ord. No. 71-59, § 4, adopted Sept. 13, 1971; Ord. No. 77-191, § 1, adopted Apr. 11, 1977; and Ord. No. 91-409, adopted Sept. 9, 1991.  
Sec. 9-31. - Rat control—Accumulations of impure or unwholesome matter. 
No garbage, rubbish, carrion, filth, animal matter, waste food products or other impure or unwholesome matter shall be allowed to accumulate or remain in any building or premises in the city so that the same may or shall afford food for or a harboring or breeding place for rats. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 3, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-32. - Same—Accumulations of lumber, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or unimproved, or on any open lot or alley in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels or similar material that may be permitted to remain thereon and that may be used as a harborage for rats, unless the same is placed on open racks and elevated not less than eighteen (18) inches above the ground, with a clear intervening space underneath, to prevent the harborage of rats. This section shall not apply when such lumber or other materials are stored temporarily, for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days, at an elevation designated by the city health officer. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 3, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-33. - Same—Inspection of premises; ordering remedial or preventive action. 
The city health officer or his representative, is authorized to make frequent and unannounced inspections of existing business buildings within the city for the purpose of determining any rat infestation, and order, by written notice, either the owner, occupant, agent or any other person in custody of any rat-infested business building to protect such business building by ordering that such rat-control methods be employed as may be deemed necessary by the city health officer, or his representative, to maintain business buildings free from rats, regardless of the need for the remodeling of or repairs to such business buildings. The written notice or order shall specify the time, in no event less than fifteen (15) days, for completion of such work and improvements. Unless such work and improvements are completed in accordance with the written order or notice within the time so specified or within the time to which a written extension has been granted by the city health officer, or his representative, then, in such event, the owner, occupant, agent or other person in custody of the building shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine as provided in section 1-6, and each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The city health officer, or his representative, is authorized to make inspections during the course of and upon completion of any construction repairs, remodeling or installation of rat-control measures to business buildings to insure compliance with the provisions of this section, and no person shall interfere with or refuse to permit such inspection. Whenever the city health officer notifies the occupant of a business building, in writing, that there is evidence of rat-infestation of the building, such occupant shall immediately institute anti-rat-infestation measures and shall continuously maintain such measures in a satisfactory manner until the premises are declared by the city health officer to be free of rat-infestation. Unless such measures are undertaken within fifteen (15) days after receipt of notice, it shall be construed as a violation of the provisions of this section and the occupant shall be held responsible therefor. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 3, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-34. - Same—Disposal of dead rats; continuation of preventive measures; methods of rat destruction. 
Any rats caught or killed therein shall be removed daily and disposed of in a manner acceptable to the city health officer, and all traps reset and rebaited and other anti-rat-infestation measures shall be continued. Rats may also be destroyed by such means other than trapping as are approved by the city health officer, or by any authorized agency of the United States Public Health Service, or the state board of health. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 3, 9-13-71) 
Cross reference— See also § 9-36.  
Sec. 9-35. - Dangerous structures. 
(a)  This section is adopted so that the city council may promote the public health, safety, and general welfare within the city through the regulation of substandard, uninhabitable and dangerous buildings or structures. By requiring the repair, demolition or removal of substandard, uninhabitable and dangerous buildings and structures, the city council seeks to protect property values and prevent bodily injury, death, and property damage within the city limits. City council hereby adopts the provisions of Subchapter C Quasi-Judicial Enforcement of Health and Safety Ordinances of Subchapter C of Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code and hereby designates the city council as the building and standards commission under said subchapter. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows, unless the clear meaning of the text mandates otherwise: 
Appraised value shall mean the value given the structure by the county tax assessor's office. 
Building shall mean any structure of any kind or any part thereof, erected for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind and includes any structure used as storage whether or not associated with a living unit. 
Building inspector/fire marshal shall mean the person(s) appointed by the city to conduct periodic inspections of buildings and structures to insure that the same are being maintained in a manner consistent with prescribed applicable codes of the city and not in violation of this section. 
City shall mean the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
City council shall mean the governing body of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Diligent effort shall mean best or reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee including a search of the following records: 
(1)  County real property records of the county in which the building is located; 
(2)  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; 
(3)  Records of the secretary of state; 
(4)  Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; 
(5)  City tax records; and 
(6)  City utility records. 
Minimum housing standards shall mean those standards found in the city's adopted standard building, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical, existing building and fire prevention codes and any other housing and structure regulations adopted under Chapter 214, Local Government Code. 
Owner shall mean any person, agent, firm, corporation, or other entity named in the real property records of the county where the building is located as owning the property. 
Structure shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, or any part thereof. 
(c)  Declaration of nuisance. Any building or structure requiring repair, removal or demolition, as described and defined herein below, and all buildings or structures within the city which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, uninhabitable or otherwise dangerous to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful and subject to the provisions of this section regarding repair, removal or demolition. 
(d)  Inspection. An inspection shall be made of every building located within the city which is suspected of being in violation of this section. The building inspector/fire marshal or their official designee(s) are hereby authorized to conduct inspections of buildings suspected of being in violation of this section and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Notice of violation. Whenever a violation of this section has been discovered and reported by the building inspector/fire marshal of their designee(s), a public hearing shall be held by the city council to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in this section. 
A notice of the hearing shall be sent to the occupant, if any, and record owner, lienholder and/or mortgagee. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified mail return receipt requested. Additionally, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the front door of each affected structure situated on the property or as close to the front door as practicable. It is not necessary that the notice to the occupant of the property list an occupant by name. Service of the notice may be accomplished by the first class U.S. mail or by personal delivery to any occupant of the property who is above the age of eighteen (18) years. 
The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The names of all persons to whom the notice is being served; 
(2)  The street address or legal description of the premises; 
(3)  The date of inspection; 
(4)  The nature of the violation; 
(5)  The date, time and location of the hearing; and 
(6)  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with [this section] and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(f)  Standards. The following standards shall be utilized in determining whether a building should be ordered repaired, removed or demolished: 
(1)  The building or structure is liable to partially or fully collapse; or 
(2)  The building or structure has been constructed or maintained in violation of any provision of the city's building code or fire code or in violation of Section 54.032 of the Local Government Code; or 
(3)  Any wall or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle one-third ( 1/3 ) of its base; or 
(4)  The foundation or the vertical or horizontal supporting members are twenty-five (25) percent or more damaged or deteriorated; or 
(5)  The non-supporting coverings of walls, ceilings, roofs, or floors are fifty (50) percent or more damaged or deteriorated; or 
(6)  The structure has improperly distributed loads upon the structural members, or the structural members have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; or 
(7)  The structure of any part thereof has been damaged by fire, water, earthquake, wind, vandalism, or other cause to such an extent that it has become dangerous to the public, health, safety and welfare; or 
(8)  The structure does not have adequate light, ventilation, or sanitation facilities as required by the city; or 
(9)  The structure has inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or other emergency or has insufficient stairways or elevators or fire escapes or other means of ingress or egress; or 
(10)  The structure, because of its condition, is uninhabitable, unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the city's citizens including all conditions conducive to the harboring of rats or mice or other disease carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease. 
(g)  Hearing. The date of the hearing shall not be less than ten (10) days after notice is made (as described herein). 
If a building is found to be in violation of this section, the city shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to, within thirty (30) days, repair, remove or demolish the building, unless it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be done in thirty (30) days. 
If the city allows more than thirty (30) days for the building to be repaired, removed or demolished, the city shall establish specific time schedules for the work to be commenced and performed and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. 
The city shall not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless a detailed plan and time schedule for the work are submitted at the hearing and it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work. Additionally, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee must submit work progress reports to demonstrate compliance with the time schedule established. 
In any case where repairs are estimated to cost fifty (50) percent or more of the appraised value, a building shall meet all current code requirements; and in all cases where a structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this section, it shall be demolished or removed. 
(h)  Order for repair or demolition. After the public hearing, if a building is found to be in violation of any of the standards set out in this section, the city may order that the building be repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time, as established herein. 
If the building is ordered to be repaired, removed or demolished, the city shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city shall make a diligent effort to discover each owner, mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or property on which the building is located. 
(i)  Notice of repair or demolition. In addition to the owner, each identified mortgagee or lienholder shall be sent a notice containing: 
(1)  An identification of the building and property on which it is located (this does not have to be a legal description); 
(2)  A description of the violation of the section; and 
(3)  A statement that the municipality may demolish the building if the ordered action is not taken. 
If the notice is returned "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected and the notice shall be deemed delivered. 
Within thirty (30) days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
(2)  Publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city (and where the building is located) stating: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date the hearing was held; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instructions as to where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(j)  Appeal. The owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall have the right to appeal the decision made at the hearing to a district court. A notice of appeal must be filed with the district court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the order is mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, as provided herein. 
(k)  Demolition and repair expenses. Whenever it is discovered upon reinspection that the owner, mortgagee or lienholder has failed to repair, remove or demolish the building or take other ordered action within the allotted time, the city or its authorized agent may repair, remove or demolish and remove said building or cause the same to be done and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having the same done to the owner, mortgagee or lienholder of said land or otherwise assess the expenses against the property on which the building is located. 
If such work is done at the expense of the city, then said expense shall be assessed against any salvage resulting from the demolition of the building and against the lot, tract, or parcel of land, or the premises upon which such expense was incurred. 
(l)  Assessment of lien. When the city incurs expenses to repair, remove or demolish a building, the city may assess the expenses on and obtain a lien against the property on which the building is located. The lien arises and attaches to the property when the city has the lien recorded and indexed with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort; 
(2)  A legal description of the real property on which the building was located; 
(3)  The amount of expense incurred by the city; 
(4)  The balance due; and 
(5)  The date on which said work was done or improvements made. 
The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot, lots, or other premises or real estate upon which said building was located, to secure the expenditure so made, second only to other liens as provided by law. It is further provided that for any such expenditure, suit may be instituted and foreclosure of said lien may be made in the name of the city; and the statement of expenses to be made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or expense. 
The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. 
(m)  Penalty. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section as may be required by governing law. 
(1)  Civil remedies: A property owner violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding the maximum amount allowed by law for each and every day of violation, or, if the owner shows the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each violation, provided that: 
a.  The owner was notified of the requirements of the section and the owner's need to comply with the requirements; and 
b.  After notification, the owner committed an act in violation of the section or failed to take action necessary for compliance with section. 
If such a civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file a certified copy of the order containing such amount and duration of the penalty as required by law in Section 214.0015 of the Local Government Code. 
(2)  Other remedies: The remedies provided herein shall be available to the city in addition to any penal or other remedy provided by law or equity which the city, state, or any other person may provide to remedy the unsafe building condition. The city may bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount due plus all associated costs and fees. 
(n)  [Violations.] Any person who intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be fined an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, with each day constituting a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 5, 9-13-71; Ord. No. 2010-675, §§ 2—15, 10-11-10) 
Cross reference— Maintaining building constituting fire hazard, § 8-4 et seq.  
Sec. 9-36. - Abandoned construction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any lot or tract of land in the city, to allow, in connection with any partially constructed building, shed or erection of any kind, the continuation of a condition wherein said partially completed structure is abandoned, leaving exposed to the young and the curious any protruding metal objects, rusted metal projections, broken masonry or concrete orifices into which a person might reasonably be expected to fall, spaces beneath the structure accessible to children or where the accumulation of stagnant water or refuse would, in the opinion of the city health officer, create a condition where mosquitoes, rats, mice or other vermin would breed. Any partially completed structure upon which no construction activity has been conducted for a continuous period of one (1) year shall be presumed to be abandoned. Such a condition existing in an abandoned structure is declared to be a nuisance and a menace to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and may be abated and removed by the city in the manner described in sections 9-35 and 9-39. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 5, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-37. - Abatement generally—Stagnant water; accumulations of impure or unwholesome matter. 
Should any owner of such lot or tract of land within the city that has holes, places or locations thereon where stagnant water may accumulate and/or which are not properly drained, or the owner of any premises or building upon which filth, carrion, animal matter, waste food products, or other impure or unwholesome matter may be, fail and/or refuse to drain and/or fill the same lot or lots, tract or tracts, or remove such filth, carrion, animal matter, waste food products or other impure or unwholesome matter within ten (10) days after notice to said owner to do so, in writing, by letter addressed to such owner at his last known address and at the address for said owner reflected on the tax rolls of the tax assessor-collector of the city, if said addresses are not the same, or within ten (10) days after notice by publication as many as two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in the official newspaper of the city, if personal service may not be had as aforesaid, or if the owner's address is not known; then, in that event, the city may do such filling or draining or removal of filth, carrion, animal matter, waste food products, or other impure or unwholesome matter or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter, or cause the same to be done and may pay therefor and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done or improvements made to the owner of such lot or lots, tract or tracts, and if such work is done or improvements are made at the expense of the city, then such expense shall be assessed on the lots or tracts of land upon which such expense was incurred. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 6, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-573, adopted Nov. 10, 2003, deleted § 9-38 in its entirety. Former § 9-38 pertained to abatement of unsightly, objectionable or unsanistary matter and derived from Ord. No. 71-59, § 7, adopted Sept. 13, 1971.  
Sec. 9-39. - Same—Dangerous structures; abandoned construction. 
Should any owner of any lot or tract of land, within the city, who shall permit the continuation of a dangerous condition of a structure determined by resolution of the city council, after public hearing and after reasonable notice as required in sections 9-35 and 9-36 fail and/or refuse to abate such dangerous condition within the time required by this article, the city council may remove such dangerous or objectionable structure or cause the same to be done and may pay therefor, and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done to the owner of such lot or tract of land, or real estate; and, if such work is done at the expense of the city, then such expenses shall be assessed on the real estate, lot or tract of land, upon which such expense was incurred. 
(Ord. No. 71-59, § 8, 9-13-71)  
Sec. 9-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-573, adopted Nov. 10, 2003, deleted § 9-40 in its entirety. Former § 9-40 pertained to filing statement of expense, impressing lien and recovery of expense and derived from Ord. No. 71-59, § 9, adopted Sept. 13, 1971.  
Sec. 9-41. - Damaged or defective parking lots—Holes or depressions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any lot or lots, tract or tracts upon which vehicle parking spaces are provided upon an asphalt or concrete surface, and said surface is intended for use by the public for parking purposes, to permit or allow on said parking area of said lots or tracts any holes, depressions or damaged places that exceed eight (8) inches in diameter or width, or four (4) inches in depth, or where water may accumulate or become stagnant, or to permit same to remain on said premises. Nothing herein shall apply to any lot or lots, tract or tracts devoted exclusively to single-family use. 
(Ord. No. 77-195, § 1, 7-11-77)  
Sec. 9-42. - Same—Maintenance of painting of stripes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any lot or lots, tract or tracts, upon which vehicle parking spaces are provided upon an asphalt or concrete surface and are intended for use by the public to fail to maintain by painting with visible stripes, or causing to be painted with visible stripes, areas where cars and other vehicles are intended to be parked, where parking is prohibited in fire lanes or where moving traffic is intended to be channeled, including directional arrows for traffic flow, or any other traffic-control directions or parking prohibitions required by some state or municipal statute, ordinance or regulation. Such striping shall be conducted and accomplished in accordance with city or state standards, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 77-195, § 2, 7-11-77)  
Sec. 9-43. - Same—Correction of violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to correct any violation of sections 9-41 through 9-44 within twenty-one (21) calendar days after receipt of written notification by the city of such violation. The method and extent of repairs shall be determined by the city engineer and shall conform, as a minimum, to the standards more fully defined in section 9-44. 
(Ord. No. 77-195, § 3, 7-11-77)  
Sec. 9-44. - Same—Repair specifications. 
Specifications for repair are as follows: 
(1)  For asphalt parking lots: Remove asphalt material and flexible base material in all damaged areas and soft spots. All new base material shall be cement stabilized shell (six (6) minimum). Placement shall be such that a bond between new base material and adjoining base material is established. Alternate base material may be used, if approved by the city engineer. Asphalt maintenance mixture shall be distributed by shovels and rakes and spread into place in a uniform layer of such amount that after receiving ultimate compaction, a minimum thickness of one and one-half (1½) inches is achieved. Surface shall be compressed thoroughly and uniformly by hand tamping or power rolling. 
(2)  Concrete parking lots: Remove broken and damaged pavement. Remove flexible base material in all soft spots. All new base material shall be cement stabilized shell (six (6) minimum). Placement shall be such that a bond between new base material and adjoining base material is established. Alternate base may be used if approved by the city engineer. Replace concrete to original thickness. Reconstruct or replace damaged sections of expansion or contraction joints, reinforcing steel or load transfer devices. Concrete must develop a minimum compression strength of three thousand (3,000) psi within twenty-eight (28) days. Repaired areas must be protected from traffic for a minimum of seven (7) days. 
(Ord. No. 77-195, App. A)  
Secs. 9-45—9-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-572, adopted Nov. 10, 2003, amended Art. II, Div. 2, in its entirety. Former Div. 2 pertained to similar material and derived from the 1978 Code of Ordinances. 
Cross reference— Impounding of vehicles illegally parked, § 19-30. 
State Law reference— Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, V.A.C.S. art. 6687—9; impounding of vehicles abandoned on streets, art. 6701d, § 94. 
 
Sec. 9-50. - Definitions. 
A "junked vehicle" as defined in Subchapter E, Sub-Section 683.071 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; or 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
An "abandoned motor vehicle" in Subchapter C, Sub-section 683.031 of the Texas Transportation Code is one that: 
(1)  Is inoperable, is more than five (5) years old, and has been left unattended on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(3)  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; 
(4)  Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-51. - Declared to be public nuisance. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and 
(7)  Is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003; Ord. No. 2012-699, 5-14-12)  
Sec. 9-52. - Offense. 
A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 9-51. An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowed by law per day that the offense remains after official notification to abate, in accordance with this chapter, has been given. The municipal court of the City of Nassau Bay shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003; Ord. No. O2012-699, 5-14-12)  
Sec. 9-53. - Authority to abate nuisance; procedures. 
The city has adopted procedures in accordance with state law for the abatement and removal from private or public property or a public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance. Those procedures: 
(1)  Prohibit a vehicle from being reconstructed or made operable after removal by the city. 
(2)  Authorize the owner/violator the ability to request a public hearing prior to removal of the public nuisance. 
(3)  Require that notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle be given to the Texas Department of Public Safety ("department") not later than the fifth (5 th ) day after the date of removal. Upon receipt of this notice, the department will immediately cancel the certificate of title issued for the vehicle. 
The municipal court of the city is authorized to issue all orders to enforce these procedures. Procedures for abatement and removal of a public nuisance will be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that any authorized person may remove the nuisance. A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures of this section may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
Relocation of a junked vehicle or parts that are declared to be a junked vehicle to another location in the same municipality after proceedings for the abatement and/or removal have commenced have no effect on the proceedings if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-54. - Notice. 
(a)  The procedures for the abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this subchapter shall provide not less than ten (10) days' notice of the nature of the nuisance. The notice will be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to the last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(b)  Each lien holder of record of the nuisance; and 
(c)  The owner or occupant of: 
(1)  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
(2)  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(d)  The notice shall state that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that 10-day period expires. 
If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11 th day after the date of the return. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-55. - Public hearings and appeals. 
If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is given by section 9-54, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of the notice. 
At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. The council may hear evidence appealing the junked vehicle in question. The council shall reverse or modify the order or affirm same. Any order of the council requiring the removal of the nuisance must include a description of the vehicle and the vehicle identification number and license plate number, if available. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003; Ord. No. O2012-699, 5-14-12)  
Sec. 9-56. - Exceptions—Inapplicability. 
The provisions of this section applying to junked motor vehicles and public nuisances shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; or 
(3)  That is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on his property, provided that the vehicle or parts in the outdoor storage area are maintained in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. Screening must comply with existing city ordinances and zoning requirements. 
In this section: 
(1)  "Antique vehicle" means a passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old. 
(2)  "Motor vehicle collector" means a person who: 
a.  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
b.  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
(3)  "Special interest vehicle" means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-57. - Junked vehicle disposal. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or another suitable site as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-58. - Abandoned motor vehicles: Seizure. 
The police department of the city may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor found on public or private property. The police department may use agency personnel, equipment, and facilities or other personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, and store an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody under this division. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-59. - Taking abandoned motor vehicles into custody—Notice. 
Upon taking an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor into custody, the police department shall send notice by certified mail not later than the tenth day after taking the vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor into custody to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody, and each lien holder of record. 
(2)  The notice shall specify the year, make, model and identification number of the item; give the location of the facility where the item is being held; inform the owner and leinholder of the right to claim the item not later than the 20 th day after the date of the notice on payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges, or garage keeper's charges. 
Failure of the owner or leinholder to claim the item during that prescribed period constitutes a waiver by that person of all title, right and interest in the item and consent to the sale of the item at a public auction. 
Notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor was abandoned is sufficient notice under this section if: 
(1)  The identity of the last known registered owner cannot be determined; 
(2)  The registration has no address for the owner; or 
(3)  The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lien holders is impossible. 
Notice by publication shall be in the same period that is required for notice by certified mail and contain all of the information required by that subsection and may contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-60. - Redemption of impounded property—storage fees. 
The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of any abandoned motor vehicle impounded as provided for in this section may redeem the same after payment of all towing, preservation, storage or garage keeper's charges to the impounder. 
If the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor is stored on or in a city impoundment lot, the police department is entitled to collect reasonable storage fees for not more than ten (10) days, beginning on the day the item is taken into custody and ending on the day the required notice is mailed; and, beginning on the day after the day the department mails notice and ending on the day accrued charges are paid and the vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is removed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-61. - Auction or use of abandoned items; waiver of rights. 
If an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor is not claimed in accordance with section 9-59, the owner or lien holder shall be deemed to have waived all rights and interests in the item and consents to the sale of the item by public auction. The police department may sell the item at a public auction or use the item as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
Proper notice of the auction shall be given. A garage keeper who has a garage keeper's lien shall be notified of the time and place of the auction. The purchaser of a motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership and shall receive a sales receipt from the police department and is entitled to register the motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor and receive a certificate of title. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-62 - Auction proceeds. 
The police department is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor for: 
(1)  The cost of the auction; 
(2)  Towing, preservation and storage fees resulting from the taking into custody and storing in a city owned or controlled storage lot; and 
(3)  The cost of notice or publication as required. 
After deducting the reimbursement allowed to the police department, the proceeds of the sale shall be held for ninety (90) days for the owner or lien holder of the vehicle. After that period of time, proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lien holder shall be deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of auction, towing preservation, storage and notice and publication fees resulting from taking other vehicles, watercraft, or outboard motors into custody if the proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to meet those fees. 
The city may transfer funds in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) from the account to the city's general revenue account to be used by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Sec. 9-63. - Police department's use of certain abandoned motor vehicles. 
An abandoned motor vehicle taken into custody by the police department that is not claimed may be used for department purposes. The police department shall auction the vehicle as provided in this chapter upon discontinuance and use of the vehicle. This section does not apply to an abandoned vehicle on which there is a garage keeper's lien. 
(Ord. No. 2003-572, 11-10-2003)  
Secs. 9-64—9-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE AND WASTE WATER DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— City sewer service, § 20-3 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-70. - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
First joint: The first section of pipe in the private sewer that connects to the wye or saddle of the public sewer. 
Private sewer: That drain field carrying the sewage from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments which connects to, but does not include, the wye of the public sewer. Wherever the private line crosses under a public street, the private line will be assumed to end at the point where the line enters the public right-of-way. 
Public sewer: The pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, is controlled by public authority, and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted. 
Saddle: A connection between the private sewer and the public sewer used as a tap in the absence of a wye. 
Sewage: A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
Stack: That extension of public pipe positioned vertical to the public sewer used where it is necessary to connect the private sewer to the public sewer at an extreme depth. 
Wye: A projection of the public sewer serving as a point of connection between the private sewer and the public sewer, or the private sewer and the stack. 
(Ord. No. 72-98, § 1, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 9-71. - Required connection of residence to public sewer—Distance. 
Every residence building within the municipality shall be separately and independently connected by a separate private sewer with a public sewer where there is such a public sewer within three hundred (300) feet of the lot or parcel of land on which such building stands. 
(Ord. No. 72-98, § 2, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 9-72. - Same—Indication on construction plans. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building in the city on any lot or any parcel of land where there is a public sewer within three hundred (300) feet of such lot or parcel of land, unless the plans and specifications show connections in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 72-98, § 3, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 9-73. - Same—Use of property in violation. 
Any person who owns, occupies or uses any building in violation of section 9-71 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine as provided in section 1-6. Any day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 72-98, § 4, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 9-74. - Breaks in sewers due to sinking—Repair required. 
Within the city a persistent soil condition problem exists, namely, the frequent appearance of sink holes around public sewers and private sewers. When a sink hole develops in the vicinity of a public sewer, it is impossible to determine, without excavation, whether the cause is in the public sewer, the first joint, or another section of a private sewer. Should it be determined that the break is in the public sewer, the stack, or wye, said break shall be repaired at city expense. The cost of all repairs to private sewers (the sewer installations from the house or commercial structures to the public sewer) shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the premises. The owner of the premises shall be notified in advance that such excavation shall be performed by the city at a time certain and that should it be determined that the break is in a location upstream from the public sewer, it will be the owner's responsibility to pay for the repairs, including initial excavation cost, to any broken private sewer. 
(Ord. No. 72-98, § 5, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 9-75. - Same—Penalty for failure to repair. 
Any person failing to repair a break in a private sewer in a location upstream from the public sewer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine as provided in section 1-6. Each day such condition shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 72-98, § 5, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 9-76. - Prohibited discharges into public sanitary sewer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit or cause the flow of any of the following substances into the sanitary sewer system: 
(1)  Any grease, fatty material, offal or garbage, normal residential usage of sinks and garbage disposal units excepted. 
(2)  Any stone, dust, sand, dirt, gravel, sawdust, metal fillings, broken glass or any material which may cause or create an obstruction in the sewer. 
(3)  Gasoline, benzine, fuel oil or any petroleum products or volatile liquids. 
(4)  Any cyanide, phenols or any other chemical or substance which interferes with or prevents the functioning of the sewage treatment plant. 
(b)  Every building or premises used or occupied by any sewer user where any commercial (including but not limited to apartments, hotels, motels, and small business establishments) or industrial operations are conducted or permitted which result in the discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the city of any of the products, waste products, or other substances described in this section shall be equipped with an adequate and suitable catch basin, grease trap, filter or other interceptor, installed in such a manner that products, waste products or other substances herein set forth, will not flow into or be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Any person acting as the owner or occupier of such building or premises or any agent, employee or representative of any person acting as the owner or occupier of such building or premises who permits the flow of such prohibited products, waste products or other substances described herein from such building or premises into the sanitary sewer system, unless such interceptor is installed and maintained in good working order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine as provided in section 1-6. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 72-98, § 6, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 9-77. - Backflow preventers to protect potable water supply, on existing installations. 
(a)  All exterior water outlets that exist on property adjacent to bodies of water, including public or private swimming pools, and property and adjacent to open drainage ditches or ponds, shall be provided with backflow preventers. Requirements and specifications for these devices shall be as specified by the plumbing code. 
(b)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to single-family attached and detached dwellings under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the only body of water on or adjacent to the property is a swimming pool equipped with a vacuum breaker incorporated into the pool's permanent water supply lines; or 
(2)  When the exterior water outlets are more than seventy-five (75) feet from the potential source of contamination to the water supply; or 
(3)  When access between the exterior water outlet and the body of water is limited by the existence of natural or artificial barriers more than five (5) feet in height, such as a fence (without a gate), a screening wall, or an accessory building. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in section 1-6; and in case of willful and continuous violation of the provisions of this section by such person, the city shall have the power to terminate water service to said person after reasonable notice to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 72-94, 10-9-72) 
State Law reference— Protection of public water supply, V.A.C.S. art. 4477—1, § 11.  
Secs. 9-78—9-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-415, adopted Feb. 10, 1992, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—5 as Art. IV was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Administrative area means the area of an establishment not generally accessible to the public, including but not limited to individual offices, stockrooms, employees lounges, and meeting rooms. 
City means the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means any person who employs the services of an individual person. 
Enclosed means closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
Food establishment means any place where food is served for on premises consumption and which is open to the general public. 
Retail or service establishment means any establishment other than a food establishment which sells goods or services to the general public. 
Public area means any area to which the general public routinely has access, exclusive of any administrative area. 
Public corridor means any enclosed corridor used by the general public to access two (2) or more different establishments or dwellings; including, but not limited to, businesses, apartments, residences, hotel guests rooms, hospital patient rooms, nursing home resident rooms, public meeting rooms, or public storage spaces. 
Public lobby means any lobby, entry area, or waiting room to which the general public routinely has access and which serves two (2) or more separate businesses. 
Public restroom means any restroom to which the general public routinely has access. 
Smoking means the combustion of any cigar, cigarette, pipe, or similar article, using any form of tobacco or other combustible substance in any form. 
Workplace means any enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof, intended for occupancy by employees who provide primarily clerical, professional, or business services of a business entity, or who provide primarily clerical, professional, or business services to other business entities, or to the public, at that location. 
(Ord. No. 92-415, § 1, 2-10-92)  
Sec. 9-102. - Regulation of smoking—Certain public areas. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he engages in smoking in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas: 
(1)  An elevator; 
(2)  An enclosed stairwell; 
(3)  A public corridor, public lobby, or public rest room; 
(4)  Any facility owned, operated or managed by the city; 
(5)  Any vehicle owned by the city; 
(6)  The public area of any food market, grocery store, pharmacy, school, child care facility, theater, movie theater, library, or museum; 
(7)  Any classroom, play room, laboratory, workroom, corridor, restroom, or lobby that is routinely used by students of any school or child care facility; 
(8)  All or any part of a retail or service establishment, not otherwise regulated above, that has been duly designated as a nonsmoking area by the owner or manager. 
(b)  The owner or person in control of an establishment or area identified in subsection (a) of this section shall post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the establishment or area. The sign shall contain the words "No Smoking, City of Nassau Bay Ordinance," the universal symbol for no smoking, or other language that clearly prohibits smoking. The owner or person in control may designate the entire establishment as "No Smoking." 
(Ord. No. 92-415, § 2, 2-10-92)  
Sec. 9-103. - Same—Food establishments. 
(a)  A food establishment which has enclosed dining areas seating twenty-five (25) or more patrons shall provide separate enclosed dining areas for nonsmoking patrons. 
(b)  A nonsmoking area must: 
(1)  Be separated, where feasible, from smoking areas by a minimum of four (4) feet of contiguous floor space; 
(2)  Be ventilated, where feasible, and situated so that air from the smoking areas is not drawn into or across the nonsmoking area; 
(3)  Be clearly designated by appropriate signs visible to patrons within the dining area indicated that the area is designated nonsmoking; and 
(4)  Have ash trays or other suitable containers for extinguishing smoking materials at the perimeter of the nonsmoking area. 
(c)  Nondining areas of any food establishment affected by this section to which patrons have general access, including, but not limited to, food order areas, food service areas, rest rooms, and cashier areas, shall be designated as nonsmoking areas. 
(d)  The food preparation and food storage areas of any food establishment shall be designated as nonsmoking areas. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if he engages in smoking in a nonsmoking area in a food establishment. 
(f)  Food establishments which seat less than twenty-five (25) patrons and which do not provide a nonsmoking area must post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the food establishment which states "This Establishment Does Not Provide a Nonsmoking Area." 
(Ord. No. 92-415, § 3, 2-10-92)  
Sec. 9-104. - Same—Workplace. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, an employer may designate his/her workplace or any portion thereof or the owner of a building may designate all or any portion of the building, as a nonsmoking area. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he engages in smoking in any nonsmoking area designated by an employer or building owner in accordance with this section. 
It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section if the nonsmoking area in the workplace or building does not have prominently displayed, reasonably sized signs indicating that smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 92-415, § 4, 2-10-92)  
Sec. 9-105. - Same—Hazardous places. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any area of piers, warehouses, stores, institutions, schools, places of assembly, and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled, the fire official is empowered and authorized to order the owner or occupant in writing to post "No Smoking" signs in each building, structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the lettering, size, color and location of legally required "No Smoking" signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire official. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or mutilate or destroy any "No Smoking" sign legally required by the fire official. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or throw or deposit any lighted or smoldering substance in any place where "No Smoking" signs are posted or in any other place where smoking would occasion or constitute a fire or life hazard. 
(Ord. No. 92-415, § 5, 2-10-92)  
Secs. 9-106—9-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STREAM MAINTENANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 93-424, adopted Feb. 8, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—6 of the ordinance as Art. V was at the discretion of the editor. Ordinance No. 92-422, adopted Dec. 14, 1992, as an emergency ordinance, was treated as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 93-424 and has been omitted. 
 
Sec. 9-121. - Objective. 
This standard operating procedure (SOP) specifies responsibilities and procedures for inspecting and cleaning the creeks and ditches in the City of Nassau Bay. 
(Ord. No. 93-424, § 1, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 9-122. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  The director of public works is responsible for the administration of this SOP. He shall inspect the creeks, ditches and retention basins and ensure that they are cleaned in accordance with this SOP. 
(b)  The director of public works is responsible for maintenance of all ditches and creeks on park property. 
(c)  The director of public works is responsible for enforcing this ordinance which prohibits dumping and depositing materials in the creeks of the city. 
(d)  Property owners are responsible for maintaining the ditches on their properties. City personnel shall not enter onto private property unless an easement has been obtained or unless the problem is deemed an emergency and guidance has been provided by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 93-424, § 2, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 9-123. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  This SOP covers all creeks and ditches in the City of Nassau Bay. 
(b)  This SOP covers the following retention basin: 
(1)  Lake Nassau. 
(Ord. No. 93-424, § 5, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 9-124. - Authority. 
(a)  The city has the legal authority to inspect and maintain all creeks, ditches and retention basins on city property. 
(b)  Where the owner has dedicated a drainage maintenance easement to the city, the city has the legal authority to enter onto the property for the purposes of inspecting and maintaining creeks and ditches. 
(c)  Where the owner has not dedicated a drainage maintenance easement to the city, the city may request permission to enter onto the property for the purposes of inspecting and maintaining creeks and ditches. If such permission is denied and the city determines that the problem affects the general health and welfare of the city, appropriate legal action may be pursued. 
(Ord. No. 93-424, § 4, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 9-125. - Identification of problems. 
(a)  The director of public works or his designee shall inspect all the water courses and basins twice a year. One inspection will run in February, before the spring flood season. The other will be conducted in July, during the middle of the summer storm season. 
(b)  After each major storm, the director of public works, or his designee, shall inspect the following "choke point" where debris has been known to accumulate: 
(1)  Martinique Drive at Upper Bay Road. 
(2)  Howard L. Ward Park at Upper Bay Road. 
(3)  City Park at Upper Bay Road. 
(4)  Surf Court. 
(5)  Sandy Cove. 
(6)  Lakeside Lane at Lighthouse Drive. 
(c)  The director of public works, or his designee, shall inspect all complaints submitted by residents, the health inspector, the floodplain administrator or other offices. 
(d)  If an inspection identifies a problem, the inspector shall describe it on the city drainage problem report form, a copy of which is attached. 
(1)  The top portion of the form shall be completed by whoever identifies the problem. 
(2)  The director of public works shall complete the middle portion of the form and assign a work priority to the project. A copy shall be kept by the department secretary to assist in tracking the city's response to the problem. 
(3)  The maintenance crew chief assigned the project shall complete the bottom portion of the form. 
(4)  When the form is completed, it shall be filed in the public works department work order files. If the problem was identified by someone outside the department, a copy of the form shall be sent to the person or office who reported the problem. 
(Ord. No. 93-424, § 5, 2-8-93)  
Sec. 9-126. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Problems defined. Maintenance problems are defined as: 
(1)  Trash: Man-made objects, such as garbage, shopping carts, tires, lumber, furniture and appliances. Animal carcasses are also included as trash. 
(2)  Minor problem: Vegetable growth, tree limbs and other "naturally" occurring debris. Sedimentation in a retention basis is also included. 
(3)  Obstruction: Fallen tree, culvert damage, log jam, large appliance or car body, etc. that by itself obstructs the flow of the ditch or stream. 
(4)  Major problem: Culvert damage, sedimentation, failure of concrete linings, etc. 
(b)  Maintenance duties. 
(1)  On public property: The director of public works shall schedule a maintenance crew to remove all obstructions expeditiously. 
(2)  On private property with drainage maintenance easements: Removal of trash, minor problems, and obstructions (see paragraphs (a)(1) through (3)) shall be the responsibility of the owner. Resolution of major problems (see paragraph (a)(4)) shall be the responsibility of the city. 
(3)  On private property without drainage easements: Removal of trash, minor problems, and obstructions shall be the responsibility of the owner. With the owner's permission and at the city's option, the city shall resolve major problems. 
Upon completion of a maintenance project, the responsible crew chief shall complete the drainage problem report form and provide it to the department of public works secretary for filing. The city floodplain administrator may periodically inspect projects and note their findings on the form. 
(Ord. No. 93-424, § 6, 2-8-93)  
Secs. 9-127—9-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HEALTH PERMITS AND LICENSES 
[7]
Footnotes: 
 
Sec. 9-136. - Designation of health authority. 
The city designates the executive director of Harris County Public Health and Environmental Services (HCPHES) as its health authority for the purpose of food establishment surveillance for the public health protection of its residents. 
(Ord. No. 2004-575, § I, 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-137. - State and county regulations adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by reference the current rules, or rules as amended, of the Texas Department of Health, Division of Food and Drugs, "Texas Food Establishment Rules", 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161-171, 173-175; "Regulation of Food Service Establishments", Chapter 437, the "Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act", Chapter 431, and "Minimum Standards of Sanitation and Health Protection Measures," Chapter 341 of Vernon's Texas Codes, Annotated; and the "Rules for the Regulation of Food Establishments in Harris County, Texas." 
(b)  A certified copy of each of the above referenced sets of rules shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-575, § II, 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-138. - Definitions. 
All definitions in the "Texas Food Establishment Rules" and the "Rules for the Regulation of Food Establishments in Harris County, Texas" are hereby adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply to this article: 
Childcare facility means a facility keeping more than twelve (12) unrelated children that provides care, training, education, custody, or supervision for children under fifteen (15) years of age, who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Health department means HCPHES. 
Food establishment means each place where food or drink is manufactured, packaged, produced, processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, or otherwise handled, whether offered for sale, given in exchange or given away for use as food or furnished for human consumption. The term does not apply to private homes where food is prepared or served for guest and individual family consumption. The term does not apply to a place where a commercially packaged single portion of non-potentially hazardous snack items and wrapped candy are sold over the counter. 
Owner of business shall mean the owner or operator of the business. 
Regulatory authority means representatives of HCPHES. 
Service of notice means the delivery of a notice, prepared by HCPHES, to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-575, § III, 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-139. - Food permits. 
(a)  Requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city, unless he possesses a current and valid health permit issued by the health department. 
(b)  Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the food establishment for which it is issued. 
(c)  Non-transference (change of ownership). Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable. Upon change of ownership of a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. 
(d)  Denial, suspension or revocation of permits. HCPHES may deny, suspend, or revoke any permit to operate a food service establishment, retail food store, temporary food establishment, mobile food unit, or roadside food vendor if the holder of the permit does not comply with these rules and regulations or if the operation of the establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. A permit can be suspended only after notice and an opportunity for a hearing as described in subsection (e) have been given. This notice must list specific violations of rules and regulations and a period of time in which violations are to be corrected. Failure to correct violations as listed on the notice will be grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. If a permit is then denied, suspended, or revoked, the holder of the permit has three (3) working days to request a hearing. This request must be in writing and delivered to HCPHES. A hearing must be held within seven (7) working days of the request. If no request for a hearing is made within the time limits, the denial, suspension, or revocation is sustained. 
(e)  Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by HCPHES at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, HCPHES shall make a final finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by HCPHES. 
(f)  Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final pursuant to the determination of the director of HCPHES, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit to the health department. 
(g)  Permit fees. A health permit fee as established by the commissioners court is required annually for each food establishment. Fees are due and payable on or before one year from date of issuance of the permit and are to be paid to HCPHES at 2223 West Loop South, Houston, Texas 77027. 
(Ord. No. 2004-575, § IV, 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-140. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Submission of plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the health department for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The health department shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of these rules. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health department. 
(b)  Pre-operational inspection. The health department shall inspect any food establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2004-575, § V, 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-141. - Food manager certification. 
(a)  Requirement. Every permitted food establishment, except establishments dealing only in fresh produce, non-potentially hazardous food, and/or prepackaged potentially hazardous food, shall have a person employed in a managerial capacity possessing a current food manager's certificate issued by the health department. A certified manager or person in charge must be on duty during all hours of operation of any non-exempt food service establishment employing six (6) or more employees per eight (8) hour shift. 
Upon written application and presentation of evidence of satisfactory completion of a food manager's course, equivalent training, or examination as approved by the director of public health, the health department shall issue a food manager's certificate valid for five (5) years from the date of completion of training or evaluation unless sooner revoked. Suspension or revocation of an establishment's health permit by the health department shall constitute cause for revocation of that establishment's manager's certification. 
Whenever the food service operator holding the certificate terminates employment, is terminated, or is transferred to another food establishment, the person owning, operating, or managing the food establishment shall be allowed sixty (60) days from the date of such termination or transfer of the certificate holder to comply with this section. 
(b)  Exemptions from certificate requirement. Temporary food establishments and persons participating as volunteer food handlers performing charitable activities for periods of fourteen (14) days or less may be exempted from the requirement for manager's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2004-575, § VI, 1-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-142. - Fine for violations. 
Any person who violates a provision of this article, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city or upon conviction in Harris County Justice of the Peace court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-575, § VII, 1-12-2004)  
Secs. 9-143—9-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - GROWTH OF WEEDS, HIGH GRASS, OR ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH 
 
Sec. 9-176. - Accumulations of rubbish or growth of weeds, high grass, etc., on private premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any lot or other premises in the city to allow rubbish, brush, weeds, high grass, or other unsightly, objectionable, or unsanitary matter to accumulate or grow on such lot or premises. It shall also be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of the property to maintain all of the city's rights-of-way adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curb line and/or adjacent improved streets, or alleys regardless of whether or not a curb line has been established. The property owner and/or occupant shall also maintain that portion of the property which extends beyond the property line, including piers, bulkheads, or other permanent structures, so that weeds, rubbish, high grass or other unsightly or unsanitary matter does not accumulate in such areas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of any lot or premises in the city to allow or permit the growth of weeds, high grass, or other unsightly growth over a height of six (6) inches on such lot or premises within any residential or business area within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of any lot or premises in the city to allow or permit the growth of any weeds or high grass over a length of three (3) inches over the curb line or edge of the property line, including piers, bulkheads, or other permanent structures. This includes city rights-of-way or other adjoining properties. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or occupant of any lot or premises in the city to allow or permit the growth of any weeds, high grass, or other unsightly growth over six (6) inches near or around poles, trees, or other objects on such lot or premises within any residential or business area within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-573, 11-10-03)  
Sec. 9-177. - Notice to correct conditions—generally. 
(a)  Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist on any lot or premises within the city, the owner and/or occupant of such lot or premises shall be notified by the city, in writing, to correct, remedy or remove the condition within ten days after such notice. On failure to correct, remedy, or remove the condition within ten (10) days after such notice is received, the city shall issue a citation to the owner and/or occupant of the premises or remove the condition and charge the cost thereof to the owner and/or occupant as provided in this article. Such notice shall not, however, be required prior to the filing of any criminal complaint for the violation of any provision of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined up to the maximum amount allowable by law. 
(b)  If there is any subsequent violation of any provisions of this article within the first anniversary date of the original notice by the same property owner and/or occupant on the same lot or premises, the city shall not be required to give notice to the owner and/or occupant to correct, remedy or remove the condition. In case of such subsequent violation, the owner and/or occupant shall be issued a citation by the city, and the city may correct, remedy or remove the condition and charge the cost thereof to the owner and/or occupant as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-573, 11-10-03) 
State Law reference— Notice to remove unsanitary, unsightly, etc., conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code 342.006  
Sec. 9-178. - Same—Service or publication. 
The notice provided for in section 9-177 shall be served personally on the owner and/or occupant to whom it is directed or shall be given by letter addressed to such owner and/or occupant at his/her last known post office address. Notice served personally or by letter shall include a complete copy of this article. If personal service cannot be made and the owner's address is unknown, such notice shall be given by publication at least once within ten days in the official newspaper of the city. Notice by publication in the newspaper shall not require a complete printing of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-573, 11-10-03)  
Sec. 9-179. - Correction of conditions by city—authorized. 
If the owner and/or occupant of any lot or premises upon which a condition described in this article exists fails to correct, remedy, or remove such condition within ten (10) days after notice to do so is given in accordance with this article, the city may do such work or make such improvements as are necessary to correct, remedy, or remove such condition, or cause such work to be done or improvements to be made, and pay therefore and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner and/or occupant of such lot. Such expenses shall be assessed against the lot or real estate upon which the work was done or the improvements made. 
(Ord. No. 2003-573, 11-10-03) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to correct or remove conditions described in this article, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code 342.006  
Sec. 9-180. - Same—Filing of statement of expenses. 
Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under the provisions of this article, the fire marshal or his/her representative, on behalf of the city, shall file a statement of the expenses incurred thereby with the appropriate county clerk. Such statement shall give the name of the owner, if known, the legal description of the property, the amount of such expenses, and the dates on which the work was done or the improvements were made. 
(Ord. No. 2003-573, 11-10-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code 342.007 (b).  
Sec. 9-181. - Same—Lien for and collection of expenses. 
After the statement provided for in section 9-180 is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenses thereof. Such lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses made in accordance with section 9-180, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2003-573, 11-10-03) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code 342.007 (c) - (f).  
Chapter 9.5 - AIRCRAFT, HELICOPTERS AND HELISTOPS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-625, adopted June 11, 2007, amended Ch. 9.5, §§ 9.5-1—9.5-8, in its entirety, in effect deleting Ch. 9.5, §§ 9.5-1—9.5-8, and enacting a new Ch. 9.5, §§ 9.5-1—9.5-7, to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 9.5, §§ 9.5-1—9.5-8, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 82-283, adopted Mar. 22, 1982. 
Cross reference— Provisions applicable to specific use permits for helistops, App. A, § 6-800. 
 
Sec. 9.5-1. - Definitions. 
Aircraft shall mean any weight-carrying structure for navigation in the air and which obtains support by the dynamic reaction of the air to any obstruction connected with the structure. Gliders or ultralights, either powered or unpowered, helicopters, hot air balloons, and airships will be considered aircraft. 
F.A.A. shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
F.A.R. shall mean the Federal Aviation Regulations found in Title 14, Code of Federal Regulations. 
Helicopter shall mean any vehicle whose support in the air is normally derived from the vertical component of force produced by airfoils mechanically rotated about an approximately vertical axis. Helicopter shall also specifically mean any rotorcraft which depends principally for its support and motion in the air upon the lift generated by one or more power-driven rotors, rotating on substantially vertical axes. 
Heliport shall mean any area to be used for the landing or takeoff of helicopters or other steep-gradient aircraft capable of hovering, but does not afford refueling, maintenance, or repair facilities and is for the accommodation of a single helicopter. Heliport shall include any land or water or a structural surface which is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended to be used for heliport buildings or other heliport facilities. The term shall also include "helistop". 
Landing field or "spot" shall mean any place on land or water, where aircraft may land, be repaired, take on fuel or take off. 
Operator shall mean any person who pilots, controls or maintains, either directly or indirectly, an aircraft or heliport. 
(Ord. No. 2007-625, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 9.5-2. - Landing or takeoff of aircraft prohibited. 
(a)  Except as outlined herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, operator or corporation to cause the landing or takeoff of an aircraft within the corporate limits of the City of Nassau Bay without express approval of the city manager or his designee. This requirement for prior, express approval of takeoff and landings shall not apply to landings or takeoffs at permanent heliports or helistops that have been approved by the city and the planning commission. 
(b)  Any person, association, firm, operator or corporation requesting such permission shall make such request no less than two (2) hours in advance Monday thru Friday or twenty-four (24) hours in advance if the event will occur on a weekend or holiday; and specify the date, time and specific location where the landing is to take place. The type and number of aircraft to be operated shall also be defined. Officials of the city may examine the proposed landing area for conformance with those specific issues outlined in subsection 9.5-4(b) for temporary landing zones. Said landing or takeoff shall not be attempted or completed until permission is received. 
(c)  Permission to perform a landing shall be denied in all cases where a temporary zone is found to be inadequate, or permitting such activity would create a potential or substantial risk to the public. 
(d)  This prohibition shall not apply to emergency or medical air ambulance landings or aircraft emergencies. The term "emergency landings" as used herein shall be construed to include rescue and ambulance missions and other such flights of unexpected and emergency nature. 
(e)  In the event that Nassau Bay police or fire personnel are required for establishing a landing zone (LZ) or perimeter security; it shall be the responsibility of the requesting party to make those arrangements. The requesting party is solely responsible for any charges or fees associated with such request. 
(f)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to temporarily suspend all of portions of this chapter in specific incidents or for special events. 
(Ord. No. 2007-625, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 9.5-3. - Operation in general. 
(a)  The performance of acrobatic stunts or maneuvering of an aircraft involving abrupt changes in altitude and/or attitude, or abnormal speed over the city shall not be permitted except as authorized and in strict accordance with F.A.A. and F.A.R. rules and regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, throw, hurl or release, or cause to be dropped, thrown, hurled or released any papers, magazines circulars handbills, advertising material or any objects of any kind or description from an airplane or aircraft while such aircraft is flying or airborne over the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-625, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 9.5-4. - Application for a heliport/helistop permit. 
The city will prescribe all places of landing of helicopters within the city, such determination to consider places and facilities having the least amount of hazard to life and property. 
(1)  Application for construction, development or designation of a permanent heliport or helistop shall be made to the City of Nassau Bay Planning Commission in accordance with Appendix A, section 6-700 of the City of Nassau Bay zoning ordinance as hereinafter amended. 
(2)  Provided that the city manager or his designee have approved a temporary heliport/helistop or aircraft landing zone as stated in subsection 9.5-2(a), said area must also, except in cases of emergency, be reviewed and approved by appropriate city officials prior to the landing or takeoff of any aircraft. In determining whether the site may be used, the city shall consider the time of day, weather conditions, and accessibility of the area, vertical and horizontal clearances, and overhead obstructions. The minimum temporary landing area should be no less than seventy-five (75) feet by seventy-five (75) feet. The operator of the aircraft shall follow and comply with all applicable F.A.A. and F.A.R. regulations concerning the landing or takeoff at places other than an airport. (See also U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration Circular No 150/5390-2B dated 09/30/04.) 
(Ord. No. 2007-625, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 9.5-5. - Revocation of permit. 
Public safety or other duly authorized city personnel may recommend revocation of a permanent heliport/helistop permit to the planning commission for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-625, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 9.5-6. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The city in no event shall be liable for any personal injuries or property damages occasioned in any way in connection with the construction, establishment, maintenance or operation of any temporary or permanent landing spot or helistop for which a permit is issued under the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-625, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 9.5-7. - Penalty for violation; additional remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm, operator or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter affecting fire safety, zoning or public health shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for health or sanitation violations, and any sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other violations. Each occurrence that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person, association, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be enjoined by a suit filed by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to other penalty provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-625, 6-11-07)  
Chapter 10 - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Designation of Ord. No. 88-363, §§ 1—5, adopted June 13, 1988, as Ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-5, was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance not being specifically amendatory of the Code. 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A; zoning performance standards re noise, App. A, § 11-800(a). 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  All technical language used in this chapter, not defined in this chapter, shall be interpreted in conformance with applicable American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Noise Specifications, including, but not limited to, Section 1.1—1960 and Section 1.4—1971. 
(b)  [For purposes of this chapter, the words and terms defined below shall have the following meanings:] 
Ambient sound level means the sound level of the all-encompassing sound associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources. It is also the A-weighted sound level exceeded ten (10) per cent of the time (L 10 ) based on a measurement period which shall not be less than ten (10) minutes. However, in no instance shall the A-weighted sound level exceed sixty-five (65) decibels. 
A-weighted sound pressure level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read shall be designated dB(A) or dBA. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Nassau Bay, or his duly appointed representative. 
Decibel means a logarithmic unit of measure used in describing the amplitude of sound; denoted as dB. A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces, noise when operated or handled. 
Noise or Noise disturbance means any sound which is unwanted or which causes, or tends to cause: 
(1)  An adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings; and/or 
(2)  Harm to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and/or welfare of the citizens of the city; and/or 
(3)  Sound levels which exceed the maximum sound levels established herein. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any other entity, public or private. 
Property boundary means an imaginary line at the ground surface and its vertical extension which separates the real property owned or occupied by one person from that owned or occupied by another person. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity. 
Sound means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity, in a medium with internal forces, that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant points. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level measured by the use of a metering characteristic and weighted as specified in American National Standards Institute Specifications, S.1.4—1971. The sound pressure level of a sound expressed in decibels is twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to the reference sound pressure of twenty (20) micropascals. If the frequence weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter means an instrument, which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator, time averager, output meter and weighting networks, that is sensitive to pressure fluctuations. The instrument reads sound pressure levels when properly calibrated with an acoustical calibrator accurate to plus or minus two (2) dBA and is of Type II so specified in ANSI Publication S1.4—1971. 
Stationary sound source means any device, fixed or moveable, which is located or used on property other than a public right-of-way. 
Residential real property means property zoned by the city for a residential as opposed to a commercial use in the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. "Residential" shall include, but not be limited to, single-family, multi-family, apartment and townhome usage. 
Zoning district means those districts established by the City of Nassau Bay Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 88-363, § 2, 6-13-88; Ord. No. 89-376, 10-9-89)  
Sec. 10-2. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to minimize the exposure of citizens to the harm of excessive noise and to protect, promote, and preserve the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare. It is the express intent of the city council to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes the use, value, and enjoyment of property and preserves the quality of the environment. 
(Ord. No. 88-363, § 1, 6-13-88)  
Sec. 10-3. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day any such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. Provided, however, a first offender of this chapter shall not be fined more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 88-363, § 5, 6-13-88)  
Sec. 10-4. - Administration; enforcement; variances. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer and enforce this chapter. In order to implement enforcement the city manager or any city police officer may: 
(1)  Make necessary inspections and tests to determine whether compliance is achieved or a noise disturbance is caused, created, or has been or is being authorized or permitted. 
(2)  Cause the immediate abatement or lowering of said noise disturbance by the issuance of an appropriate order. 
(3)  Warn the operators of sound devices or the owners, managers, lessors, or any other persons lawfully in control of the use of residential or commercial property to abate a noise disturbance or be penalized hereunder as a violator of this chapter. 
(4)  File a complaint in municipal court. 
(b)  The city manager shall evaluate all applications for permits of variance from the requirements of this chapter and may grant said variances. The city manager shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise and the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise. 
(Ord. No. 88-363, § 4, 6-13-88)  
Sec. 10-5. - Maximum sound levels; exceptions. 
(a)  Exceeding maximum sound levels: 
(1)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated on public or private property any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in subsection (b) of this section when measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving use. Sound levels in excess of said limits shall constitutes "noise disturbances." 
(2)  No person who owns, operates, manages, leases, or who otherwise is in lawful control of residential or commercial premises shall authorize or permit any other person to operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in subsection (b) of this section when measured at or within the property boundary of the receiving use. Sound levels in excess of said limits shall constitute "noise disturbances." 
(b)  Table of maximum sound levels: 
Receiving Land-Use Category 	Time Level Limit (dBA) 	Ambient Sound 
Residential real property, including single-family, multifamily, apartment and townhouse usage, as specified in the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. 	From 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
From 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	55 
  
50 
All other uses, including Commercial or Business 	At all times 	65 
Construction sites both Residential and Commercial 	From 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 	75 
 
(c)  Correction for character of sound. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone or impulsive sound, the maximum sound level limits set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall be reduced by five (5) dBA. 
(d)  Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Holiday fireworks displays conducted or supervised by the city. 
(2)  The unamplified human voice. 
(3)  Church bells or similar calls to worship and outdoor religious services conducted on recognized religious holidays, including but not limited to Easter sunrise services. 
(4)  Fire alarms, burglar alarms, sirens, or warning devices of an emergency nature. 
(5)  Power lawn equipment and air conditioning units, operating within the limits of the manufacturers specifications shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Firearms; fireworks. Impulsive sound disturbances such as the discharge of firearms or the unauthorized and/or unsupervised detonation of fireworks shall be and are governed by the provisions of other city ordinances and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 88-363, § 3, 6-13-88; Ord. No. 89-376, 10-9-89; Ord. No. O2011-691, 11-14-11) 
Cross reference— Fireworks, § 8-40 et seq.; discharge of firearms, § 12-4.  
Sec. 10-6. - Severability. 
In the event any clause, phrase, provision, sentence, or part of this chapter or the application of the same to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect, impair, or invalidate this chapter as a whole or any part or provision hereof other than the part declared to be invalid or constitutional, and the city council of the City of Nassau Bay declares that it would have passed each and every part of the same notwithstanding the omission of any such part thus declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, whether there be one or more parts. 
(Ord. No. O2011-691, 11-14-11)  
Sec. 10-7. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. O2011-691, 11-14-11)  
Sec. 10-8. - Adoption and publication. 
This chapter shall be codified and become a part of the City of Nassau Bay's Code of Ordinances. The city secretary shall certify to the adoption of this chapter and cause its caption and penalty to be published as required by law, and this chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval and adoption. 
(Ord. No. O2011-691, 11-14-11)  
Chapter 11 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cable television systems, Ch. 4.5; fee for use of streets, sidewalks, etc., by cable television companies in lieu of license, charge, tax, etc., § 4.5-41 et seq.; taxation generally, Ch. 18; sales tax, Ch. 18(note); penalty assessed for delinquent taxes, § 18-3; permit for garbage collection, § 20-21. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - General occupational license tax levy. 
There shall be levied on and collected from every person pursuing any occupation, trade, calling or profession licensed or taxed under the laws of the state, an annual tax of one-half of the amount so taxed by the state. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy one-half of state tax, Const. art. 8, § 1; scope of various state occupation taxes set out in V.A.T.S. Tax.-Gen. art. 19.01 et seq.; general licensing authority, V.A.C.S. arts. 1031, 1175(21), (23); limitation on levying V.A.T.S. Tax.-Gen. art. 1.09; authority to levy gross receipts permit fee vehicles for hire, V.A.C.S. art. 6698; detective licenses, art. 4413(29bb); tax on coin-operated machines authorized, V.A.T.S. Tax.-Gen. art. 13.14. 
Cross reference— Penalty assessed for delinquent taxes, § 18-3.  
Sec. 11-2. - License required before doing business. 
No person shall pursue any occupation, trade, calling or profession upon which there is a tax levied as prescribed in this Code, without first obtaining a business registration certificate to pursue the same from the city secretary. The one-time registration fee for a business is twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 91-402, 6-10-91)  
Secs. 11-3—11-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 11-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Applicant: Any individual who makes written application to the city secretary for a license in accordance with section 11-22. No person involved in interstate commerce, as that term is defined herein, shall be classified as an applicant. 
Interstate commerce: Soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, photographs, newspapers or magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, which, at the time the order is taken, are in another state or will be produced in another state and shipped or introduced into this city in the fulfillment of such order. 
Person: As defined in section 1-5, except that as to an individual it shall mean any individual above the age of eighteen (18) years, and such term shall include, but not be limited to, solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, vendors and merchants. 
Registrant: Any individual who files a written registration with the city secretary in accordance with section 11-27. Only persons engaged in interstate commerce, as that term is hereby defined are classified as registrants under this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 4, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-21. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place within the city, soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, or anything of value, without first having applied for and obtained a license so to do from the city secretary. It shall also be unlawful to sell or solicit within the city as aforesaid without carrying such license while engaged in such soliciting or selling. It shall also be unlawful to sell or solicit as aforesaid within the city without an appointment, before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or after the hour of 5:00 p.m., on any day of the year. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 1, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-22. - Same—Application. 
Any person desiring to go from house to house or from place to place within the city to sell or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, shall make written application to the city secretary for a license so to do, which application shall show the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person, if any, that he represents, and the kind of goods or services offered for sale, and whether such applicant upon any such sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery or completion of services, and the period of time such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in the city. Such application shall be accompanied by two (2) photographs of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which photographs shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches, showing the head and the shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 2, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-23. - Same—Bond. 
The application for license shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned to guarantee final delivery of the applicable goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines and newspapers, in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery, and also conditioned to indemnify any purchasers or customers for all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of said bond, at the time of delivery and that may be discovered by such customer or purchaser within thirty (30) days after delivery, and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on said bond, or an agent or employee of the principal. Provided, however, in case applicant is a person engaging in any activity mentioned in this article through one or more agents or employees, such person shall be required to enter into only one bond, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), as herein required, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all such persons, agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 3, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-24. - Same—Fee; term; letter of recommendation. 
The license fee for a person to engage in an activity mentioned in this article shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); provided, however, when any person engages in any activity mentioned in this article through one or more agents or employees, such person shall, in addition to said twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee herein mentioned, pay a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) additional for each agent or employee so engaged. 
Such licenses shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of their issuance. 
Provided, however, in lieu of the payment of a license fee, there may accompany the written application and the bond required herein a letter of recommendation signed by at least twenty-five (25) responsible citizens of the city, which persons have been customers of said applicant during at least the preceding year and whose recommendations shall state that the applicant is honest, dependable and reliable and of good reputation. The license fee imposed herein is intended not as a tax or as a revenue measure, but as a means of enabling the city to partially defray the administrative expense of enforcing the provisions of this article as to licensing. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 5, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-25. - Exemptions—Commercial travelers; sales agents. 
Provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to vendors of farm or dairy products. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 6, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-26. - Same—Charitable, etc., endeavors. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed or construed to require payment of a license fee or the presentation of a letter of recommendation or the posting of a bond or the filing of an application or even the act of registration by any individual, association or corporation, or group of individuals, soliciting or selling tickets for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the city, whenever the receipts from any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any civic, religious or benevolent purpose. Further, sales of cookies, cakes or candies, wherever the receipts therefrom are to be appropriated, for civic, religious or charitable purposes, are activities that shall not be affected by the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 7, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-27. - Registration required; application. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons engaged in interstate commerce; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate commerce to go from house to house or place to place within the city without having first registered with the city secretary giving the following information: 
(1)  Name, home address and local address, if any, of registrant. 
(2)  Name and address of the person, if any, that he represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(3)  Nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited. 
(4)  Whether registrant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or receive or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(5)  The period of time in which registrant wishes to solicit or sell in the city. 
(6)  The place of manufacture or production of the goods or property to be sold, or for which orders are taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time of registration, and the proposed methods of delivery. 
(7)  Two (2) photographs of the registrant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the registration, which photographs shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the registrant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the registrant, taken by a law enforcement officer of the city, and the names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of this county, who will certify as to the registrant's good character and business respectability, or, in lieu of taking of fingerprints and in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the registrant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the registrant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any provision of this article, or of any similar ordinance of any other city, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 8, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-28. - Investigations; issuance of license or permit; record. 
The city secretary shall cause to be made such investigation of the business and moral character of any applicant or registrant as the city secretary may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. The city secretary is hereby authorized to enlist in this investigation such assistance from the law enforcement officials of the city as the city secretary may deem necessary. If, as a result of such investigation, the character or business responsibility of the applicant or registrant is found to be unsatisfactory, the city secretary shall notify the applicant or registrant that his application or registration is rejected and that no license or permit will be issued. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of applicant or registrant are found to be satisfactory, the city secretary shall, upon payment by applicant of the prescribed license fee, issue to the applicant his license or deliver to the registrant his permit. Such license or permit, whichever is applicable, shall contain the signature of the city secretary and the seal of the city and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee or permittee, the kind of goods or services to be sold thereunder, date of issuance or delivery and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in any of the activities regulated herein. The city secretary shall keep a permanent record of all licenses and permits issued. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 9, 2-9-71)  
Sec. 11-29. - Violations; not authorized, revocation of license or permit, punishment. 
No license or permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. Any license or permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city council for any reason which the granting of such license or permit might be lawfully denied or on any grounds specifically set forth in this article, or any other ordinance of the city, or for any other reason which, in the judgment of the city council is necessary for the protection of the public interest. Such revocation shall be made only upon a hearing before the city council after reasonable notice to the holder of said license or permit, which notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the reason for the proposed revocation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or who knowingly and intentionally misrepresents to any city official any material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for, and any person having a license or permit issued in accordance with this article in his possession or under his control and who fails to exhibit the same upon demand of the city manager, mayor, any councilman, or a law enforcement officer of the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of any of these violations shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-6. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(Ord. No. 71-40, § 10, 2-9-71)  
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 11-30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coin-operated machine means every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or checks. The terms "music coin-operated machines" and "skill or pleasure coin-operated machines," as those terms are defined in this section, shall be included in such term. 
Music coin-operated machine means every coin-operated machine of any kind or character, which dispenses or vends or which is used or operated for dispensing or vending music and which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or checks. The following are expressly included within such term: phonographs, pianos, graphophones and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend music. 
Operator means any person who exhibits or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in a place of business other than his own, any coin-operated machine in this state. 
Owner means any person owning any coin-operated machine in the city. 
Service coin-operated machine means every pay toilet, pay telephone and all other machines or devices which dispense service only and not merchandise, music, skill or pleasure. 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine means every coin-operated machine of any kind or character whatsoever, when such machine dispenses or is used or is capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure or when such machine is operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure or for any other purpose other than the dispensing or vending of merchandise or music or service exclusively, as those terms are defined in this article. The following are expressly included within such term: marble machines, marble table machines, marble shooting machines, miniature racetrack machines, miniature football machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines, and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or afford skill or pleasure. However, every machine or device of any kind or character which dispenses or vends merchandise, commodities or confections or plays music in connection with or in addition to such games or dispensing of skill or pleasure shall be considered as a skill or pleasure machine and taxed at the higher rate fixed for such machines. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-31. - Occupation tax levied; amount; payment. 
(a)  Every owner, except an owner holding an import license and holding coin-operated machines solely for resale, who exhibits, displays or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in this city any coin-operated machine shall pay, and there is levied on each coin-operated machine, as defined in section 11-30, except as are exempt in section 11-32, an annual occupation tax of one-fourth the occupation tax levied by the state. The tax shall be paid to the city secretary by cashier's check or money order. The annual tax levied may be collected on a quarterly basis. The city secretary may establish procedures for quarterly collection and set due dates for the tax payments. No refund or credit of the annual tax levied may be allowed to any owner who ceases the exhibition or display of any coin-operated machine prior to the end of any calendar year. V.T.C.A., Tax Code title B, subtitle 1 (V.C.T.A. Tax Code § 111.001 et seq.) applies to the enforcement of the taxes, penalties and interest. 
(b)  The occupation tax provided for under this section shall not be subject to the proration or reduction for payment for a period less than 12 calendar months. 
(c)  The owner of any room, hall, building, tent or any enclosed or partially enclosed space in which is exhibited for hire, revenue, fee or gain of any kind of skill- or pleasure-oriented coin-operated machine shall not be exempt from the payment of occupation tax. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the operator of the machines from paying the tax levied in this section for the account of the owner, but the payment of the tax by the operator or other person shall not relieve the owner from the responsibility of complying with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-32. - Exemptions. 
Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending machines, merchandise vending machines, and cigarette vending machines which are now subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax, stamp vending machines and service coin-operated machines, as that term is defined in section 11-30, are expressly exempt from the tax levied in section 11-31 and the other provisions of this article. The owner of any room, hall, building, tent or any enclosed or partially enclosed space in which is exhibited for hire, revenue, fee or gain of any kind of skill- or pleasure-oriented coin-operated machine shall not be exempt from the payment of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-33. - Illegal machines not authorized. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table or coin-operated machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is illegal or in violation of any article of the penal code of this state or the constitution of this state. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-34. - Certificate of payment. 
(a)  The city secretary shall issue a certificate evidencing payment of the occupation tax levied by this division. Such certificate shall be securely attached to the machine in a manner that will require continued application of steam and water to remove the certificate, or such certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the machine so as to be easily seen by the public. The certificate affixed to the machine shall be valid only for the machine which must be identified by serial number and no occupation tax receipt issued for a certain coin-operated machine shall be transferred to any other machine. Any amusement machine operator who shall exhibit or display within the city any skill- or pleasure-oriented coin-operated machine without having annexed or attached thereto a valid certificate issued by the city secretary, showing payment of the tax due thereon for the current year, shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(b)  If an amusement game is removed from a location for repair, another amusement game may be substituted for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days without having obtained an occupational certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-35. - Nonpayment. 
(a)  The city secretary may seal, in a manner that will prevent further operation, any coin-operated amusement machines subject to the payment of the occupation tax upon which the tax levied by this division has not been paid. any person subject to this subsection shall be required to pay a fee, the amount of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, for release of any machine so sealed for nonpayment of the tax. 
(b)  Whoever shall break the seal pursuant to this section or exhibit, display or remove any machine on which such seal has been broken shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-36. - Changing location of machine. 
It shall be unlawful to move a skill- or pleasure-oriented coin-operated machine to a different place of business in the city without prior written notification to the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-37. - Change in corporate ownership. 
Every person licensed under this article shall file with the city secretary a sworn affidavit prior to the effective date of any change of ownership of such business or enterprise or of the home address or principal business address of any owner thereof or, if such business or enterprise is unincorporated, prior to the effective date of any change of officers or directors of such business or enterprise or of the home address or principal business address of any officer or director thereof. Such affidavit shall state therein such change of ownership of such unincorporated business or enterprise and such change of home address or principal business address of any owner thereof or such substitution of officers or directors of such incorporated business or enterprise and such change of home address or principal business address of any officer or director thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-38. - Operation by minors; time restrictions. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to play amusement games during regular school hours, unless supervised by a parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  In addition, no person under the age of 18 years will be permitted to play amusement games after 12:00 midnight on a night followed by a school day unless supervised by a parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  All school vacation periods and holidays are exempt from the restrictions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-39. - Noise restrictions. 
No sound of any nature shall be audible beyond the limits of a place of business covered under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-40. - Skill or pleasure coin-operated machines prohibited in certain locations. 
Skill or pleasure-oriented coin-operated machines are prohibited within 300 feet of a church, school, or hospital. The city secretary shall maintain on file a current map highlighting the prohibited areas. (See attachment "A".) 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-41. - Lighting. 
Amusement games shall be lighted so that all games may be seen by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Sec. 11-42. - Violations and penalties. 
Any operator and/or owner who permits, allows or in any manner condones a violation of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum amount authorized by law for each violation and each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-576, Exh. A, 2-9-2004)  
Secs. 11-43—11-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES AND TEMPORARY SALES EVENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-652, § I, adopted Oct. 12, 2009, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 11-40—11-49. In order to maintain the existing numbering system of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been designated as §§ 11-50—11-59 to read as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 11-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Commercial activity: Any occupation, trade, calling, or profession licensed or taxed under the laws of the state, which must be operated out of a permanent, stationary, site-built building located in a commercial zone. 
Temporary sales event: Sales associated with any occupation or trade, which are not conducted in a permanent, stationary, site-built building and are not conducted as a continuing, permanent business. Such events shall be conducted in non-residential zones, including commercial, publicly-owned, church, and not-for-profit properties. Outdoor seating for restaurants does not constitute a temporary sale event, where the seating is a regular facility associated with an existing restaurant and located in the near vicinity of the permanent structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-51. - Permit required for temporary sale events. 
No person shall conduct temporary event sales either in the open or under a tent or other temporary cover for commercial or business purposes within the city limits without first obtaining a permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-52. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring to conduct a temporary sale event shall make written application to the city manager for a permit within ten (10) working days of the proposed date of the temporary sale event. The application shall state: the name of the person conducting the activity; the proposed location; the name of the owner of the property where the sales are to be located; the nature of the intended activity; the proposed dates of use; and other pertinent information on the form. If there will be multiple vendors at the safe event, the event sponsor shall be named and a list of the other vendors and the types of goods and services being sold by each vendor shall be identified. The cost of a permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00), payable at the time of submittal of the request for a permit. 
Proof of current premises liability insurance for the activity, in a minimum amount of coverage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage shall also be submitted to the city prior to issuance of a permit and shall remain in place during the permitted time. In the event the owner of the property where the temporary use shall take place has and furnishes proof to the city of premises liability insurance that provides the same or greater coverage to this applicant shall suffice for purposes of this requirement for insurance. 
A site plan shall also be submitted to city staff containing all information required by the zoning ordinance, as defined in section 11-43, for administrative review. The city reserves the right to require additional information or verifications, such as health permits, depending upon the type of business and regulatory oversight by other entities. 
A permit may be granted for a single event or a recurring event for no more than a calendar year. The application shall define the desired duration and frequency of the event. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-53. - Zoning compliance required. 
Temporary sale events shall be permitted only in non-residential zones in the city including commercial, publicly-owned, church, and not-for-profit properties with the written approval of the property owner. Typically, a temporary sale event will be sponsored by a commercial activity located permanently in the area of the temporary sale event. Further, all temporary sale events must comply with the setback requirements, parking requirements, and other standards in city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-54. - Hours of operation. 
A permit for temporary event sales shall be for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days. The commercial or business activity shall be allowed to conduct business no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and must close activities no later than 10:00 p.m. The permittee must remove all items, tents, and materials used for the conduct of the temporary event sales from the location not later than 5:00 p.m. of the day after the final date of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-55. - Compliance with all codes. 
All tents or other coverings and materials used for commercial and business purposes must otherwise comply with all applicable fire, safety, and other codes in effect during the dates of the permitted activity, These standards include compliance with regulations for fire protection and prevention, prevention of tripping and bumping hazards (e.g., electrical lines, signage, etc.), and provisions for emergency access. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-56. - Posting. 
A copy of the permit shall be conspicuously posted at or upon the entrance to the temporary event sales activity at all hours during the approved dates of the activity. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-57. - Operating without a permit; false information. 
Any person or entity conducting a temporary sale event for commercial or business purposes without complying with this article or who gives false, misleading, or incomplete information on an application shall, within one (1) day of notice of violation, obtain the required permit or immediately cease and desist from all activity covered by this article and remove the temporary event sales activity from the premises before midnight of that day. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-58. - Existing temporary sale events. 
Any person conducting a temporary sale event as defined above on the effective date of this article must either apply for and receive a permit or cease the use and remove the activity no later than 5:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day after the effective date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Sec. 11-59. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Charitable or nonprofit events. The conducting of temporary sale events by a governmental entity, publicly-owned utility, or tax exempt not-for-profit organization formed for education, philanthropic, scientific, or religious purposes, where any proceeds and profits are designed to be contributed to such entity conducting the activity or where the activity occurs on property owned by a governmental entity. However, such entities and organizations shall comply with all other ordinances and laws applicable to their activity, and no such activities shall be allowed on the publicly-owned rights-of-way without prior, written authorization by the city manager 
(b)  Outdoor displays of merchandise. Outdoor displays of merchandise by retail businesses shall be allowed if the display involves items for sale by a commercial retailer located within a permanent structure. Such displays may not cover more than half of the width of the pedestrian walkway between the storefront and the curb, unless other accommodations for pedestrian travel satisfactory to the building official are made. A permit shall be required for the placement of outdoor sales activities or items within any parking lot, and a permit shall not be granted if the proposed area eliminates required parking areas, provided, however, that special events shall be exempt from this latter provision, where emergency access and parking is approved by the building official in advance of the event. 
For the purposes of this section, "special event" is defined as a temporary outdoor use on private property that extends beyond the normal uses and standards allowed by the zoning ordinance of the city and which runs not longer than four (4) days "special event" includes, but is not limited to, art shows, sidewalk sales, pumpkin and holiday sales, festivals, craft shows, and church bazaars. 
(c)  Suspension in the event of disaster or loss. In the event of a natural disaster (e.g. flood, hurricane) or other catastrophic loss (e.g., fire), the city manager may suspend this chapter for such period of time as may be determined to be necessary for reconstruction of permanent structures. 
(Ord. No. 2009-652, 10-12-09)  
Secs. 11-60—11-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATELY OWNED AMBULANCES 
 
Sec. 11-70. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specified, the term: 
Ambulance means any privately owned motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed and equipped and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the transportation of patients. 
Applicant means any person, partnership, corporation or other operator that makes application to obtain a permit to operate within the city limits of Nassau Bay. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, this definition will include all officers or partners. 
Attendant-driver means any person who has the duty of performing or assisting in the performance of an ambulance call and is certified at the minimal level as an emergency medical technician by the Texas Department of State Health Services. The certification shall be current and valid. 
Emergency medical service means the City of Nassau Bay - Emergency Medical Services. 
Certification means an official designation that meets the requirements of the Texas Department of State Health Services at the level of Emergency Care attendant, Emergency Medical Technician Basic, Emergency Medical Technician Intermediate, Emergency Medical Technician Paramedic, and Emergency Medical Technician Licensed Paramedic Levels. 
Chief EMS officer means the chief of emergency medical services, for the City of Nassau Bay or a duly authorized representative. 
City means the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Driver's license means a license issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety to operate a motor vehicle. 
Emergency means any circumstance that calls for immediate response (emergency lights and/or siren) in which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Said circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally traffic accidents, acts of violence resulting in personal injury and sudden illness. 
Emergency call means any request for ambulance service in circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency requiring immediate ambulance response. 
Emergency medical technician (EMT) means any person currently certified by the Texas Department of State Health Services as an EMT, EMT-Intermediate, and/or EMT-Paramedic/EMT-LP. 
Emergency run means an emergency ambulance trip to a place where an emergency exists or from the place of such emergency to the emergency room of a receiving hospital. 
Medical director means any licensed physician who serves in an advisory capacity to any ambulance for the purpose of providing medical direction under the terms of the Medical Practice Act (Article 4495b, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) and rules promulgated by the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners pursuant to terms of the Medical Practice Act. 
Non-emergency means any request for ambulance service response (no emergency lights and/or siren) that is made in circumstances which are or have been represented to be of a non-emergency nature requiring non-emergency service. 
Officer means the chief EMS officer, any senior EMS officer designee or a police officer of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Patient means any person desiring non-emergency transportation to an appropriate medical facility either on an emergency or transfer basis. 
Permit means an official document issued by the City of Nassau Bay Emergency Medical Service pursuant to this article. 
Person means an individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business, trust, partnership, association or other legal entity. 
Police means any peace officer of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, Police Department. 
Protocol means written medical orders signed by a licensed physician serving as medical director giving medical direction to provide treatment for certain emergencies or other pre-hospital situations requiring physician's orders. These orders must conform to all applicable laws. 
Street means any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive or highway commonly used for the purpose of motor vehicle travel within the corporate limits of the city. 
Transfer ambulance means any motor vehicle constructed, equipped and/or used for transferring the sick or injured under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency. 
Transfer call means any request for ambulance service in circumstances which are or have been represented to be of a non-emergency nature requiring non-emergency service. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 1, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-71. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise shall operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business of ambulance service upon the streets, alleys or public ways or places of Nassau Bay, Texas, unless he or she holds a current valid permit for an ambulance vehicle and an ambulance company, issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Ambulance vehicle permit, ambulance company permit, and attendant-driver's permits shall be issued for one year or any portion thereof during which an ambulance service is maintained. Permit fees of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per company; fifty dollars ($50.00) per ambulance unit or five hundred dollars ($500.00) per fleet for fifteen (15) or more vehicles; fifty dollars ($50.00) per attendant-driver shall be due and payable at the time of application. The permit period shall be from October 1st of each year to the 30th day of September of the subsequent year. Permit fees will not be prorated. 
(c)  No person shall act as an attendant-driver on any ambulance operated under this article unless he or she holds a valid attendant-driver permit issued pursuant to this article. A temporary twenty-one-day temporary permit may be issued at the time of application. It shall be the responsibility of the chief EMS officer to verify the applicant's certification status through the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(d)  All permits issued pursuant to this article are neither assignable nor transferable and remain the property of the city. 
(e)  No official entry made upon a permit may be defaced, removed or obliterated. 
(f)  All permits shall be available for inspection by any officer of the city at all times. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 2, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-72. - Application for ambulance permit. 
Application for an ambulance vehicle permit and ambulance company permit shall be made upon forms designed and furnished by the chief EMS officer who shall issue such a permit to an applicant only upon proof by the applicant that the applicant has satisfied all provisions and conditions provided for and has given complete and truthful information to all requirements stated herein. Copies of the application form are attached as Exhibit "A" [to the ordinance from which this article derives] and may be amended from time to time as required or necessary. 
The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the ambulance; 
(2)  The trade or other assumed name, if any, under which the applicant does business or proposes to do business; 
(3)  A complete report on whether or not the applicant has any claims or judgments against him; 
(4)  A report that the applicant's business has paid all city taxes, if applicable; 
(5)  Business address, medical license number and DEA number of applicant service's medical director; 
(6)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, VIN, motor vehicle registration, current TDSHS license number, the length of time the ambulance has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate applicant's ambulance; 
(7)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary or applicable; 
(8)  Incomplete applications will not be considered; 
(9)  Falsification of information on an application will be grounds for denial of a permit. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 3, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-73. - Standards for ambulance permit. 
(a)  Each permitted ambulance shall, at all times when in use, be suitable for the transportation of a patient, from the standpoint of health, sanitation and safety. 
(b)  Minimum equipment requirements for each ambulance shall be those established by the Texas Department of State Health Services. 
(c)  When an ambulance permit is issued or renewed under the provisions of this article, the chief EMS officer will affix to each vehicle two (2) decals one applied on the front windshield passenger side, and one applied on the back window. Which indicate the vehicle meets all requirements established by this article. The color of such decals shall be changed annually. 
(d)  An ambulance involved in any collision or accident shall be promptly inspected by the chief EMS officer or his designee. 
(e)  The chief EMS officer shall cause all ambulances to be inspected before being placed in service and may thereafter inspect such ambulances no less than once each year. All permitted ambulances and or vehicles are subject to spot inspections with no notice. In the event an ambulance or vehicle fails to pass inspection, the chief EMS officer will notify the ambulance operator to correct the defects noted in the inspection and, after such notification, the chief EMS officer shall cause such ambulance to be re-inspected within forty-eight (48) hours. If upon such re-inspection the defects noted in the original inspection have not been corrected, the permit decal shall be removed from the ambulance or vehicle and shall only be replaced upon such ambulance or vehicle after the defects have been corrected. The license fee shall be paid in full for the balance of current year of the original vehicle decal provided. 
(f)  No ambulance that has been substantially damaged or altered, or has received damage where the repair costs exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be again placed in service until it has been repaired and re-inspected by the chief EMS officer. There will be no charge for re-inspection. 
(g)  Every ambulance must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(h)  All emergency medical calls that originate in the City of Nassau Bay will be responded to by the City of Nassau Bay - Emergency Medical Service, or Mutual Aid Resource. In the event that a private ambulance service receives a direct call requesting an ambulance that originates within the City of Nassau Bay, it will be the duty of the private ambulance service to immediately refer the emergency medical call to the City of Nassau Bay - Emergency Medical Service (EMS) Communication Center. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 4, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-74. - Requirements for business location. 
If the business location of the ambulance service, firm or organization is located within the city limits of Nassau Bay, the building must be in compliance with all city ordinances, state and federal laws or regulations. Pursuant to this section, no such ambulance service, firm or organization shall house or utilize a private residence, apartment, or hotel for overnight accommodations for service personnel. The chief EMS officer has the right to inspect such locations as often as deemed necessary to make sure all provisions of this article are in effect. Refusal of any privately owned ambulance service to allow the chief EMS officer to inspect a business office premises in the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 5, 6-11-07; Ord. No. O2014-729, § 5, 10-13-14)  
Sec. 11-75. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  No ambulance permit shall be issued under this article, nor shall any ambulance be operated for any reason in the city, unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, for each and every ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the applicant providing for the payment of damages: 
(1)  For injury to or death of individuals in an accident resulting from any cause for which the owner of said vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his agent. 
(2)  For the loss of or damages to the property of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in the following sums: Not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each accident and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage. A written statement from an authorized agent of the ambulance operator(s) insurance carrier verifying the issuance of such insurance shall be filed with the chief EMS officer before any permit may be issued. All such verifications of insurance shall provide for a thirty-day cancellation notice to the chief EMS officer. 
(3)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for a continuing liability there under to the full amount thereof not withstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the assured, in that until the policy is revoked the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act or admission of the named assured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the payment of any judgments up to the limits of said policy, recovered against any person other than the owner, by his agent or employee, who may operate the same with the consent or acquiescence of the owner. 
Expiration or cancellation of such insurance coverage shall automatically terminate any ambulance permit. Proof of insurance shall be provided on demand and proof shall at all times be on board any permitted ambulance. 
(b)  Each attendant-driver involved in the operation of an ambulance within the city limits shall be required to carry at all times professional liability insurance. This policy may be provided by the applicant company for all its employees or individual policies issued to all personnel employed by the company. 
(1)  This coverage must be from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas for each and every person operating within the city limits of Nassau Bay. 
(2)  The limits of liability required are no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per claim and a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) aggregate umbrella policy. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of each person to provide to the chief EMS officer proof of such insurance upon demand by any authorized EMS officer or peace officer. 
(4)  Failure to promptly provide proof of insurance will be justification to suspend and/or not issue any attendant-driver and/or ambulance permit. 
(5)  The chief EMS officer must be notified within twenty-four (24) hours of any cancellation of insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 6, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-76. - Application for attendant-driver permit. 
(a)  Applications for attendant-driver permits hereunder shall be made upon such form as may be prepared by the chief EMS officer and shall contain the following information which is a requirement for the issuance of a license: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, current address, how long he has lived at current address, previous address, how long he lived at previous address, home telephone number, and social security number. 
(2)  The applicant's age, date of birth, height, place of birth, hair and eye color. 
(3)  The applicant's valid Texas driver's license number and expiration date. 
(4)  The applicant's present EMS certification level, appropriate Texas Department of State Health Services registration number and the expiration date of his/her certification. 
(5)  Two (2) recent photographs of a size designated by the chief EMS officer, which shall be attached to the license application. 
(6)  A report from a duly licensed physician of the State of Texas of a recent physical examination which attests that the person has vision in both eyes correctable to 20/20 and has no physical defects which would impair his or her ability to perform the duties of an ambulance attendant-driver. 
(7)  Any such other information as the chief EMS officer shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this article. 
A copy of the attendant-driver permit application form is attached as Exhibit "B" [to the ordinance from which this article derives] and may be amended from time to time as required or necessary. 
(b)  The chief EMS officer shall, within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of a completed application for an attendant-driver permit, investigate the application and issue the permit or notify the applicant that the application has been denied. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 7, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-77. - Standards for attendant-driver permits. 
(a)  All attendant-driver applicants must be able to read, write and speak the English language. 
(b)  All drivers must have a valid Texas driver's license (Class A, B, or C). 
(c)  All attendant-drivers must hold current certification from the Texas Department of State Health Services as an emergency medical technician (EMT). 
(d)  No attendant-driver shall have a final conviction for theft, robbery, state or federal controlled substances acts, rape, sexual abuse, indecency with a child, or any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(e)  No attendant-driver shall have been convicted of three (3) or more moving violations within the preceding two-year period. 
(f)  All attendant-drivers shall be able to pass the vision test as prescribed by the Texas Department of Public Safety. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 8, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-78. - Renewal of permit. 
Renewal of any permit hereunder, upon expiration or after revocation, shall require conformance with all requirements of this article as if an original permit was being sought. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 9, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-79. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The chief EMS officer may, and is hereby authorized to, suspend or revoke a permit to operate within the City of Nassau Bay issued hereunder for failure of a permittee to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of this article, or of regulations promulgated hereunder, or of any other applicable laws, regulations or ordinances, but only after warning and a reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the chief EMS officer. Any applicant denied a permit or any permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall have the right of appeal to the city manager of the City of Nassau Bay. Such appeal shall be submitted to the city manager in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the action being appealed. The city manager shall, within ten (10) days after the appeal is received, consider all the evidence in support of or against the decision being appealed from and render a decision either sustaining, reversing, or modifying the determination of the chief EMS officer. 
(b)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance permit hereunder, such ambulance shall cease operation in the City of Nassau Bay as such and no person shall permit such ambulance to continue operations as such. Upon suspension, revocation or termination of attendant's or driver's permit hereunder, such attendant or driver shall cease to drive or attend an ambulance and no person shall employ or permit such individual to drive or attend to an ambulance. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 10, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-80. - Medical director to serve in an advisory capacity. 
(a)  Any ambulance whose attendant receives physicians' orders either by voice communications or written standing orders must have, in an advisory capacity, a physician, licensed in the State of Texas, to serve as medical director before such physician's orders may be carried out. 
(b)  Any ambulance permitted under this article must maintain with the chief EMS officer a statement of their current medical director including his or her name, business address, business telephone number, and Texas medical license number; and the federal narcotics license number if any drugs or supplies are prescribed by this physician. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 11, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-81. - Inspection of ambulances. 
(a)  Subsequent to issuance of any ambulance or vehicle permit hereunder, the chief EMS officer shall cause to be inspected each such permitted vehicle, its equipment, premises and personnel, whenever he/she deems it necessary. All permitted ambulances or vehicles shall be subject to unannounced spot inspections and in any event will be inspected at least once per year. The periodic inspection required hereunder shall be in addition to any other safety or motor vehicle inspection required to be made for ambulance or other motor vehicles in the State of Texas. Compliance with this article shall not excuse compliance with any requirements of law to display any other official certificate of motor vehicle inspection at all times. A copy of the inspection form is attached hereto as Exhibit "C" [to the ordinance from which this article derives] and may be amended from time to time as required or necessary. 
(b)  A copy of each initial, semiannual, spot or other ambulance, equipment, premises and personnel inspection report shall be promptly transmitted to the applicant or permittee to whom it refers. 
(c)  The chief EMS officer may immediately suspend any of the permittee's issued under this article if an inspection reveals violations or deficiencies that might endanger a patient or the public. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 12, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-82. - Central emergency dispatching system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any private ambulance, not permitted in accordance with this article, to respond to any emergency calls within the city limits of Nassau Bay. 
(b)  If any non-permitted ambulance service receives any request for an emergency ambulance service response on an emergency basis other than through the city's central dispatching system, it is the obligation of that person to immediately report the same request to the city's central dispatching system at which time a City of Nassau Bay Emergency Medical Service (EMS) unit will be dispatched to respond. 
(c)  It shall not be unlawful for a person operating a permitted ambulance in the City of Nassau Bay, upon responding to a direct call for non-emergency ambulance service, to operate such ambulance under non-emergency conditions. Notifying the city's central dispatching system is not required for non-emergency ambulance responses. 
(1)  In the event that the senior ambulance attendant-driver of a permitted ambulance service makes a determination upon arrival that a true emergency exists, the senior ambulance attendant-driver may then proceed in an emergency status (lights and siren) to the closest appropriate hospital facility and shall immediately, or a soon as reasonably practical, notify the city's central dispatching system of their actions. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 13, 6-11-07)  
Sec. 11-83. - Penalty for violation of [article]. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person violates any provision of this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates a provision of this article, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine in an amount of no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than the maximum allowed by law for such violations at the time of infraction, whichever amount is greater. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 14, 6-11-07; Ord. No. O2014-729, § 14, 10-13-14)  
Sec. 11-84. - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
The following are exemptions from this article: 
(1)  A person who has transported a sick or injured person to medical care as an individual citizen not ordinarily engaged in that activity; 
(2)  A person that transports a sick or injured person in a multiple casualty situation that exceeds the capacity of the city's emergency medical services; 
(3)  A person that is a member of an organization and the person's function is to transport members of that same organization to an appropriate medical facility at no charge to the individual being transferred; and that same organization does not solicit business outside itself or provide service to any other organization except in a multiple casualty situation; 
(4)  The vehicle or person is moving through the city on a call that neither originates nor ends within the city; 
(5)  The organization is principally an air transport system; 
(6)  The organization or vehicle is licensed by the state as a "specialized emergency medical services vehicle" and is designed to provide service to patients with special needs not easily met by other transport services; 
(7)  The organization is an agency or designated provider of a municipal government; 
(8)  The occurrence of a declared evacuation by the mayor of the City of Nassau Bay; or a disaster or other public health or safety event in which case multiple ambulances may be required. In such cases, the exemption shall automatically expire when the need for additional medical assistance as a result of a declared evacuation, disaster, or public health or safety event has passed. In all such cases, the City of Nassau Bay EMS Director and/or an official representative of the Christus St. John Hospital reserve the exclusive right to determine which emergency medical services are used based on their individual ability to meet basic licensing, health and safety standards as appropriate for their intended use at the time. 
(Ord. No. O2007-624, § 15, 6-11-07)  
Chapter 12 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Illegal acts in city parks, § 13-10; abandoned refrigerators, § 9-20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - False alarm reward—Offered. 
The city shall and does offer a reward of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of violation of section 42.06, V.A.P.C., by knowingly and maliciously making any false alarm or falsely reporting any act or fact situation which causes an authorized emergency vehicle of the city, as defined in article 6701d of V.A.C.S., to respond to said report or alarm. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
Cross reference— Arson conviction reward, § 8-1; alarm systems, Ch. 2.3.  
Sec. 12-2. - Same—Posting notice. 
The city secretary is directed to post in at least six (6) different public buildings, a placard eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches that is under glass and in a wooden frame, with the following wording: 
"FALSE ALARM REWARD 
The City of Nassau Bay, Texas, hereby offers a reward of TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY DOLLARS ($250.00) for the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of making a false alarm or falsely reporting any act or fact situation which causes an authorized emergency vehicle to respond to said report of alarm."  
Sec. 12-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-250, enacted Dec. 17, 1979, repealed Ord. No. 77-193, adopted April 25, 1977, from which § 12-3 was derived. Said Ord. No. 77-193 made it a Class C misdemeanor to possess a usable quantity of marijuana at the weight of two ounces or less or to possess certain other drugs and controlled substances.  
Sec. 12-4. - Discharge of firearms and other guns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to cast, throw, shoot, fire or discharge any rifle, gun, revolver, pistol, pellet gun, shotgun, cartridge or any firearm of any kind or nature, except as specifically allowed in this section. 
(b)  BB guns will be restricted for use in enclosed yards, or enclosed property, of the individual's residence, and shall not be discharged on or into any public right-of-way, public roadway, public park or any other public or private property. 
(c)  For purposes of clarification, the definition of a "firearm" shall mean any gun, revolver, pistol, rifle, shotgun, pellet gun, cartridge or any other weapon that is spring loaded, discharged by explosive action of any kind or nature, or of pneumatic design and operation. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the possession or ownership of any firearm, or to the sale of such firearm, nor shall this section be construed to prevent any private display of firearms of any kind. No person shall conduct or participate in public displays of firearms of any kind unless he has first obtained a temporary permit issued by the city manager. Said permit shall be issued if: 
(1)  The applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or over and has never been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  The location of said public display is disclosed and the permit shall be valid in said location only; and 
(3)  The time said display shall begin and end is disclosed and the permit shall only be valid during those times. 
(Ord. No. 77-192, 4-25-77) 
Cross reference— Maximum permitted noise levels, § 10-5.  
Sec. 12-5. - Hindering or preventing peace officers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to intentionally or knowingly hinder or prevent any peace officer from performing an official function by physical action or verbal utterance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and an offense to recklessly hinder or prevent any peace officer from performing an official function by physical action or verbal utterance after explicit official command or request to desist. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section "official function" means any activity that a peace officer is lawfully authorized to undertake in his or her official capacity. 
(Ord. No. 81-271, 3-23-81) 
Editor's note— Having not expressly amended the Code, the provisions of Ord. No. 81-271, enacted March 23, 1981, have been codified herein as § 12-5 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 12-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-552, § I, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, renumbered § 12-6 as § 19-33.  
Sec. 12-7. - Fishing in certain locations. 
Fishing will be prohibited on certain public rights-of-way or public property (all such property clearly marked by signs indicating that it is a "No Fishing" area) bounded by the meanders of the water's edge as delineated below (for purpose of clarification, a detailed map is attached hereto and incorporated herein for reference): 
(1)  The right-of-way waterfront of Upper Bay Road along its entire length of access of Nassau Bay, including frontage on canals. 
(2)  The approximately 70-acre city-owned peninsula property in its entirety. 
(3)  Clear Creek parallel and south of Harbour Drive between the city's peninsula property and the Nassau Bay City Park. 
(4)  The public property waterfront of Clear Creek abutting the western limits of the Nassau Bay City park along Clear Creek at the point such property is enclosed by a fence and from that point north including the property of the city's wastewater treatment plant; continuing beyond the fenced area to include the public property adjacent to the city's flood gate; and continuing north to the boundary of public land abutting private property. 
(5)  The right-of-way water front of Kingstreet Lane on Lake Nassau between Point Lookout Drive and Martinique Drive. 
(6)  The right-of-way and abutting public property water front of Martinique Drive on Lake Nassau between Port Royal Drive and south to Upper Bay Road. 
(Ord. No. 96-467, 7-8-96) 
Cross reference— Trapping, netting, seining, trotlining fish in Lake Nassau prohibited, § 13-10(9).  
Secs. 12-8—12-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCIES AND PUBLIC DISTURBANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Civil defense and emergency management, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Authority, V.A.C.S. art 5890e, § 5 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Contraband: Any article, substance or thing, the possession or transportation of which is prohibited, and which is subject to summary destruction upon seizure by officers of the law. 
Curfew: A regulation requiring withdrawal of persons from streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the city during the stated hours when it is in effect. 
Emergency: A state of natural or man-made calamity or disaster or of violent civil disorder which causes or threatens to cause loss of life or property in the city. 
Public disturbance: Any riot, affray, noise, disturbance or disorderly assembly in any public or private place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-53, § 1, 7-26-71)  
Sec. 12-21. - Duties of mayor. 
(a)  When the mayor determines, on the basis of information from the police and other reliable sources, that an emergency exists in the city, he shall proclaim that such exists and command all persons engaged in unlawful and riotous conduct to disperse and retire peaceably to their respective abodes immediately and thereafter to abandon all such activities. 
(b)  At any time after the proclamation of an emergency, if the mayor determines that the resources and ability of the police and other peace officers in the city are inadequate to cope with the danger, he shall call upon the governor of the state for assistance from state military forces. Following deployment of state military forces, the mayor shall keep himself informed as to their effectiveness, and if additional forces appear to be needed, he shall forthwith recommend to the governor that the state make application for federal military aid. 
(c)  At any time after the proclamation of an emergency, the mayor shall have the authority to order supplies and equipment necessary to protect life and property. If supplies and equipment are required immediately, and if it is necessary, he shall commandeer them for public use. 
(d)  Immediately after proclaiming an emergency, the mayor shall organize the forces of the various departments of the city government to provide any necessary services, and if additional employees are needed, to deputize or otherwise hire persons on a temporary basis, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date when the emergency expires or the mayor declares that the emergency has ended, whichever is sooner. During the emergency, the mayor shall appoint special municipal court judges as needed to assure the speedy trial of offenders, such appointments to be acted upon, and the length thereof to be determined by the city council at the earliest practicable date. 
(e)  In addition to the foregoing specific duties, the mayor shall do whatever else he may deem necessary for the purpose of meeting the emergency. 
(f)  As soon as the mayor finds that order and the public peace have been restored and are no longer threatened, he shall forthwith proclaim that the emergency has terminated. If there is no proclamation of the termination of an emergency, the emergency proclamation shall expire automatically seventy-two (72) hours after it is issued and declared. Subsequent proclamations may be issued to extend the emergency if found necessary, by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 71-53, § 2, 7-26-71)  
Sec. 12-22. - Duties of city attorney. 
(a)  From the time that a public disturbance is imminent, and throughout any that may arise, the city attorney shall advise the mayor on the legal procedures requisite to the performance of his duties, as set forth in section 12-21. If there is a need for additional special municipal court judges, the city attorney shall recommend persons to the mayor for appointment to such positions. 
(b)  During any emergency proclaimed by the mayor, if the city attorney finds that additional attorneys are needed to represent the city in the municipal court, so as to afford offenders a speedy trial, the mayor shall appoint, on a temporary basis, the number of special assistant attorneys that he deems necessary, all such appointments to be submitted to the city council for confirmation at the earliest practicable date. 
(Ord. No. 71-53, § 3, 7-26-71)  
Sec. 12-23. - Powers of mayor in emergency. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a proclamation by the mayor that an emergency exists, he shall have broad powers to protect life and property, to suppress any public disturbance, and to restore order and maintain public peace. Such powers shall be coextensive with the necessities of the emergency, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The power to order a curfew into effect in all or any delineated part of the city and to exempt therefrom persons whose movement is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(2)  The power to order the closing of any place where arms, ammunition, dynamite or other explosives are sold, and forbid the sale, barter, loan or gift of any such items. 
(3)  (a)  The power to order the closing of bars, lounges, private clubs, package liquor stores, or any business establishment having a liquor, beer or wine permit, gasoline stations, theaters, ballrooms, and public rooms or buildings. 
(b)  The power to prohibit the sale of beer, wine and intoxicating liquor and the sale, distribution, or gift of gasoline or other flammable liquid or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(4)  The power to declare a list of contraband and authorize search for the items on said list. 
(5)  The power to exclude sightseers from any area where there is a public disturbance. 
(6)  The power to order the detention of persons who impede the preservation or restoration of order or incite others to do so. 
(Ord. No. 71-53, § 4, 7-26-71)  
Sec. 12-24. - Notice of proclamations and orders. 
A copy of every proclamation and order issued by the mayor incident to an emergency shall be filed with the city secretary, posted at the city hall and in at least two (2) other public places, and shall be given the widest practicable publicity in newspapers, on radio and television, to the end that the public will have notice of their provisions. 
(Ord. No. 71-53, § 5, 7-26-71)  
Sec. 12-25. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person during the period of an emergency as proclaimed by the mayor under authority of this article as above provided, to enter or remain upon the premises of any mercantile establishment not open for business to the general public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person during the curfew hours and within the curfew area, as proclaimed by the mayor under the authority of this article as above provided, to be in possession of any goods, wares or merchandise not then being sold in the curfew area and from which it may be reasonably presumed that said person procured said goods, wares or merchandise by other than lawful means. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-6. 
(d)  From the time the mayor proclaims an emergency, until he proclaims it terminated or the emergency terminates by operation of law as described in section 12-21(f), it shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To violate any of the orders duly issued by the mayor. 
(2)  To commit any acts in the city that deter any policeman, any peace officer called to assist the police, any fireman, or any member of the military called to restore and maintain the public peace, from the enforcement of any order issued by the mayor. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provisions of subparagraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (d) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-6, and each offense shall be deemed to be a separate violation and punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 71-53, § 6, 7-26-71)  
Sec. 12-26. - Interlocal police assistance—State law adopted. 
The city hereby adopts in all respects the provisions of Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, article 999b, sections 1—5, entitled "Law-enforcement officers; interlocal assistance."  
Sec. 12-27. - Same—Authority of city officials to furnish assistance. 
The city acting by and through its city manager or, in his absence or inability to act, the chief of police, may send or direct any of its regularly employed law enforcement officers to assist any county or other municipality, when a request is received for assistance from the mayor, or other officer authorized to declare a state of civil emergency, in such other municipality or county, representing that there exists in such county or other municipality a need for additional law enforcement officers to protect health, life and property of such county or other municipality or its inhabitants, and the visitors thereof, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat by three (3) or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during the time of natural or man-made calamity.  
Sec. 12-28. - Same—Rights and duties of officers. 
When law enforcement officers of the city are sent to another municipality or a county, they shall be in all things subject to the provisions of the state law adopted by section 12-26. Such officer shall be considered a peace officer of the county or other municipality under the command of the law enforcement officer therein, who is in charge in that municipality or county and, as provided by such state law, shall be vested with all the powers of a regular law enforcement officer in the county or other municipality. Such law enforcement officers of the city shall be considered under the terms of such state law and shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all other compensations while performing police duties outside of the territorial limits of the city as though the same services were being rendered in the city. The city shall pay to the officers such wages, salary, pension and other benefits, together with medical, travel, food, lodging and other expenses incurred on account of performing services outside of the territorial limits of the city and the city shall be reimbursed by the county or other municipality requesting the services out of which such payments and expenses arose, as is provided by state law.  
Sec. 12-29. - Curfew hours for juveniles. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Nassau Bay or a designated representative. 
Curfew hours means the time between 12:01 a.m. until 5:00 a.m. (CDT) on any day of the week. 
Direct route means the shortest path of public travel to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
Emergency means, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury, loss of life, or damage to or loss of property. 
Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Juvenile means any person less than seventeen (17) years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other form of entity or association, including the owners, members, managers, partners, officers, agents and employees thereof as applicable, operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural or adoptive parent or step-parent of another person; 
(2)  A court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of another person; or 
(3)  At least twenty-one (21) years of age and authorized by a parent or court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of another person. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, playground, park, plaza, building, or other place used by or open to the public. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A juvenile commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours or fails to return home by a direct route from such public place or establishment after being asked to leave by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(2)  A parent of a juvenile commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the juvenile to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner or operator of an establishment commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(1) of this section that the juvenile was: 
a.  Accompanied by the juvenile's parent; 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parent and was using a direct route; 
c.  In a motor vehicle or mode of transportation involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity, including but not limited to newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route; 
e.  Involved in an emergency; 
f.  On the sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence; 
g.  Attending an activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, governmental entity, church, civic or charitable organization, or similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile with the consent of the juvenile's parent or going to or returning home by a direct route from any such activity; 
h.  Engaged in, participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function, or activity to which the application of subsection (b)(1) of this section would contravene the juvenile's First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
i.  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner or operator of an establishment, or any employee or agent thereof, promptly notified the police department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  A police officer, upon finding a juvenile in violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section, shall: 
a.  Ascertain the name and address of the juvenile; and 
b.  Order the juvenile to go promptly home by a direct route. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(1) of this section, a police officer, upon finding a juvenile in violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section, may: 
a.  Issue the juvenile a citation for the offense and deliver the juvenile to a parent; or 
b.  Take the juvenile into custody and deliver the juvenile to a holding location if: 
1.  A parent to whom custody of the juvenile may be released cannot be located; or 
2.  Reasonable grounds exist to believe the juvenile has engaged in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision in accordance with Sections 51.03 and 52.01 of the Texas Family Code. 
3.  If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, the juvenile shall be released to the appropriate juvenile authorities or responsible adult. 
4.  A police officer finding any violations of any provisions of this section shall file a written report on the incident. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), community service in lieu thereof or both. 
(2)  When required by Section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection (b)(1) of this section and shall refer the juvenile to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 2006-603, § 1, 2-13-06; Ord. No. 2008-641, § 1, 11-10-08; Ord. No. O2012-694, § 1, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. O2016-742, § 1, 3-14-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2016-742, § 1, adopted March 14, 2016, renewed section 12-29 for an additional two (2) years by the adoption of said ordinance.  
Secs. 12-30—12-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-710, adopted June 10, 2013, repealed Art. III, §§ 12-51—12-68, which pertained to mass gatherings and derived from Ord. No. 91-403, §§ 1—13, adopted June 10, 1991. 
 
Secs. 12-51—12-68. - Reserved.  
Chapter 13 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority as to parks and recreation, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(15), 6080—6081i. 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Group: An organization or association of individuals having a common interest or purpose and numbering twenty (20) or more persons. 
Park: A tract of city-owned property used for recreational purposes by the general public. 
Pollute: To make physically impure, unclean or contaminated. 
(Ord. No. 74-127, § 2, 2-25-74; Ord. No. O2017-763, 12-11-17)  
Sec. 13-2. - Special events committee—Created; composition; terms. 
A special events committee is hereby created, to consist of from eight (8) to twelve (12) members, depending on the needs of the community, who shall serve two-year terms. There shall be overlapping terms to ensure continuity and experienced membership at all times. 
(Ord. No. 73-116, § 1, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 83-305, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 87-356, 10-12-87; Ord. No. 94-440, 11-14-94)  
Sec. 13-3. - Same—Expiration of terms. 
The term of one-half of the members shall expire on the first day of September on each even-numbered year. The term of the remaining members shall expire on the first day of September on each odd-numbered year. 
(Ord. No. 73-116, §§ 2, 3, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 83-305, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 87-356, 10-12-87)  
Sec. 13-4. - Same—Duties. 
The duties of the special events committee shall be to coordinate city-sponsored recreational events and activities which have been approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 73-116, § 4, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 83-305, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 94-440, 11-14-94)  
Sec. 13-5. - Same—Meetings. 
The special events committee shall hold meetings as necessary and said meetings shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 73-116, § 5, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 83-305, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 94-440, 11-14-94)  
Sec. 13-6. - Purpose of regulation of parks and recreation areas. 
All city parks and Lake Nassau exist for the benefit, use and enjoyment of the people of the city. Sections 13-7 through 13-10 are meant to control special interest use and general use of city parks and recreation areas to prevent interference with general public enjoyment. 
(Ord. No. 74-127, § 1, 2-25-74)  
Sec. 13-7. - Supervision. 
All parks and Lake Nassau shall be operated and maintained under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 74-127, § 3, 2-25-74)  
Sec. 13-8. - Amusement for gain. 
No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made shall be conducted in any city park without the consent of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 74-127, § 4, 2-25-74; Ord. No. 83-305, 7-11-83)  
Sec. 13-9. - Group use regulation. 
(a)  Whenever any group desires to use a park or its facilities for a particular purpose, other than informal sports, a representative of said group shall first obtain a permit from the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall adopt the application form to be used for such situations. The city manager shall grant the application if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public and if the group meets all other conditions contained in the application. 
The city manager may, at his discretion, establish a reservation system for park facilities to ensure fair, equitable and reasonable use. 
Each person or group using the parks and recreational facilities within the parks shall clean up all debris and leave the premises in a neat and orderly condition. 
(Ord. No. 74-127, § 5, 2-25-74)  
Sec. 13-10. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group to: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any structure, tables, benches, railings, trees, shrubs or ornamental plants, flower beds, paving or park property or appurtenances. 
(2)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain or Lake Nassau, or drain flowing into Lake Nassau, any substance, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said lake or fountains. 
(3)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and the rules applicable to such use. 
(4)  Drive any motorized vehicle (including, but not limited to cars, trucks, golf carts, motorcycles, motorbikes, motorized scooters) in any park, or in any place other than on established for roadways or public parking areas. 
Park or leave any motorized vehicle (including cars, trucks, golf carts, motorcycles, motorbikes, motorized scooters) in any park or in any place other than established for public parking. 
Provided, however, that city officials, employees and members of the fire department while conducting public business are expressly excepted from this section. In addition, the city manager may authorize motorized vehicles to drive or park in the park on a specific instance basis. The maximum speed for all motor vehicles within the park shall be ten (10) miles per hour. 
The roadways adjacent to the waste water treatment plant are not public roadways and their use is limited to city employees, city business, or by express permission by the city manager. The bridge over the spillway between Lake Nassau and Clear Creek leads to a sidewalk towards Founders Park. Motorized vehicles, especially golf carts, are not allowed to use the bridge or sidewalk. 
(5)  Permit any pet to be in any park unless such pet is controlled by a leash not more than six (6) feet long or a retractable leash of not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in length, or is in a cage, or within a vehicle being driven or parked in a designated parking space. 
(6)  Bathe in or use Lake Nassau for swimming. 
(7)  Operate any motor-powered boat on Lake Nassau unless approved specifically by the city manager. 
(8)  Carry on or about his or her person any type of glass which if broken could cause injury to themselves or any other person or persons in any park area. 
(9)  Trap, net, seine or trotline fish in Lake Nassau or fish in any manner or by any means along the bank of Lake Nassau from the following public property: 
That certain public right-of-way or public property bounded by the meanders of the water's edge of Lake Nassau, the roadbed of Martinique Drive, the northerly right-of-way of Upper Bay Road and the southerly boundary line of a privately owned residential tract located at 18718 Martinique, which area shall be clearly marked by signs indicating that it is a "no fishing, netting or seining" area. 
(Ord. No. 74-127, § 6, 2-25-74; Ord. No. 80-251, 2-11-80; Ord. No. 83-305, 7-11-83; Ord. No. 83-311, 12-12-83; Ord. No. 94-432, 3-14-94; Ord. No. O2017-763, 12-11-17) 
Cross reference— Water safety regulations, § 22-21 et seq.  
Chapter 14 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative services, Art. IV. 
Cross reference— Creation of office of city treasurer, § 7-1; official holidays, § 2-4. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Personnel policy adopted. 
The city council hereby adopts the personnel policy, a copy of which is on file in the city secretary's office, and the same is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 91-404, 6-10-91; Ord. No. 96-472, 11-11-96) 
Editor's note— Former § 14-1 was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 91-404, adopted June 10, 1991. The deleted provisions pertained to the personnel policy adopted by Ord. No. 75-147, enacted April 28, 1975.  
Sec. 14-2. - Drug control policy. 
The city council hereby adopts the drug control policy, a copy of which is on file in the city secretary's office, and the same is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 91-399, 9-25-91) 
Editor's note— At the city's request, the provisions of Ord. No. 91-399, adopted Sept. 25, 1991, were not set out, but were incorporated herein by reference.  
Secs. 14-3—14-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT 
 
Sec. 14-20. - Social security—entering into agreements. 
The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of House Bill 603, Acts 52nd Leg., R.S. 1951, (V.A.C.S. art. 695g) and Public Law 734, 81st Congress, ch. 809, 2d. H.R. 6000, to secure the benefits of federal old-age and survivors insurance, as outlined in said laws. 
(Ord. No. 72-96, § 1, 10-23-72)  
Sec. 14-21. - Same—Agent to execute agreements. 
The city manager is appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and city. 
(Ord. No. 72-96, § 2, 10-23-72)  
Sec. 14-22. - Same—Assessing, collecting, payment and reporting officer. 
The city secretary is directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and reports, as required by the state department of public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 72-96, § 3, 10-23-72)  
Sec. 14-23. - Same—Social Security fund. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the above-mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the "City of Nassau Bay Social Security Fund," which fund shall be set side and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Ord. No. 72-96, § 3, 10-23-72)  
Chapter 15 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sign regulations, Ch. 16; subdivision regulations, App. B; zoning regulations, App. A. 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Planning and zoning commission—Created and established; composition; quorum. 
There is hereby created and established for the city a planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed of seven (7) members. The members shall be resident citizens and qualified voters of the city, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council to serve for a term of two (2) years. Initially four (4) members shall serve terms ending on January 1, 1973, and three (3) members shall have terms ending on January 1, 1974. All vacancies created on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for terms as provided for the original appointments and in the same manner. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. Three (3) successive unexcused absences from the meeting after a minimum five (5) day notice served by telephone or mail of the time and place of such meetings shall ipso facto terminate membership on the city planning and zoning commission. Absences may be excused only by a majority of the commission. Members of the commission may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, after public hearing and cause assigned in writing. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 72-74, § 1, 1-24-72) 
Charter reference— Planning commission and planning, Art. X.  
Sec. 15-2. - Same—Organization. 
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership and shall request the city council to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of the commission and to pay for their services and such other necessary expenses, provided that the cost of such services and expenses shall be approved in advance by the city council and shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the city council for the use of the commission. It shall also have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council and same shall be subject to approval by such council. Such bylaws shall conform to state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 72-74, § 2, 1-24-72)  
Sec. 15-3. - Same—Cooperation from and with city officials, etc. 
Officials and members of committees of the city shall be available to the planning commission for advice and consultation and they shall cooperate with and render such services for the commission as shall come within the scope of the duties of such officials and committees. In like manner, the planning commission shall consult and coordinate with cognizant city officials, committees, commissions and advisory bodies before recommending any planning program to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 72-74, § 4, 1-24-72)  
Sec. 15-4. - Same—Duties generally. 
It shall be the duty of the commission to act as an advisory board to the city council and to act on all planning and zoning matters referred to it by the council. 
(Ord. No. 72-74, § 3, 1-24-72)  
Sec. 15-5. - Same—Powers and duties specifically. 
The planning commission shall have the power and authority and it shall be its duties with the consent of the city council: 
(1)  To make studies and project plans for the improvements of the city with a view of its development and extension, and to recommend to the city council all matters for the development and advancement of the city facilities, layouts and appearance and to perform the duties imposed upon the planning commission by the charter and by the statutes of the state, and specifically by Chapter 231, Acts of Regular Session of 40th Legislature, 1927, the same being Article 974a, V.A.C.S. 
(2)  To make plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the city, and of land outside the city limits located within the extraterritorial area, which in the opinion of the planning commission bears relation to the planning of the city, and to make such changes in additions and extensions of plans or maps as it deems advisable. 
(3)  To confer with and advise private property owners pertaining to location and erection of private structures with the view of having the same conform to the overall city plan and to advise the building official in the performance of his duties. 
(4)  To aid and assist the city manager in the preparation of the city budget and determination of sources of funds and other assistance for the city from the state and federal governments and their agencies for any of the purposes herein enumerated. 
(5)  To act with and assist all other municipal and governmental agencies and especially the city council in formulating and executing proper plans for municipal development. 
(6)  To plan and recommend the location of public buildings and other improvements of city properties, and public utilities, whether public or privately owned, including water, lights, sewage treatment, drainage and flood control; and to plan and recommend the removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing public places, works, buildings, facilities or utilities. 
(7)  To plan and recommend to the city council routes, streets, avenues and boulevards and particularly to investigate and recommend the opening, widening or abandonment of streets, avenues, boulevards and alleyways or the changing thereof to conform to a unified concept for the present and future. 
(8)  To investigate and report to the city council upon the layout and plan of any new residential plats or specific use permits as outlined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(9)  To recommend to the city council for adoption, additional rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the city to promote health, safety, moral and general welfare of the community, and the safe and orderly and healthful development of the community. Such rules and regulations may be adopted by the city council only after public hearings held thereon. 
(10)  To make investigations, consider and make recommendations to the city council concerning traffic routing and control. 
(11)  To act as the zoning commission for the city. 
(12)  To recommend amendments to the zoning, subdivision and building code ordinances for compliance with the federal flood insurance program. 
(13)  Prepare long range (5 and 10 years, plus) plans, including budget and capital improvements for the city covering such matters as population changes, annexation, location and type of business and industrial development, parks and recreational needs and facilities, city offices and other facilities and special equipment such as fire trucks, water supplies, land subsidence, sewage treatment systems, and estimated revenues and expenditures. This plan should be submitted to council three (3) months prior to the end of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 72-74, § 5, 1-24-72) 
Charter reference— See also § 10.01 et seq.  
Chapter 16 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Highway Beautification Act, V.A.C.S. art. 6674v—1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
(a)  Roof line: The uppermost part of the main structure of the building excluding appurtenances such as air conditioners, chimneys, vents, etc. 
(b)  Roof sign A: Any sign erected partially or wholly above the roof line and principally supported by the roof or any portion of the building. 
(c)  Roof sign B: Any sign erected on a roof but no part of which extends above the roof line and principally supported by the roof or any portion of the building. 
(d)  Wall sign: A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall and which has the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building. 
(e)  Marquee sign: A sign attached to and not projected above a marquee, canopy or awning projecting from and partially or wholly supported by the building. 
(f)  Projecting sign: A sign which projects from and is partially or wholly supported by the building. 
(g)  Pylon sign: A sign supported by one main upright structure and which has a freestanding framework which is independent of a building. 
(h)  Billboard: A sign supported by more than one upright structure, and which has a freestanding framework which is independent of a building. 
(i)  Monument sign: A sign constructed on the ground with two (2) feet or less of visible open area between the ground and the sign. 
(j)  Temporary sign: A sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvass, fabric or other light temporary material with or without a structural frame. 
(k)  Small portable sign: A freestanding sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, four and one-half (4½) feet or less tall and having a maximum area seven (7) square feet or less. 
(l)  Identification sign: A sign which is used solely for the purpose of identifying the building or occupant's name and/or address and not a business sign. 
(m)  Business sign: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
(n)  Advertising sign: A sign used for a name, identification, description, display or illustration which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business which is offered or conducted elsewhere than on the premises upon which such sign is located. 
(o)  Construction sign: A sign stating a brief description of the construction project, the name of the construction company, owner, financier, engineer, architect and other businesses associated with the construction operation of the project. 
(p)  Spectacular sign: A sign with animated advertising copy, wired for lights or illuminous tubing or both with copy action or parts of which move, blink, flash or revolve. 
(q)  Person: As defined in section 1-5. 
(r)  City: As defined in section 1-5. 
(s)  Display surface: The surface made available by the structure, either for the direct mounting of letters and decorations, or the mounting of the surface sign space. 
(t)  Height: The vertical distance from the uppermost point of a sign to the ground immediately below such point. 
(u)  Measurement of area of sign: The entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display surface or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed but including any sign tower. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two (2) such faces are placed back to back, and are at no point more than two (2) feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two (2) faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two (2) faces are of unequal area. 
(v)  Sign: Any arrangement of letters, figures, symbols or other devices used for advertising, announcement, direction or declaration intending to attract or inform the public, affixed or attached to or projecting from the exterior walls of the building or other structure or upon constructed surfaces supported by one or more uprights or braces in or on the ground or in or on the roof or parapet of a building, or otherwise erected, attached or supported outdoors. The word "sign" shall be interpreted to include the structure of such sign. 
(w)  Institutional bulletin board: A structure containing a surface area upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library, community center or similar institution and the announcement of its services or activities. 
(x)  District: As defined in the city zoning ordinance. 
(y)  Setback: The distance from the property line. 
(z)  Interior sign: Any sign placed in the interior of a building so that its primary viewing area is outdoors. 
(za)  Large portable sign: A freestanding sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, more than four and one-half (4½) feet tall and having a maximum area of more than seven (7) square feet. This includes trailer and skid mounted signs. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 1, 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-2. - Signs permitted; on-premises signs, signs permitted according to district. 
The following types of signs (illuminated or unilluminated) shall be permitted in the following districts in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Types of sign structures permitted in each district according to the functional category of such signs. 
District 	Business 
Sign 	Construc- 
tion Sign 	Identifica- 
tionSign 	Institutional 
Bulletin 
Board 
R1, R2, R3 		g, h, i, j, k 	i 	d, i 
MF 		g, h, i, j, k 	d, i 	d, i 
ORP 	d, g, h, i 	g, h, i, j, k 	d, g, h, i 	d, g, h, i 
MSHO 	c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k 	g, h, i, j, k 	c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k 	b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k 
C 	b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k 	g, h, i, j, k 	b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k 	b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k 
 
Note: Letters in the function category are referenced to the section 16-1, definitions. 
(2)  Area, height and placement regulations. 
Structure Type 	Area 	Height 	Placement 
Pylon sign billboard 	1 square foot of sign per 1 ft. of setback; maximum not more than 120 square feet 	Maximum of 1 foot of height for each 2 feet of setback, but height shall not exceed maximum of 35 feet 	Setback not less than ½ foot 
Wall sign 	2.0 square feet total signing per lineal foot of ground floor business. Maximum 200 square feet or 1.5 square feet per lineal foot of ground floor business plus 12 square feet for a second wall sign 	Lower edge of the sign shall be a minimum of 9 feet aboveground when sign projects or encroaches into required setback or street right-of-way. Maximum 5 feet, however, not to project above roof line 	18 inches maximum extension from face of building to accommodate necessary supporting devices 
Monument sign 	Maximum of 32 square feet plus an additional ½ foot in height and 2 feet in length for each 40 feet of setback 	Maximum 4½ feet plus½ foot for each 40 feet of setback 	Setback not less than ½ foot 
Projecting sign 	Maximum 12 square feet 	Lower edge of the sign shall be a minimum of 9 feet aboveground maximum 35 feet, however, not to project above roof line 	Setback not less than ½ foot 
Marquee sign 	Maximum 12 square feet 	Lower edge of the sign shall be a minimum of 9 feet, maximum not to exceed top of face or balance of the marquee, awning or canopy on which the sign is located 	Shall be attached to and contained within the perimeter of the face or balance of a marquee, awning or canopy. Shall not exceed an 8 foot extension from the face of the building wall, nor be closer than 3 feet to the curbline 
Roof sign A and B 	1.5 square feet per lineal foot of ground floor business. Maximum of 200 square feet 	Maximum 35 feet, however not to exceed 3 feet above the roof line 	Upon or over the roof of building 
Maximum height in R1, R2, R3 and MF district shall be 9 ft. 	
Temporary sign 	Maximum of 120 square feet 	Maximum of 35 feet 	When placed over public right-of-way or easement the bottom must be a minimum height of 16 feet 
Small portable sign 	Maximum of 7 square feet 	Maximum of 4½ feet 	Setback not less than 8 feet 
 
(3)  Number of on-premises signs permitted. 
(a)  In the case of reverse lots (lots held under one ownership fronting on two (2) streets or a street and public alley), the number of signs shall be determined as though the lots were held by separate owners. In the case of a corner lot situated on two (2) or more streets, signs may be permitted on each street in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Each parcel of land (other than a corner lot or reverse lot as defined above) shall not be permitted more than one sign of any function category permitted by this section, except that when more than one floor business or usage occupies a single parcel of land. Each business or usage occupying the premises shall be permitted one projecting or roof sign on each side of the area occupied that fronts on a street or public alley. 
(4)  Illuminated signs. All illuminated signs shall have only indirect or diffuse lighting, and no lights shall be permitted on any sign to be constructed at a height above the height of the sign to be illuminated. 
(5)  Off-premises advertising sign. Off-premises advertising sign shall not be permitted in any district. 
(6)  [Signs not specifically identified.] A proposed sign that is not specifically identified in the section for a district or for a functional category shall be permitted only after approval of a specific use permit. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 2A, 1-12-76; Ord. No. O2017-756(2), 7-10-17)  
Sec. 16-3. - Signs not requiring permits. 
The following signs do not require permits: 
(1)  House numbers, real estate signs, residential name-places or address, and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(2)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when construction is of bronze or other incombustible material. 
(3)  Signs painted on or attached to motor vehicles which are legally licensed and normally used upon the highway for the transporting of persons, goods or equipment. 
(4)  Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution or noncommercial organization. 
(5)  Traffic or other municipal signs such as the following: Legal notices, railroad crossing, danger and other emergency signs as may be approved by the city council or city manager. 
(6)  Community special event signs approved by the city council or city manager to be displayed for less than one month. 
(7)  Theater-hotel marquee advertising, provided that said advertising is wholly contained within the basic marquee face. 
(8)  Gasoline service stations only may display the following special signs which are deemed customary and necessary to their respective businesses: 
(a)  Customary lettering or other insignia on a gasoline pump consisting of the brand of gasoline sold, lead warning sign, and any other sign required by law and not exceeding a total of three (3) square feet on each pump and not in violation of other sections of this chapter. 
(b)  A single nonilluminated double-faced sign per gasoline pump island each of which shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area may be placed on a gasoline pump island; said sign may extend a maximum of two (2) feet above pumps. 
(c)  Nonilluminated signs located on the gasoline pump island which shall define the type of service of the island. 
(9)  Merchandise or showcases may be displayed in reasonable quantities. Such racks or showcases may contain a single sign not exceeding ten (10) per cent of the largest visible face area nor more than one square foot. Such signs must contain messages relating only to the merchandise for sale on such rack or showcase. 
(10)  Vending machines and structures used for the storage and sale of ice and/or beverages shall be permitted two (2) signs. The total area of said signs shall not exceed ten (10) per cent of the wall surface area of the side of the structure on which such signs are located, or in any case a maximum area of ten (10) square feet for all of such signs. All portions of such signs shall be located within the face of the structure. 
(11)  Institutional bulletin boards subject to the area, height and placement regulations for the signs. 
(12)  Private parking lot and drive identification signs based upon the following standards: 
One (1) sign per entrance not to exceed three (3) square feet in area nor six (6) feet in height. Information naming or describing the business (as distinguished from parking and driving information) shall occupy no more than thirty (30) per cent of the sign area and shall consist of letters, numbers and symbols no larger or more conspicuous than those used for parking or driving information. 
(13)  Noncommercial signs. On election day, signs advocating or opposing a candidate for public office or a position on an issue to be determined at the election, may be erected without permit. 
(14)  Noncommercial resident information. Residents may erect signs of not more than three (3) square feet to provide information on matters of local interest such as picnic, church activities, garage sales, advertisements for lost animals, etc. These signs must be dated and have the name of resident and must be removed within one week of the date. 
(15)  Real estate signs used for advertising the property for sale or rent and less than four (4) square feet in area including attachments such as sold, open house, MLS, etc., with a maximum height of six (6) feet and shall be removed within two (2) weeks after the property is sold. 
(16)  Interior signs, except spectacular signs used as interior signs which are prohibited. 
(17)  Small portable signs. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 2B, 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-4. - Signs prohibited. 
A sign not expressly permitted is prohibited. The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any district: 
(1)  Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving lights. 
(2)  Banners, pennants, spinners and streamers except temporary signs authorized herein. 
(3)  String lights used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes, other than Christmas decorations. 
(4)  Any sign which has any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations, or by action of normal wind currents. 
(5)  Any sign or sign structure which (a) is structurally unsafe, or (b) constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment, or (c) is not kept in good repair, or (d) is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it. 
(6)  Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, contour, coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any traffic signs or control devices on public streets and roads. 
(7)  Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exitway. 
(8)  Signs which make use of words such as "Stop," "Look," "Danger," or any other words, phrases, symbols of characters or designed by size, shape, contour or coloring in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(9)  Any sign or other advertising structure containing any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(10)  Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained. 
(11)  Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product sold. 
(12)  Spectacular sign, including the use as an interior sign. 
(13)  Advertising sign (as defined in section 16-1). 
(14)  Commercial real estate signs in R1, R2, R3 and MF Districts other than temporary signs. 
(15)  Any sign within fifty (50) feet of the nearest point of intersection of the right-of-way line of any two (2) public streets. 
(16)  Large portable signs. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 2C, 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-5. - Existing signs. 
Any sign lawfully existing and maintained at the effective date of ordinance number 76-161 and made unlawful or nonconforming by provisions of this chapter shall be considered as legal and the continued existence of said nonconforming or unlawful sign, is hereby permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
Every sign, including those signs exempted from the terms and prohibitions of this chapter because said signs were lawfully constructed and in existence at the time of passage of ordinance number 76-161, which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to human life or property by reason of unsafe structural design or construction or by reason of being a fire hazard, shall be removed by the building official upon the giving of notice to the owner, agent or person in control of such sign by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the defects thereof. A copy of such notice shall be posted on the premises. This notice shall require the owner to put such sign in a condition which shall eliminate the immediate danger or threat to human life or property by reason of unsafe structural design or construction or by reason of being a fire hazard or, alternatively, to demolish and remove such installation or portion thereof, and shall allow ten (10) days from the receipt of such notice for such corrective action to be taken. The owner, agent or person in control of such sign shall have the right of appeal to the appeal board. Should the appeal board determine at said hearing that said outdoor advertising sign constitutes an immediate danger to human life or property by reason of unsafe structural design or construction or by reason of being a fire hazard, the appeal board shall allow said owner, agent or person in control of said sign a reasonable time, not to exceed three (3) days, to put such sign in a condition which does not constitute an immediate danger or threat to human life or property by reason of unsafe structural design or construction or by reason of being a fire hazard or, alternatively, to demolish and remove such installation or a portion thereof and, should such owner, agent or person in control of such sign fail to act within the time allotted. The appeal board shall forward its findings to city council and the council shall determine if the city should commence an action or actions, in a court of competent jurisdiction, for the abatement and removal or enjoinment of such sign, or portions thereof. Every outdoor advertising sign constructed after the effective date of ordinance number 76-161 or any other ordinance of the city and every outdoor advertising sign which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to human life or property by reason of unsafe structural design or construction or by reason of being a fire hazard is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and shall be repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished in accordance with the above described procedures. Provided, however no nonconforming business signs, business directory signs, outdoor advertising sign, billboards or spectacular signs shall be altered or reconstructed unless the same shall be made to conform with all of the requirements of this chapter. The term "altered" or "alteration" and "reconstruction" or "reconstructed" shall mean a replacement of all or any part of the supporting structure for any reason whatsoever, but does not include changing any of the ornamental features, electric wiring or devices, and the advertising display. When any outdoor advertising sign, billboard, spectacular sign, business sign or business directory sign which would be unlawful or nonconforming hereunder but for the fact that such sign was lawfully in existence on the date of passage of ordinance number 76-161 or any substantial part thereof is blown down or destroyed, or taken down or removed for any purpose other than routine maintenance operations or for changing the lettering, symbols or other matter on such sign, it shall not be reerected, reconstructed, rebuilt or relocated except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 2D, 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-6. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall erect or cause to be displayed, within the city, any sign where a permit is required without first having obtained a permit therefor from the building official of the city. (See section 16-3 for signs not requiring permits). 
(b)  Any person desiring to erect any sign within the city shall make application for permit to the building official. Such application shall be on form provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a sketch of the sign to be erected or displayed, a description of the property with location of sign defined on said property. No permit shall be issued until the building official has satisfied himself that the sign meets the requirements and specifications of this chapter as well as the requirements and specifications of the building codes and other construction and is not in violation of any such provision. (See section 16-8) 
(c)  If the work authorized by permit is not completed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance, then such permit shall thenceforth be null and void. 
(d)  The building official shall have and is hereby granted the power and authority to revoke any permit granted hereunder, and is also granted the power and authority to order the owner of any sign which is maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the city, to alter, repair, change, reconstruct, demolish or remove such sign as may be necessary to conform hereto. Such work or act shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the receipt of notice by registered mail to the owner, agent or person in control of such sign. Provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the building official to order the alteration, repair, change, reconstruction, demolition or removal of any sign that was lawfully in existence on the date of passage of ordinance number 76-161, unless such sign has been altered or reconstructed as defined herein, after the date of passage of said ordinance. 
(e)  Any permits secured from the building official for the erection of any sign which in the opinion of the building official has been secured through subterfuge or as a result of error on the basis of incorrect information and not in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city shall be revoked by the building official as not conforming with the spirit and intent of this chapter. 
(f)  Any permit issued for a sign shall be valid only while such sign is maintained in a safe condition, and as defined for temporary and portable signs. The building official shall revoke any permit when unsafe conditions are not corrected forthwith by the owner of said sign. 
(g)  All fees are to be paid to the city. Fees for the erection of all signs, business signs or business directory signs shall be identical to those set forth in the building code, or four (4) per cent of the sign cost, whichever is greater. The fee for temporary signs shall be five dollars ($5.00). In case any work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fee specified herein shall be doubled, but the payment of said doubled fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter or the requirements of the building code in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. Double-faced signs shall be measured on both faces. Every sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the building official. When deemed advisable by the building official, a sign may be inspected at the point of manufacture, if such point of manufacture is within Harris County or Galveston County, Texas. 
(h)  Temporary signs shall have a permit issued for a maximum of fourteen (14) consecutive days, four (4) times per year, limited to special events or promotions. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 3, 1-12-76; Ord. No. 90-394, 12-10-90) 
Cross reference— Safety inspection fees, § 16-11.  
Sec. 16-7. - Liability insurance. 
If any sign is suspended over a public street or property or if the vertical distance of such sign above the street is greater than the horizontal distance from the sign to the street property line or parapet wall and so located as to be able to fall or be pushed unto public property, then the owner of such sign shall keep in force a public liability insurance policy, approved by the city attorney, in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for injury to one person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to more than one person, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for damage to property, said policy to indemnify said owner from all damage suits or actions of every nature brought or claimed against the owner for or on account of injuries or damage to persons or property received or sustained by any persons through any act of omission or negligence of said owner, his servants, agents or employees regarding such sign. In lieu of an insurance policy as required herein, an owner may present proof satisfactory to the city attorney that said owner is financially capable of self insurance in the above amounts. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 4, 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-8. - Construction regulations. 
(a)  Nothing herein is intended to repeal or limit any construction standard delineated in the building code; provided however, should any conflict arise between said code and this chapter the terms and conditions of this chapter shall control. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall supplement the provision of the building code relating to signs and the two ordinances in concert shall govern signs and display structures with respect to location, safety, size, design, construction, erection, attachment, alteration, repair, support, anchorage and maintenance. 
(c)  The structure of each such temporary or small portable sign shall be constructed and erected securely to resist safely all stresses to which it may be subjected. Each such temporary or small portable sign shall be repaired or removed when it is damaged. 
(d)  No person shall do any electrical wiring or install any electrical lighting to be used in connection with any outdoor advertising sign, without first obtaining from the building official a permit in writing so to do, and pay therefor the fee prescribed in the electrical code. 
(e)  Electrical design and installation shall be in accordance with the electrical code. 
(f)  Signs and sign structure shall be maintained at all times in a state of good repair, with all braces, bolts, clips, supporting frames and fastenings free from deterioration, termite infestation, rats, rust, or loosenings. They shall be able to withstand safely at all times the wind pressure specified by the building code. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 5, 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-9. - Appeal board. 
(a)  Power. The zoning board of adjustment shall constitute the sign appeal board and shall have power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. The appeal board shall also have power to authorize a variance from the strict application of this chapter where such application will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship to the person owning or having the beneficial use of the property or sign for which a variance will be issued. The city council shall be given a reasonable opportunity to study the appeal or request for variance and to make recommendations thereon to the appeal board. 
(b)  Organization, meetings. The board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings, provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this chapter or the statutes of the state. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oath and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the city secretary's office and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 6, 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-10. - Enforcement—Punishment for violation; enforcing officer. 
(a)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any person is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-6. Each day a violation of any of the terms of this chapter continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(b)  The building official shall have and is hereby given jurisdiction over the erection, construction, location, relocation and maintenance of all signs within the city. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 7(a), (b), 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-11. - Same—Safety inspections; frequency, fees. 
The building official or his duly authorized representative shall every two (2) years (and at such other times as may be necessary) make a safety inspection of signs. The owner of a sign shall pay to the city an inspection fee of five dollars ($5.00) to defray the expenses connected with the inspection of signs. Fees for inspection shall be paid on or before the first day of May of each inspection year. Failure to pay such fee on time will result in an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) being charged. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 7(c), 1-12-76)  
Sec. 16-12. - Same—Remedial action. 
If the building official shall find that any sign is maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give written notice of the person owning or having beneficial use of the sign or the property where the sign is located. If such person fails to alter or remove the sign so as to comply with this chapter within ten (10) days after such notice, the building official may cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the owner or person having the beneficial use of the property or sign. The building official may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to person or property to be removed forthwith. These procedures are supplemental to other legal remedies available for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 76-161, § 7(d), 1-12-76)  
Secs. 16-13—16-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SCENIC RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 16-25. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
Business sign: A sign located on a pylon sign structure. 
Curbline: An imaginary line drawn along the edge of the pavement or either side of a public street. 
Frontage: That portion of any tract of land which abuts a public street right-of-way. 
Individual business establishment: Any freestanding business not located within a shopping center or integrated business development. 
Monument sign: Any sign supported by one or more columns, poles, uprights, or braces anchored in or on the ground and not attached to any building. Except where stated to the contrary herein, a monument sign is one that is constructed so that the bottom is no higher than eighteen (18) inches above the adjacent grade. The top of a monument sign is no higher than six (6) feet as measured from the natural or average finished grade. The width of a monument sign shall not be greater than five (5) times the height of the sign. 
On-premise sign: Any sign identifying or advertising the business, person, activity, goods, products or services primarily sold or offered for sale on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained when such premises is used for business purposes. 
Pylon sign structure: A freestanding structure which contains two (2) or more separate business signs within a project. Each individual business sign shall not exceed seventy-two (72) square feet in area. The total allowable area of a pylon sign structure is two hundred eighty-eight (288) square feet for a 25-foot-high sign. 
Scenic right-of-way: Nasa Road One from FM 146 to Alvin. 
Scenic right-of-way signs: Signs visible from and located on premises with frontage on scenic right-of-way. 
Shopping center or integrated business development: A project built and intended to be used for two (2) or more independent retail shops, department stores, restaurants, cinemas, and other allied businesses. The term "shopping center" also includes shopping malls and strip centers. 
Snipe/bandit sign: A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to power poles, trees, stakes, fences, or other like objects, the advertising matter of which is not applicable to the present use of the premises on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 97-481, § A, 9-8-97)  
Sec. 16-26. - Allowable signs. 
(a)  Generally. Scenic right-of-way signs shall be limited to on-premises signs of the following types: 
(1)  Business signs and pylon sign structures. 
(2)  Monument signs. 
(3)  Temporary special sales signs. 
(4)  Temporary vacant land sales monument signs. 
(5)  Wall signs. 
(6)  Reader board signs. 
(7)  Temporary construction monument signs. 
(8)  Temporary real estate monument signs. 
(9)  Temporary grand opening signs. 
(10)  Gasoline station signs. 
(b)  Temporary special sales signs. Temporary special sales signs shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Limited to one fourteen-continuous-day period per quarter. 
(2)  Banner sign size shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(3)  Shall be attached to a building and may not project above roofline of the building. Exception: Buildings with parapet walls, in which case the sign shall not project outside of the building's silhouette and shall not project above the parapet. 
(4)  Limited to one side of a building which fronts upon a street or faces upon a customer parking area. 
(5)  An unlimited number of pennants or streamers may be used in conjunction with a banner. 
(c)  Temporary vacant land sales monument signs. Temporary vacant land sales monument signs shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Signs may be located anywhere on property for sale, provided they are set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from another freestanding sign and thirty (30) feet from property line. 
(2)  Tracts less than ten (10) acres shall be limited to one sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in display area and four (4) feet in height. 
(3)  Tracts with ten (10) acres or more shall be limited to two (2) signs, each not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in display area and six (6) feet in height. 
(d)  Temporary construction monument signs. Temporary construction signs shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Temporary construction monument signs are allowed in addition to permanent signs during construction with a valid building permit. 
(2)  Must be removed when construction is complete or twelve (12) months from when erected, whichever first occurs. 
(3)  Developments less than ten (10) acres shall be limited to one sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in display area and four (4) feet in height. 
(4)  Tracts with ten (10) acres or more shall be limited to two (2) signs, each not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in display area and six (6) feet in height. 
(5)  Developments with ten (10) acres or more are allowed a total of two (2) temporary construction monument signs. 
(6)  Developments with ten (10) acres or less are allowed one temporary construction monument sign. 
(7)  Sign may be located anywhere on property provided they are set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from another freestanding sign and thirty (30) feet from the property line. 
(e)  Temporary real estate sign. One temporary monument sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet shall be allowed in order to give information concerning leasing, renting, or selling of such while space or lot is actually available for lease, rent or sale. No permit shall be required for the erection of temporary real estate signs under this subsection. 
(f)  Temporary grand opening signage. A wall sign to advertise grand opening celebrations for individual businesses shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(1)  Maximum size not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and may be in the form of a banner. 
(2)  May not project above roofline except buildings with parapet walls. 
(3)  Limited to one side of a building which fronts upon a street or faces upon a customer parking area. 
(4)  Not allowed on the rear wall of a building except independent detached business pads in a shopping center. 
(g)  Gasoline station signs: 
(1)  Signs on pump islands regarding type of service, price, promotions are allowed, provided they are not located on or above canopy that extends over the pump island. 
(2)  Pricing signs may have a total of twelve (12) square feet in area, when integrated into an allowed freestanding sign or when attached to an allowed freestanding sign structure. 
(3)  Portable gasoline price signs are prohibited. 
(h)  Shopping center project signage: 
(1)  Pylon sign structure: 
a.  Maximum sign area shall not be more than two hundred eighty-eight (288) square feet for a twenty-five-foot-high sign. 
b.  Maximum of three (3). 
c.  Cannot be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of another pylon sign or fifty (50) feet of a side property line unless the sign is fifty (50) feet from an existing sign. 
(2)  Business sign. Pylon business signs shall comply with the following: 
a.  Individual businesses may utilize no more than one pylon sign structure for signage purposes. 
b.  Individual businesses may not install more than one sign within a pylon sign structure. 
c.  Individual business signs within a pylon sign structure shall not exceed seventy-two (72) square feet in display area. 
(3)  Freestanding ground sign: 
a.  All business establishments located within a shopping center shall utilize pylon type signs for all outdoor advertising purposes. 
b.  Individual business establishments located within a shopping center development shall not be permitted to erect freestanding outdoor signs to advertise their individual business. 
c.  Monument type signs shall be permitted in conjunction with pylon signs if the following specifications and conditions are met: 
1.  Maximum height shall not exceed six (6) feet; 
2.  Maximum sign area shall not be more than sixty (60) square feet; 
3.  Each sign shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from each other or within fifty (50) feet of the property line, except monument signs. However, a freestanding sign will be allowed within fifty (50) feet of the property line as long as the sign is fifty (50) from an existing sign. 
4.  All signs within a project shall be designed and constructed similarly, to have uniformity within the project. 
d.  If there are one or more detached pad site, the business will be allowed to construct one freestanding sign under the following conditions: 
1.  Maximum height shall not exceed six (6) feet; 
2.  Maximum sign area shall not be more than seventy-two (72) square feet; 
3.  Each sign shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from each other or within fifty (50) feet of the property line, except monument signs. However, a freestanding sign will be allowed within fifty (50) feet of the property line as long as the sign is fifty (50) feet from an existing sign; 
4.  All signs within a project shall be designed and constructed similarly, to have uniformity within the project. 
(4)  Wall or projecting signs. Business wall and/or projecting signs shall comply with the following: 
Allowable total sign area to be calculated as follows: 
a. 	Business Frontage (feet) 	Allowable Area (sq. ft.) 
Up to 30 	2.5 × business frontage 	
30 to 180 	2.0 × business frontage or 75 sq. ft. whichever is greater 	
Greater than 180 	1.5 × business frontage or 360 sq. ft. whichever is greater, not to exceed 500 sq. ft. 	
 
b.  Location and height. A wall and/or projecting sign may not project above the roofline of the building. 
1.  Exception: Buildings with parapet walls in which case the sign shall not project outside of the building's silhouette and shall not project above the parapet. 
2.  Signs placed on mansard, gambrel, and other sloping roofs must be perpendicular to the ground with all structural supports covered from view. 
3.  Wall and/or projecting signs identifying businesses shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) sides of a building which fronts upon a street or faces upon a customer parking area. Signage shall not be placed on the rear wall of a building. 
(5)  Reader board signs. Reader board signs shall comply with the following: 
a.  Each individual business establishment is allowed a reader board in addition to the permitted business pylon sign, business monument sign or permitted business wall and/or projection sign. 
b.  The maximum size reader board for a permitted business wall and/or projection sign is twenty-five (25) per cent of the total sign display area or thirty (30) square feet, whichever is less. 
c.  The maximum size reader board for a permitted business pylon sign or business monument sign is twenty-five (25) per cent of the total sign display area or twelve (12) square feet, whichever is less. (Total sign display area includes reader board.) 
(i)  Individual business establishments (not in a shopping center). Each building establishment within a commercial or industrial zoned district shall be allowed signage in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Freestanding ground sign: 
a.  Placement. Signs other than a monument sign cannot be within fifty (50) feet of a side property line. However, a freestanding sign will be allowed within fifty (50) feet of the property line as long as the sign is fifty (50) feet from an existing sign. 
b.  Size. Maximum sign area shall not be more than seventy-two (72) square feet. 
c.  Quantity. No more than one sign. 
d.  Height. Maximum height shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Wall and/or projecting sign. Wall and/or projecting signs are allowed for each individual business establishment with an allowable total sign area to be calculated as follows: 
a. 	Business Frontage (feet) 	Allowable Area (sq. ft.) 
Up to 30 	2.5 × business frontage 	
30 to 180 	2.0 × business frontage or 75 sq. ft. whichever is greater 	
Greater than 180 	1.5 × business frontage or 360 sq. ft. whichever is greater, not to exceed 500 sq. ft. 	
 
b.  Location and height. A wall and/or projecting sign may not project above the roofline of a building except for buildings with parapet walls, in which case the sign shall not project outside of the buildings silhouette and shall not project above the parapet. Signs placed on mansard, gambrel, and other sloping roofs must be perpendicular to the ground with all structural supports covered from view. Wall and/or projecting signs identifying businesses shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) sides of a building which fronts upon a street or faces upon a customer parking area. Signage shall not be placed on the rear wall of a building. 
(Ord. No. 97-481, § B, 9-8-97)  
Sec. 16-27. - Signs prohibited along a scenic right-of-way. 
The following signs are prohibited along a scenic right-of-way: 
(1)  Off-site advertising signage. No off-site advertising sign shall be constructed or placed within the city including, but not limiting to, awning sign, banner, free-standing sign, wall sign and billboard. 
(2)  Portable sign or wheeled signs. 
(3)  No sign illuminated or otherwise shall be erected, constructed or maintained on the roof of a building. 
(4)  Signs which advertise or otherwise direct attention to a product, service, activity, person, institution, or business which no longer occupies or is conducted, sold, manufactured, produced, or offered upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
(5)  Signs which move or contain visible moving parts; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit time and temperature components of allowed monument signs which are not otherwise intended as an attention getting device or barber poles of traditional design not to exceed twenty (20) inches high which revolve during the time a barbershop is open for business. 
(6)  Except as allowed herein, signs in the form of banners, posters, pennants, flags, ribbons, streamers, balloons, strings of light bulbs, spinners, search lights, beacons, or other similar devices. 
(7)  Snipe signs. 
(8)  Spectacular signs with flashing, blinking, or traveling lights or messages. 
(9)  Signs attached to or located upon exposed amenities such as benches, trash containers, fences, trees, stakes, shrubs, and the like; provided, however, information about the manufacturer or distributor of benches and trash containers may be placed on their products not to exceed ten (10) per cent of one surface of the bench or trash container. 
(10)  Signs placed on the rear of any building except for identification nameplates or signs on a commercial or industrial establishment not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and located near and for the purpose of identifying delivery entrances and authorized parking areas, except as otherwise provided. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or affix a sign to any vehicle and/or trailers which are parked on a public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product, a service or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property. However, this provision is not in any way intended to prohibit temporary window markings used by car dealers or signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer except that the vehicle must be parked on a paved surface. 
(12)  Within fifty (50) feet of the side property line unless it is fifty (50) feet from an existing sign. 
(Ord. No. 97-481, § C, 9-8-97)  
Sec. 16-28. - Nonconforming signs. 
All signs which were legally erected pursuant to a valid permit or legally maintained and which do not conform to the provision of this article are nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs shall be removed or modified so as to conform with the requirement of this section within seven (7) years of the date the sign became nonconforming with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Signs which constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, unauthorized signs or portions thereof which are located on or extended over public property, snipe signs, signs with spinners, streamers, pennants or the like, and portable signs shall be removed or made to conform within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this section. 
(2)  No nonconforming sign shall be repaired or renovated at a cost in excess of sixty (60) per cent of the replacement cost of the total sign structure, unless such sign is brought into conformity with this section. No nonconforming sign shall be repaired or renovated where the effect of such repair or renovation shall be to enlarge or increase the structure of the nonconforming sign. For the purpose of this subsection, routine maintenance shall not be considered to be repair or renovation. 
(3)  Permits will not be issued for a nonconforming freestanding sign if there is a change in ownership or a change in the type of business unless such sign is brought into compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-481, § D, 9-8-97)  
Chapter 17 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Defective parking lots, § 9-41 et seq.; streets in subdivisions, App. B, Art. IV, § 2, Art. VI, § 2. 
State Law reference— Control and regulation, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(12), (16), (17), (18), (20). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Obstructing or injuring. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or injure or cause to be obstructed or injured, or to maintain an obstruction in any manner whatsoever upon any street, sidewalk or other public way. 
State Law reference— Authority to remove obstructions, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(18); offense under state law, V.A.P.C., § 42.03.  
Secs. 17-2—17-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RENTAL BY UTILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.A.C.S. art. 1446c. 
 
Sec. 17-20. - Gross receipts statement to be filed. 
All persons, including all public utilities, using or maintaining any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, wires, cables, gas pipelines, gas mains, laterals, feeders, regulators, meters, heating and cooling service pipes or pipelines or pressurized lines for chilled water or hot water or steam, pipes, conduits or other fixtures in, under or over, across, through or along, any of the present or future streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places within the present or future corporate limits of the city shall, on the first day of February of each year, file with the city secretary a sworn report showing the gross receipts from the business conducted by such persons, within the city for the preceding year ending December 31. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 1, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-21. - Books and records may be examined. 
The city council or city manager may, when it may see fit, have the books and records of the person rendering the statement required herein examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether such statement is accurate, but nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other method. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 2, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-22. - Rental rate; payment annually. 
Upon the fifteenth day of February of each year, every person occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places of the city with poles, wires, cables, gas pipelines, gas mains, laterals, feeders, regulators, meters, heating and cooling service pipes or pipelines or pressurized lines for chilled water or hot water or steam, pipes, conduits or other fixtures shall as a condition to such further occupancy pay to the city annually for such privileges a rental equal to two (2) per cent of the gross proceeds received by such person from its business conducted in the city for the preceding year. Provided, however, if the legislature of the state shall increase the maximum percentage of gross receipts chargeable for these purposes, the percentage heretofore specified shall be replaced ipso facto by said new maximum percentage, and the passage of a new ordinance shall not be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 3, 9-14-70) 
State Law reference— Rate limited, V.A.T.S. Tax.-Gen. art. 11.03.  
Sec. 17-23. - Receipt for payment; privilege conferred. 
Upon receipt of the above rental by the city, the city secretary shall deliver to the person paying the same a receipt for such rental, which said receipt shall authorize such person to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public ways of the city in carrying on its business for twelve (12) months, beginning February 15 of such year. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 4, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-24. - Rental additional to taxes, etc. 
The rental for the privilege of using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or public places of the city provided for in this article is not charged as a tax, but is made for the privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed by such persons of using such streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public places or ways of the city in the conduct of their respective businesses; and such charges are additional to all ad valorem and franchise taxes (except as otherwise herein provided) and to all taxes of every nature whatsoever against the persons mentioned herein. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 5, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-25. - Regulations cumulative. 
Nothing herein is intended to relieve any person of any condition, restriction or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 6, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-26. - Article does not constitute a franchise; effect of franchise. 
This article does not grant a franchise to any person to use the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public places or ways and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise, and the city reserves the right to cancel the privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city. Provided, however, should such a franchise be granted by the city, the terms of said franchise shall be controlling as between the city and said grantee, and the terms of this article shall no longer be applicable to the grantee of such a franchise for the duration of said franchise. The grantee of any franchise executed and granted prior to the adoption of ordinance number 70-11 is specifically excluded from payment of the hereinabove described rentals during the term of said franchise. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 7, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-27. - Additional regulations authorized. 
The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the burial, erection, construction, maintenance, operation, use, removal, replacement and repair of poles, wires, pipes, heating and cooling service pipes or pipelines or pressurized lines for chilled water or hot water or steam, gas mains, laterals, conduits, feeders, regulators, meters, connections and attachments, cables, other fixtures and other appurtenances in, under, across, upon, over and along the streets, easements, alleys and public ways of the city, and from time to time to require such of said equipment as it may deem proper to be removed and to require wires to be run in conduits on such terms as the city may deem proper. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 8, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-28. - Penalty for use without rental payment. 
Every person who shall operate any business covered herein without the payment of the rentals provided for herein shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that such person shall conduct such business using and occupying the streets, highways, easements, alleys or other public places or ways of the city without the payment of the said rentals, which said sum may be recovered by the city in a court of competent jurisdiction by a suit filed therein. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 9, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-29. - Penalty for failure to make report or permit examination. 
Every person and the local manager or agent of every such person failing or refusing to make the report required herein or failing or refusing to allow the examination provided for herein shall, upon conviction in the municipal court be fined as provided in section 1-6, and each day that such failure or refusal as mentioned in this section continues, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 10, 9-14-70)  
Sec. 17-30. - Safety inspections; remedial action. 
The city fire marshal, building official, electrical inspector, any of the city's police officers, and such other persons designated by the city, shall have the power and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect from time to time all telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, wires, cables, gas pipelines, gas mains, laterals, feeders, regulators, meters, heating and cooling service pipes or pipelines or pressurized lines for chilled water or hot water or steam pipes, conduits and other fixtures in the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places within the city for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or to be unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition. 
(Ord. No. 70-11, § 11, 9-14-70)  
ARTICLE III. - TRANSPORTATION OF WASTES AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 
 
Sec. 17-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disposer means a person who operates a facility at which waste is intentionally placed for final disposition. 
Hazardous materials means any of the following: 
(1)  Any flammables, explosives, radioactive materials, hazardous waste, toxic substances or related materials, including substances defined as "hazardous substances", "hazardous materials", "toxic substances", or "solid wastes" in or pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 1801, et seq.; the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.; the Toxic Substances Control Act, as amended, 15 U.S.C. § 2601, et seq.; or the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 261.001 et seq. 
(2)  Petroleum or petroleum products, such as liquefied petroleum gas, gasoline, oil, used oil, fuel oil or kerosene. 
(3)  Any substances that are combustible liquids, corrosive liquids, explosives, explosive materials, fireworks, flammable liquids, flammable liquefied gases, flammable solids, highly toxic materials, liquefied natural gases, poisonous gases, potentially explosive chemicals, radioactive materials or toxic materials as defined in the International Fire Code adopted by this city. 
(4)  Any mixtures or combinations of the substances listed in subsections (1) through (3) above or any vapors or residues thereof. 
Person means an individual, corporation, organization, business trust, partnership, association or other legal entity, except a governmental entity. 
Producer means any person, by site, who produces waste or who stores waste to be transferred to another person, and whose site (where the waste is located) is located within the city limits. 
Public safety team is a team that consists of each department head in the fire department, police department, emergency medical services, fire marshal and emergency management. On hazardous materials incidents, the fire chief is designated incident commander with support of the team as outlined in Annex Q of the Nassau Bay Basic Plans and Annexes. 
Responsible party means, jointly and severally, all persons involved in the possession, ownership or transportation of any hazardous material that is released or abandoned, or who have legal liability for the causation of an incident resulting in the release or abandonment of any hazardous material. 
Service means a response by the team to an incident involving a leakage, spill and/or other release and/or abandonment of any hazardous materials. 
Service call means the total period of time from the dispatch of the team to the return of the team to on-call status. 
Sewage sludge means the residual material generated by sewage treatment plants by the biological treatment of wastewater. 
Solid waste laws means Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act as found in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Ch. 361, as hereinafter known or amended, as well as any rule, permit, license, or order issued pursuant to the authority of such act. 
Station means the fire department facility or facilities. 
Transporter means a person who transfers waste or hazardous substances by means of a motor-propelled vehicle utilizing city streets. A producer or a disposer who transfers its own waste over city streets for off-site disposition is also a transporter. 
Waste means any of the following waste classifications or any mixture thereof: Class A, class b or class C waste or radioactive waste. 
(1)  Class A waste means sand, grit, or similar non-decomposable material obtained from sand traps, sewage sludge, grease traps, waste and portable toilet waste, and material from septic tanks. 
(2)  Class B waste means any solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry, manufacturing or commercial operations, except: 
a.  Any waste that is defined as a class A or class C waste; and 
b.  Radioactive waste, garbage and rubbish. 
(3)  Class C waste means any solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry, manufacturing or commercial operations which has been identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq., except radioactive waste. The terms "solid waste", "radioactive waste", "rubbish", and "garbage", as used in these definitions, are defined in the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Ch. 361. Waste classifications range from "lower" to "higher" in accordance with those alphabetical denominations, class A waste being the lowest waste classification. Mixed wastes shall be classified by the highest classification of waste in the mixture. 
(Ord. No. 2005-587, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 17-32. - Registration of producers. 
(a)  Required. All producers, except producers exempted by subsection (f) of this section, shall register with the fire marshal of the city in accordance with this section. A separate offense is committed for each day the producer remains unregistered. The effective date for enforcement of this section is sixty days following the adoption of this chapter for producers in existence as of the date of adoption or final approval. All new producers must register prior to producing waste and as a condition for obtaining an operations permit in accordance with Chapter 11 Occupational Licenses, Taxes and Regulations of the City of Nassau Bay Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Forms. Registration shall be made on forms provided by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Issuance of certificate; possession of certificate. The fire marshal shall be authorized to issue registration certificates for all producers who have returned completed and truthful registration forms. In cases involving prosecution for failure to register, failure on the part of the producer to provide an original copy of its registration certificate for inspection by the fire marshal or any agent or employee of the city shall be prima facie evidence that the producer has not registered in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Amendments. Producers who have registered on a form provided by the fire marshal shall have a continuing duty to amend their original registration whenever there has been a change in an item for which a representation or response was given by the producer in its original registration. 
(e)  Transfer. Registration cannot be assigned or transferred to another person or location. 
(f)  Exemptions. Producers generating waste only from single-family septic tanks or from portable toilets, products that clearly state on its Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) that it is not a hazardous chemical as defined under the OSHA Standard (29CFR 1910.1200); any product not reportable under Section 311 and 312 of EPCRA and those not required to file Tier II reports under SARA Title III, or those listed as exemptions under Texas Department of State Health Services standards need not register as producers. 
(g)  Applicability to agents. All responsibilities designated by this section for the producer shall be equally applicable to the producer's agent in charge of the site where the waste is produced. 
(Ord. No. 2005-587, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 17-33. - Reports by producers. 
(a)  Every six (6) months, each producer shall submit a report to the fire marshal or other officially designated city official summarizing its waste disposal activity for the previous six (6) months. Such report shall include the following information for each waste load transported: 
(1)  Date of delivery to a transporter. 
(2)  Name of transporter. 
(3)  Name of disposer, if known. 
(4)  Waste manifest identification number, if applicable. 
(5)  Total volume. 
(6)  Waste classification. 
(7)  Description of waste. 
(b)  If a waste load is covered by a completed state or federal manifest, the waste load may be identified by manifest identification number on the required monthly report, with a copy of the completed manifest attached. 
(c)  The producer shall retain a copy of each report, supporting documents, and any related waste manifests for a period of two (2) years. The producer shall make these documents available to employees or agents of the city on request. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall not be applicable for any waste load derived from single-family septic tanks or portable toilets, and the waste manifest system prescribed by this article shall not apply to such waste loads. 
(e)  All responsibilities designated by this section for a producer shall be equally applicable to the producer's agent in charge of the site from which a waste load is transported. 
(Ord. No. 2005-587, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 17-34. - Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous substances; parking; loading and off-loading of materials. 
(a)  Routes restricted. Every semi-trailer, truck or other vehicle transporting hazardous substances shall have its movements within the city restricted as designated in this section. 
(b)  Permitted routes. All semi-trailers, trucks or other vehicles transporting hazardous substances are prohibited from movements within the city except where such movement is associated with a registered business or to perform a service as provided by the transporter or requested by a waste generator site. In those instances the most direct route shall be used. 
(c)  Parking. Any semi-trailer, truck or other vehicle transporting hazardous substances shall not be parked on or in any parking lot, road, street or alley or near any school, hospital, utility provider offices, church or government building within the city, except in an emergency which occurs as a result of a vehicle malfunction. Such emergency situations must be corrected with all deliberate speed. In no event shall such vehicle be parked closer than fifty (50) feet to any building within the city, except when such buildings are used for the transaction of business relating to such products. 
(d)  Loading and off-loading of materials. Any semi-trailer, truck or other vehicle containing or transporting hazardous substances shall not be parked at any site or facility within the city limits except to load or off-load material or products for lawful delivery, unless such facility is a duly licensed and authorized disposer and such facility and location are clearly identified as the disposer in a manifest for the load of waste contained in that vehicle. Any such loading or off-loading of material or products must be completed with all deliberate speed and shall be in accordance with all federal and state laws. 
(e)  Exceptions. The provision designating routes in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any semi-trailer, trailer, truck, or other vehicle carrying hazardous substances which is then being used to carry such substances for lawful delivery within the corporate limits of the city for direct resale to the public or final consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2005-587, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 17-35. - Inspection of transport vehicles. 
(a)  All transporters shall make their vehicles traveling city streets available for stops and inspections by peace officers or agents of the city. Inspection may include: 
(1)  An identification check of the driver. 
(2)  A registration and permit check of the vehicle. 
(3)  Demand for waste manifests or for manifest documents if required by state or federal law. 
(4)  Sampling of the contents of the vehicle to evaluate compliance with this article. Split samples may be taken, provided the driver provides the sample bottle. 
(b)  If test results from the samples show that the contents of the truck were not as stated in the manifest or as represented to the city's agent, the transporter shall be liable to the city for the cost of the laboratory tests. Transporters shall instruct their drivers concerning this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2005-587, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 17-36. - Violations; penalty; civil action. 
(a)  In order to prove a violation of this article, it shall not be necessary to prove a culpable mental state. 
(b)  Any person violating provisions of this article, or failing to comply with any requirement of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provisions of this article is committed or continued. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than the maximum amount allowable by law. It is specifically recognized that this article governs fire safety or public health and sanitation when determining the maximum fine allowed by law. Any offense under this article that also constitutes a violation of any state law or federal statute shall also be punishable as provided by the applicable state law or federal statute. 
(c)  The city attorney is hereby authorized to file and maintain all necessary civil legal actions to enjoin or enforce any violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-587, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 17-37. - Hazardous substances cleanup operations. 
(a)  It is prohibited for any person or company to discharge substances on any public street or right-of-way or onto any private property within the city. 
(b)  It is prohibited for any person or company to fail to immediately clean up any hazardous substance that had been discharged onto public or private property. 
(c)  It is prohibited for any person or company to fail to repair any damage to public property caused by a hazardous discharge spill. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of each responsible party to report an incident involving any leakage, release, spill, or abandonment of any hazardous materials to the police department dispatcher immediately upon discovery of the same. 
(e)  The responsible party for the discharge of the hazardous substance shall pay all costs of cleanup as well as reimburse the city for its personnel time with a minimum administrative fee. The public safety team will submit bills and reports to the office of emergency management. The office of emergency management will compile all reports, issue statements to the city finance officer who shall be responsible for record keeping, collecting, and submitting statements to the responsible party(s). 
(f)  In order to partially defray the costs incurred by the city in providing service, fees and charges are hereby established to be paid by and collected from the responsible party. The amount of the fees and charges shall be as authorized by city council motion from time to time upon the request of the fire chief. 
(g)  The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour for each service call provided under this section. 
(h)  In addition to the fee provided for herein, a charge shall be imposed for all costs incurred by the city relating to the testing and disposal of the hazardous material. This section applies in all instances where the hazardous material transporter does not have a contract with a licensed hazardous materials cleanup team/company that is able to respond within two (2) hours from the time the spill is reported to the city or when it is discovered by the city; whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2005-587, 2-15-05)  
Secs. 17-38—17-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GOLF CARTS 
 
Sec. 17-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means the person driving and having physical control over the motorized cart. 
Motorized cart means those electric and gasoline powered carts, commonly referred to as golf carts, but which must have a minimum of four (4) wheels and which have an attainable top speed not greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles. Specifically excluded from this definition are those motorized conveyances commonly referred to as ATVs, four-wheelers, mules, and gators. 
Owner means the person holding title to the motorized cart. 
Parking area means those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
Street means the public roadways of the City of Nassau Bay by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that: 
a)  Has a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less; or 
b)  Provides for no more than two (2) lanes of vehicular traffic per direction; or 
c)  Is not designated as part of either the state of federal highway system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-656, § 1, 11-9-09)  
Sec. 17-52. - Electric and gasoline motorized cart required equipment. 
Every motorized cart must be equipped as mandated by the Texas Transportation Code, H.B. No. 2553 Section 551.404 Subsection (a) and/or required by the City of Nassau Bay the following: 
(1)  Operational headlamps; 
(2)  Operational tail lamps; 
(3)  Side reflectors; 
(4)  Operational parking brake; and 
(5)  Rearview mirror(s). 
(Ord. No. 2009-656, § 2, 11-9-09)  
Sec. 17-53. - Gasoline carts. 
Every motorized cart powered by gasoline shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation and meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or including any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
(2)  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened with brackets or hangers, which are designed for the particular purpose of fastening motorized cart exhaust systems. 
(3)  The engine and powered mechanism of every motorized cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned so that the exhaust is the amount of a motorized cart in good working order. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart to operate or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer is rendered unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interferes with its operation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-656, § 3, 11-9-09)  
Sec. 17-54. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  All drivers of motorized carts shall hold a valid driver's license and shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. 
(b)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  All motorized carts are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorized cart of the full use of a lane. 
(d)  The driver of a motorized cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(e)  No driver shall operate a motorized cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of vehicles. 
(f)  The driver of a motorized cart with a current and valid driver's license operating the cart on a street (as defined herein) may cross a multi-lane or a county or state route only at a signalized intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-656, § 4, 11-9-09; Ord. No. O2013-714, 8-12-13)  
Sec. 17-55. - Liability. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the City of Nassau Bay for any injuries to persons, pets or property which may result from the operation of a motorized cart by an authorized driver. 
Owners are fully liable and accountable for the actions of any individual that they provide permission to operate and drive said motorized cart, both on personal and/or city and public properties. This described liability responsibility especially applies to personal injuries or property damage resulting from motorized cart drivers who are minors under the age of twenty-one (21) with or without a current and valid Texas drivers license. 
(Ord. No. 2009-656, § 5, 11-9-09)  
Sec. 17-56. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be penalized as follows: 
The maximum penalty allowed by law for such a misdemeanor and in addition to traffic violations the driver of the motorized cart may be subject to pursuant to Texas Law, the owner of the motorized cart shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less then twenty-five dollars ($25.00); 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 2009-656, § 6, 11-9-09)  
Chapter 18 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A one per cent sales and use tax was approved at an election held on Nov. 3, 1970, pursuant to Ord. No. 70-12, dated Sept. 14, 1970. 
Cross reference— Fee for use of streets, sidewalks, etc., by cable television companies in lieu of occupation or privilege tax, § 4.5-41 et seq.; occupational taxes, Ch. 11; utility street rental, § 17-20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Homestead exemption. 
(a)  Authority. As authorized by the Texas Constitution, Article VIII, Section 1-b., subsection (e), the city council does hereby exempt from ad valorem taxation a percentage of the market value of the residence homestead of a married or unmarried adult, including one living alone. The percentage of the market value exempt shall be within the authorized range and be determined by the city council subsequently. 
(b)  Applications. Applications for such residence homestead exemption shall be filed with the city tax collector not later than April 30, 1983. 
(Ord. No. 77-187, § 1, 3-14-77; Ord. No. 78-219, 6-12-78; Ord. No. 82-286, §§ 1, 2, 4-12-82)  
Sec. 18-2. - Hotel occupancy tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, are, for the purposes of this section, and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
Assessor and collector of taxes: The assessor and collector of taxes of the City of Nassau Bay. 
Consideration: The cost of room, sleeping space or bed space in a hotel only if the room, sleeping space or bed space is one ordinarily used for sleeping and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy and shall not include any tax assessed for the occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
Hotel: A building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, or roominghouse, but does not include a hospital, sanitarium or nursing home. 
Occupancy: The use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel if the room, space or sleeping facility is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
Quarterly period: A quarter of the calendar year. The first quarter composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter is composed of the months of April, May and June; the third quarter is composed of the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter is composed of the months of October, November and December. 
(b)  Tax levied. There is hereby levied a tax on a person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs two dollars ($2.00) or more each day and is ordinarily used for sleeping, such tax to be equal to seven (7) per cent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except for those services related to cleaning and readying the room for use or possession. The tax does not apply to a person who is a permanent resident under section 156.101 of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
(c)  Collection of tax. A person owning, operating, managing or controlling a hotel shall collect for the state the tax that is imposed by subsection (b) hereof and that is calculated on the amount paid for a room in the hotel. 
(d)  Quarterly reports to tax assessor and collector. On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in subsection (c) hereof to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the assessor and collector of taxes showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any other information the assessor and collector of taxes may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The failure of the person, firm or corporation owning, operating, managing or controlling said hotel to collect sufficient monies from occupants to satisfy said tax shall not excuse his or its obligation to pay said tax to the city. 
(e)  Rules and regulations of tax assessor and collector; access to books and records. The assessor and collector of taxes shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby. The city adopts all the enforcement provisions, including the auditing of records of the persons required to collect the tax, and the collection thereof contained in Chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code, including by not limited to, section 351.004 and 351.008 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(f)  Tax authorized by chapter 351, Municipal Hotel Occupancy Taxes, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated-Tax. The tax imposed hereunder is levied by the city in accordance with chapter 351, Municipal Hotel Occupancy Taxes, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated-Tax. 
(g)  Interest on delinquent taxes. A tax imposed by this section that is not paid to the assessor and collector of taxes when it is due draws interest at the highest rate permitted by law as set forth in Section 156.201 and Section 111.060 of the Texas Tax Code. 
(h)  Penalty. If the person who is required to pay to the assessor and collector of taxes the tax imposed by this section fails to file a report or does not pay the tax when it is due, the person shall be liable to the city as stipulated in Chapter 351, Section 351.004 of the Tax Code. The minimum penalty under this section is one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 95-442, §§ 1—8, 1-9-95; Ord. No. 2005-597, 10-10-05; Ord. No. O2012-696, §§ 1—3, 3-12-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-442, § 9, adopted Jan. 9, 1995, repealed Ord. No. 78-208, adopted March 13, 1978; and Ord. No. 89-373, adopted Sept. 18, 1989, from which were derived §§ 18-2 and 18-2.1, pertaining to hotel occupancy tax generally and supplemental provisions for the benefit of Space Center Houston. Sections 1—8 of Ord. No. 95-442 have been included herein as a new § 18-2 by the editor.  
Sec. 18-2.1. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 18-2.  
Sec. 18-3. - Additional penalty assessed for delinquent taxes. 
The city hereby imposes an additional penalty to defray costs of the collection of delinquent taxes pursuant to the Texas Property Tax Code, Section 33.07 (as revised in 1981) which states that taxes that remain delinquent on July first of the year they become delinquent may incur an additional penalty, not to exceed fifteen (15) per cent of the amount of taxes and penalty and interest due. 
(Ord. No. 86-338, 5-12-86) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 86-338, enacted May 12, 1986, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification herein of the substantive provisions of such ordinance as § 18.3 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Occupational licenses, taxes and regulations, Ch. 11; general occupational license tax levy, § 11-1.  
Chapter 19 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire lanes, § 8-8 et seq.; defective parking lots, § 9-41 et seq.; driving or parking in parks, § 13-10(4). 
State Law reference— Authority of city as to traffic, V.A.C.S. arts. 1175(20), 1175e; 6698, art. 6701d, §§ 12, 26, 27, 31, 43A, 49, 65, 76, 87, 91, 94—96, 165, 169, 170; 6701j—l, § 5(b); 6701½. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Short title; adoption of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways. 
This chapter may be known and cited as the Traffic Code. 
All provisions of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, as now in effect in the state and generally referred to as Revised Civil Statutes, article 6701d, including all amendments to such statute as of this date, are hereby adopted and is supplemented by the regulations set forth in this chapter.  
Sec. 19-2. - Signs, signals, markings and devices; authority to place; confirming those in place. 
Any sign, signal, marking or device for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic placed or erected by authority of the city shall first be authorized by ordinance or resolution of the city council. Further, certain signs and markings that were placed and erected by the county within the city prior to the incorporation of the city, as well as all signs and markings placed by the city and now in place for the purpose of regulating, warning and guiding traffic, the city council hereby adopts, confirms and declares to be official, authorized signs and markings of the city. All traffic control devices, signs, signals or markings placed or erected by authority of the city shall conform to the state highway department's manual and specifications, as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 8, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Authority, V.A.C.S. art 6701d, § 31.  
Sec. 19-3. - Maximum vehicle weights on asphalt streets. 
No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, dump trucks which exceed five (5) tons net capacity, or any other vehicle of equivalent gross weight on any street with an asphalt surface. 
(Ord. No. 72-84, § 1, 5-8-72)  
Sec. 19-4. - Regulation of vehicles using private parking areas open to public use. 
The provisions of the state laws, the traffic code of the Nassau Bay City Code, and all ordinances of the city regulating vehicles are hereby made applicable to all vehicles using private parking areas open to public use, and the entrances thereto and exits therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 90-393, 12-10-90) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 90-393 amends the Code by adding provisions thereto, but did specify the manner of inclusion; designation as § 19-4 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 19-5—19-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING 
 
Sec. 19-20. - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Alley: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation. 
Bicycle: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter. 
Crosswalk: That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway; any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the roadway surfaces. 
Emergency vehicle: Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the State Board of Health, emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of an incorporated city, private vehicles operated by volunteer firemen while answering a fire alarm, and vehicles carrying a state, county, municipal or federal officer or employee in response to an emergency call. 
Park or parking: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading equipment, merchandise or any other physical object, or passengers. 
Safety zones: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Sidewalk: That portion of a street right-of-way intended for the use of pedestrians between the private property lines and the adjacent curbline or roadway. 
Street or highway: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Traffic: Pedestrians, vehicles, ridden and herded animals, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel. 
Vehicle: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 1, 11-13-72) 
State Law reference— Definitions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, §§ 1—20H.  
Sec. 19-21. - Stopping for school buses. 
An operator on a street or highway when approaching from either direction a school bus stopped on the street or highway to receive or discharge a student: 
(1)  Shall stop before reaching the school bus when the bus is operating a visual signal as required; and 
(2)  May not proceed until: 
a.  The school bus resumes motion; 
b.  The operator is signaled by the bus driver to proceed; or 
c.  The visual signal is no longer actuated. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 31, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 2005-599, § 2, 11-14-05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 104.  
Sec. 19-22. - Temporary suspension or creation of parking regulations. 
The chief of police or fire marshall of the City of Nassau Bay, or their duly authorized and appointed representatives, shall have the authority, from time to time, to temporarily suspend or create parking rules and regulations as may by needed in the interest of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2002-552, § II, 9-9-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-552, § II, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, amended § 19-22 in its entirety. Former § 19-22 pertained to parking position and derived from Ord. No. 72-97, adopted Nov. 13, 1972.  
Sec. 19-23. - Parking for display for sale or rent of a vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or motor vehicle upon any street or public right-of-way for the sole or exclusive purpose of displaying it for sale or rent. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or motor vehicle on any private property for the sole or exclusive purpose of displaying it for sale without first obtaining permission of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 4, 11-13-72; Ord. No. 2005-599, § 3, 11-14-05)  
Sec. 19-24. - Parking in fire lanes. 
Except emergency vehicles and physicians on emergency calls, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or bicycle in a fire lane authorized by the fire marshal and properly designated, on either public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 5, 11-13-72) 
Cross reference— Designating fire lanes, § 8-8.  
Sec. 19-25. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or in such a position as to leave available less than twelve (12) feet of width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway or entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 7, 11-13-72)  
Sec. 19-26. - Parking on private property without consent. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 8, 11-13-72)  
Sec. 19-27. - Continuous parking limitation. 
(a)  In all areas of the city where parking is not otherwise prohibited, no person shall park a vehicle or motor vehicle as defined in the Texas Transportation Code on any street or right-of-way of the city for a continuous period of time in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. 
(b)  This prohibition of parking in excess of forty-eight (48) [hours] shall be especially construed to mean all residential streets of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 6, 11-13-72; Ord. No. 2002-552, § III, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 2005-599, § 4, 11-14-05)  
Sec. 19-28. - No parking zones. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle, bicycle or golf cart to park on any of the following streets or places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a policeman or traffic control device: 
Specific Prohibitions 
Bal Harbour Drive, the west side from Starboard Drive to Lighthouse Drive. 
Clippers Cove Court, the north side from Surf Court to a point three hundred sixty-nine (369) feet east of the intersection of Clippers Cove Court and Surf Court. 
Lagoon Drive, the east and west side from NASA Parkway to north boundary line of Swan Lagoon Park. 
Lakeside Lane, the east and west side from NASA Parkway to Lighthouse Drive. 
Nassau Bay Drive: 
(1)  The east side from Saxony Lane to NASA Parkway. 
(2)  The west side from Saxony Court to NASA Parkway. 
Point Lookout Drive: 
(1)  The east side from Saxony Lane to NASA Parkway. 
(2)  The west side from wall north of 18122 Point Lookout to NASA Parkway. 
Sailboat Drive: 
(1)  The south side from Sandy Cove to Starboard Drive. 
(2)  The north side from Bal Harbour Drive to Starboard Drive. 
(3)  The north side from Bal Harbour Drive to Lakeside Lane. 
San Sebastian Court, the entire length. 
San Sebastian Lane: 
(1)  The north side from Point Lookout Drive to Upper Bay Road. 
(2)  The south side from Vinland Drive to Upper Bay Road except on Sunday. 
Sandy Cove, the entire west side starting at Sailboat Drive to the end of the street. 
Saturn Lane, the east and west side from NASA Parkway to Space Park Drive. 
Space Park Drive, the north and south side from Upper Bay Road to Nassau Bay Drive. 
Space Park Drive, the north and south side of Space Park Drive access road (deceleration lane), west of Nassau Bay Drive. 
Surf Court, the west and east side from Baycrest Drive to NASA Parkway. 
Surf Court, the east and west side from Space Park Drive to the end of the street but only between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. 
Upper Bay Road: 
(1)  The west side from San Sebastian Lane north to NASA Parkway. 
(2)  The west side from the south property line of the Episcopal Church to San Sebastian Lane, except Sunday. 
(3)  The east side from the intersection of Prince William Lane to NASA Parkway. 
Vinland Drive, from the intersection of Saxony Lane to a point four hundred twenty-three (423) feet south of Saxony Lane. 
All other locations where designated by signs or painted areas placed by the authority of the city council, either as part of this section or from future ordinances. 
(b)  The city council authorizes signs to be posted in areas where parking is limited or prohibited. Such signs shall indicate limitations or prohibitions. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, §§ 2, 9, 11-13-72; Ord. No. 97-477A, 6-9-97; Ord. No. 2000-510, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 2002-552, § IV, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 2005-585, 12-13-04; Ord. No. 2005-599, § 5, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2010-672, § 1, 9-13-10; Ord. No. O2015-734, § 1, 5-11-15; Ord. No. O2016-750, § 1, 12-12-16)  
Sec. 19-29. - Painted areas. 
The city council may authorize portions of streets, sidewalks, curbs, alleys and parking lots, public and private, to be painted as an indication of specific areas where parking is prohibited for the purpose of traffic control in the interest of safety. All such areas shall be painted or marked in accordance with the standards established in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devises as amended. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 10, 11-13-72; Ord. No. 2002-552, § V, 9-9-02)  
Sec. 19-30. - Towing vehicles away. 
Police officers of the city are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or public place under the following circumstances: 
(a)  Any vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a hazard or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency; or by reason of catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstances the safety of the vehicle is imperiled; is stolen or abandoned; or is found to be in violation of a city ordinance of the city or state law. 
(b)  When an officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for alleged offense and such officer is authorized by this Code or other law to take the person arrested immediately before a magistrate, and no other immediate means of securing or releasing the vehicle are available or practical. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, having registered in his name or owning or operating or having in charge any vehicle, knowingly to allow or suffer or permit the same to stop, stand or be parked in any street in the city in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 72-97, § 11, 11-13-72; Ord. No. 2002-552, § VI, 9-9-02) 
Cross reference— Abandoned vehicles, § 9-50 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 94; Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, art. 6687—9.  
Sec. 19-31. - Parking of specific motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions of words and phrases. The following words and phrases when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, V.C.S. Art. 6701d: Truck tractor, farm tractor, road tractor, bus, trailer, semi-trailer, pole trailer, house trailer, and special mobile equipment. 
(b)  Parking prohibited, limited time. No person shall park a truck tractor, farm tractor, road tractor, bus, trailer, boat trailer, semi-trailer, pole trailer, house trailer, motor home, special mobile equipment or any other motor vehicle as defined in Section 501.001 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, on any residential street for a continuous period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours without first having obtained a permit in accordance with section 19-32 of this chapter. No permit is required for periods of time less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(1)  Vehicles and motor vehicles defined in subsection (b) above must be legally parked immediately adjacent to the curb line abutting the property of the vehicle or motor vehicle owner's primary residence and must be wholly within the property lines (as described by the metes and bounds or plat map for that property) and may not extend beyond those lines onto adjacent property. 
(2)  Unless a special permit has been issued, under no circumstances may a vehicle, motor vehicle or combination thereof, as described in subsection (b) above be parked in the roadway if that vehicle or motor vehicle exceeds a total length of forty-two (42) feet, or the width is such that less than twelve (12) feet of paved roadway (as measured from that portion of the vehicle or motor vehicle closest to the center of the roadway to the opposite curb line) remains for clear and safe passage of other motor vehicles including emergency vehicles. The measurement of a motor vehicle shall be from front to rear bumper. The measurement of a trailer or boat shall be from the trailer tongue or bow to the stern or rear of the trailer. The measurements shall be made from that portion of the boat or trailer that extends the furtherest. 
(3)  Under no circumstances may a vehicle or motor vehicle be parked on any city street in a manner as to block access to another's private driveway or impede access to a driveway or alleyway. 
(c)  [Parking of tractors, trailers or equipment.] No person shall stop, park or leave standing a truck tractor, farm tractor, road tractor, bus, trailer, boat trailer, semi-trailer, pole trailer, house trailer or special mobile equipment on any street within a business district as defined by the city's zoning ordinance, for a period of time greater than one (1) hour. 
(d)  Exceptions. Subsection (c) does not prohibit the parking of an emergency vehicle or vehicles owned, operated or leased by the city, county, state or public utility; or vehicles used in the performance of services under contract of the city, county, state, or public utility. This section shall further not apply to vehicles making a pickup, delivery or rendering some requested service at a location, which abuts the street on which the vehicle is stopped or parked. 
(Ord. No. 91-410, §§ 1—4, 9-9-91; Ord. No. 2002-552, § VII, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 2005-599, § 6, 11-14-05)  
Sec. 19-32. - Special permit for long-term parking. 
(a)  [Prohibition.] No person shall park a vehicle as defined and described in subsection 19-31(b) on any city street or right-of-way in excess of any continuous twenty-four-hour period unless such person has obtained a special permit from the city to do so. 
(b)  Certain parking not permitted. No special permit shall be issued for parking on any public property nor shall any special permit be issued for parking on private property on grass, dirt or other nonimpervious surfaces where a paved or improved area is available. 
(c)  Conditions for issuance of special permit for parking in excess of twenty-four hours. Parking of a vehicle otherwise in violation of this article may be permitted subject to all the following conditions: 
(1)  The vehicle sought to be parked must be registered to a permanent resident or owner of the property for which the special permit is sought and there must exist a condition peculiar to the site and not the result of any act or omission of the resident or owner of the property. 
(2)  Special permits to park a vehicle or trailer shall not be issued for a period of time greater than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(3)  The city may impose such other conditions as it deems necessary or desirable upon each such special permit issued as may be necessary. 
(4)  Application for a special permit shall be made at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time of the special need. 
(d)  Procedure for issuance of a special permit. 
(1)  A resident or property owner desiring to obtain a permit for special parking shall make the application to Nassau Bay Police Department in person on a form provided by the department. No fee shall be required for such permit. If the applicant is not the owner of the property for which the permit is sought, the owner of the property must consent to the issuance of the permit and evidence that consent by signing the application or providing a signed written statement to that effect. 
(2)  The chief of police or his/her designee shall review each application for a special permit and if it is determined that the application does not conform to the provisions of the city ordinances, shall so inform the applicant in person, writing or by telephone. 
(e)  Limitation on number of permits. 
(1)  It is the intent of this section to provide exceptions to the city's ordinances and to preserve the appearance and quality of life in the city and where exceptional or extenuating circumstances may exist. Homeowners and property owners shall be limited to a total of two (2) special parking permits in any seven (7) day calendar week and a total of six (6) permits in any twelve (12) consecutive month period. 
(f)  Display of permit. 
(1)  A permit issued by this section shall be prominently displayed on the vehicle in a manner so as to be readily visible to a police officer, code enforcement officer or other official of the city authorized to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for a person to display a permit that is expired or altered in any manner. 
(g)  Ineligibility for permit. The city reserves the right to refuse issuance of future special parking permits to any individual who has been previously convicted of violating this section 
(h)  Compliance with other laws. Nothing in this section shall authorize a person to violate any other parking ordinances of the City of Nassau Bay or the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2002-552, § VIII, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 2005-599, § 7, 11-14-05)  
Sec. 19-33. - Parking of boats, motor vehicles, trailers and other vehicles on residentially zoned property. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be illegal for any person to park or to allow to parked on any property under his control any vehicle, motor vehicle, trailer, boat and/or parts thereof on any unpaved portion of a front yard or side yard of any area which is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 or RM-1 under the comprehensive zoning ordinances, except in a driveway or in a parking space. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  Front yard means the space on a lot or parcel of land, extending across the full width of same, between the street and a residential structure situated thereon. 
(2)  Side yard means the space on a lot or parcel of land, extending from the front yard to the rear property line, between the street and a residential structure situated thereon. 
(3)  Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a front yard or a side yard abutting a street. 
(4)  Parking space means a paved area of sufficient size within a front yard or a side yard abutting a street, approved by the city, to be used for the express purpose of parking. 
(5)  Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway or a body of water, except a device moved by human power. 
(c)  Nuisances. 
(1)  Declaration of a nuisance. It shall be illegal for any person to park or allow to be parked on any area designated as a "Reserve" on any recorded subdivision plat within the city; or, in any parking facility designed or designated exclusively for visitors or guests, any tractor, truck-tractor, tractor-trailer, boat or boat trailer, watercraft, recreational vehicle or parts or pieces thereof, on any paved or unpaved portion of the reserve or parking area for a period of time greater than forty eight (48) hours. Said vehicles, parts, or pieces are hereby determined to be non-conforming to the parking only purposes of such Reserves. Such non-conforming vehicles, parts, or pieces thereof are declared to be a public nuisance. 
(2)  Definition of public nuisance. A public nuisance, as used in this subsection, is defined as a condition visible from a public place or public right-of-way, that is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, that could reduce the value of private property, that could invite vandalism or create a fire hazard, or that constitutes an attractive nuisance, or is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the public health, safety, general welfare and continuing orderly development of the city. A private driveway on a single family lot improved with a single family home is not a nuisance. 
(3)  Notice to owner. The police department of the city, is authorized to remove any public nuisance, as herein defined, provided that notice by certified or registered mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known address of the registered owner of the tractor, truck-tractor, tractor-trailer, boat or boat trailer, watercraft, recreational vehicle, or parts or pieces thereof, and any lien holder of record, which notice shall set forth: 
a.  The nature of the public nuisance; and, 
b.  That it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days from receipt of the certified or registered mail. 
If the public nuisance is found to exist on a public right-of-way notice shall also be sent to the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon the public nuisance exists. 
If any notice to an owner or occupant, as mentioned above is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the public nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than the ten (10) days from the date of such return. 
(4)  Abatement of nuisance by city. Whenever any nuisance has been declared to exist within the city and such nuisance has been ordered to be abated, corrected or removed, and the person causing such or creating such nuisance has failed or refused to obey such order, the city may direct the chief of police to abate the nuisance, and he shall proceed at once to carry out such order, calling upon such assistance as he deems necessary. All costs accruing therein shall be taxed against the person causing or creating such nuisance and collected as other costs. 
(5)  Penalty for violation. 
a.  When the city shall have legally declared a condition defined in this subsection as being a nuisance and notified the owner or person guilty of maintaining same to abate or remove, and such person shall fail to obey the notice within the time designated, the owner or person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each day the nuisance or condition was permitted to remain beyond the ten-day notice. 
b.  Any person who violates any provision or subsection of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each day the violation continues, after proper notice, if applicable. This fine shall be enforceable as soon as the caption and penalty are published as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 86-346, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 2002-552, § I, 9-9-02; Ord. No. 2003-563, 3-10-03; Ord. No. 2005-599, § 8, 11-14-05) 
Cross reference— Scattering materials from vehicles, § 9-21; zoning, App. A.  
Secs. 19-34—19-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLE 
 
Sec. 19-40. - Speed limits—Maximum generally. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle on any street within the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speeds for compliance with subsection (b) of this section, the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour anywhere within the city or in excess of the limits established as hereinafter authorized shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. These limits shall apply to passenger vehicles, light trucks, busses or any other vehicles engaged in the city in the business of transporting passengers for compensation or for hire or to any commercial vehicles, including vehicles engaged in the transportation of United States mail, and shall be the same for daytime or nighttime driving. The maximum speed limits set forth in this section may be altered as authorized in section 19-41. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle on any city street within the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching or crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when traveling upon any street, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians and other traffic or by reason of weather or street conditions. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 1, 10-26-70; Ord. No. 79-242, 3-12-79) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 166; arrests for speeding, art. 6701d—8.  
Sec. 19-41. - Same—Altering maximum. 
(a)  Whenever the city council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the prima facie maximum speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the street system of the city, taking into consideration the width and condition of the pavement and other circumstances on such portion of said street as well as the usual traffic thereon, the council may determine and declare a reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit thereat or thereon, by proper ordinance of the city council, entered on its minutes, which limit, when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, shall be effective at such intersection or other place or part of the street system of the city at all times or during hours of daylight or darkness, or at such other times as may be determined. 
(b)  The council may also alter the maximum speed limits that shall exist with respect to any part of any street of the city. Any revision of any street zone established herein shall only be for reasons of technological advancement in traffic operation, design and construction of streets and motor vehicles, as well as the safety of the motoring public. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 2, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Authority, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 169.  
Sec. 19-42. - Same—Minimum may be prescribed. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(b)  When the city council determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of any city street consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, it hereby reserves the right to determine and declare a minimum speed limit thereat or thereon, by ordinance, and when appropriate signs are erected giving notice of such minimum speed limit, no person shall drive a vehicle below that limit except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 3, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 170.  
Sec. 19-43. - Negligent collision—Offense defined. 
If any driver or operator of a vehicle upon any public street or upon any drive in any publicly owned land, within the city, shall with negligence, as is defined in the Penal Code of this state in the title and chapter on negligent homicide, collide with or cause damage to any other vehicle of any kind whatsoever, or with any other property at any place within the city, he or she shall be deemed guilty of negligent collision, and subject to punishment, on conviction, as provided in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 74-123, § 1, 1-14-74) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 51.  
Sec. 19-44. - Same—Evidence. 
Proof of no intent on the part of any operator of any vehicle charged with an offense under section 19-43 to collide with any other vehicle or with any other property shall be no defense to any charge filed under the authority of such section. 
(Ord. No. 74-123, § 2, 1-14-74)  
Sec. 19-45. - Same—Exempt vehicles. 
Nothing contained in section 19-43 shall authorize the prosecution of any person for the violation of the same while such person is operating any fire department or police department vehicle of the city in the performance of his or her duty; provided, it shall not be necessary in any complaint, action or proceeding under such section to negate this exception, but the same shall be proved by the defendant by way of defense. 
(Ord. No. 74-123, § 3, 1-14-74)  
Sec. 19-46. - Designating no passing zones and one-way streets. 
(a)  The city council may determine by ordinance those portions of any street where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(b)  The city council may designate by ordinance any street under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. Upon a roadway designated or marked for one-way traffic, the driver of a vehicle shall drive only in the direction designated. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 19, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, §§ 58, 59.  
Sec. 19-47. - Right-of-way at intersections—Generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection in obedience to any stop sign, yield right-of-way sign or traffic-control device erected by public authority, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street, not controlled by traffic-control signs, signals, markings or devices, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any other vehicle which has entered the intersection from such driver's right or is approaching such intersection from such driver's right in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard and after so stopping may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter such intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(c)  A driver obligated to stop and yield the right-of-way in accordance with subsections (a) or (b) of this section, who is involved in a collision or interference with other traffic at such intersection, is presumed not to have yielded the right-of-way as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 26, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 71.  
Sec. 19-48. - Same—Turning left. 
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given the signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 27, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 72.  
Sec. 19-49. - Following emergency vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall follow in a motor vehicle any ambulance, fire vehicle or police car which is traveling on a public street in response to report of an automobile accident. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-234, adopted Oct. 9, 1978, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, codification of a portion thereof as § 19-49 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Wreckers, § 21-21 et seq.  
Secs. 19-50—19-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Towing vehicle away, § 19-30. 
 
Sec. 19-60. - Arrest without warrant. 
Any peace officer is authorized to arrest without warrant any person found committing a violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 37, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 153.  
Sec. 19-61. - Taking arrested person immediately before judge. 
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this chapter punishable as a misdemeanor, the arrested person shall be immediately taken before the judge of the municipal court whenever such a person arrested demands an immediate appearance before the judge or in any other event when the person arrested refuses to give his written promise to appear in court as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 33, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 147.  
Sec. 19-62. - Notice to appear; promise to appear. 
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this chapter punishable as a misdemeanor, and such person is not immediately taken before the judge as hereinbefore required, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate written notice to appear in the municipal court, obtaining the name and address of such person, the license number of his vehicle, if any, the offense charged, and the time and place when and where such person shall appear in court. Provided, however, that the offense of speeding shall be the only offense making mandatory the issuance of a written notice to appear in court, and only then if the arrested person gives his written promise to appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer; and providing further that it shall not be mandatory for an officer to give a written notice to appear in court to any person arrested for the offense of speeding when such person is operating a vehicle licensed in a state or country other than this state, or who is a resident of a state or country other than this state. The time specified in said notice to appear must be at least ten (10) days after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing. The place specified in said notice to appear must be before the judge of the municipal court within the city, where the offense charged is alleged to have been committed and who has jurisdiction of such offense. The arrested person, in order to secure release as provided in this section, must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The original of said notice shall be retained by said officer and the copy thereof delivered to the person arrested. Thereupon, said officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court, given as provided in this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. The foregoing provisions of this section shall govern all peace officers, including but not limited to police officers and deputy sheriffs, in making arrests without a warrant for violations of this chapter, but the procedure described herein shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for arrest and prosecution of a person for an offense of like grade. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 34, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, §§ 148, 149, 150.  
Sec. 19-63. - Penalties for misdemeanors. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, unless such violation is by other law of this state declared to be a felony. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-6; or as otherwise may be provided for parking violations. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 32, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 143.  
Sec. 19-64. - Credibility as witness not affected by conviction. 
The conviction of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter shall not affect or impair the credibility of such person as a witness in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 35, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 151.  
Sec. 19-65. - Record of cases. 
The clerk of the municipal court shall keep a full record of every case in which a person is charged in the municipal court with any violation of this chapter or of any other law regulating the operation of vehicles on streets of the city or of any other traffic ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 70-26, § 36, 10-26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 152(a).  
Chapter 20 - UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 701, dated June 22, 1970, adopted provisions of V.A.C.S. art. 1182c—1, providing for assuming of municipal control over water district formerly comprising territory of the newly incorporated city.   Private utilities are regulated by franchises, which are omitted from this Code, continued in effect, and on file in the office of the city secretary. 
Charter reference— Power of city relative to water mains, etc., § 2.01(D); cost of improvements, § 2.02; public utilities and franchises, § 9.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Sewage and wastewater disposal, 9-70 et seq.; cut off of water service for failure to install backflow preventers, § 9-77; rental paid to city by utilities for use of streets, sidewalks, etc., § 17-20 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Water rate schedule. 
(a)  The following monthly water rate schedule is hereby established and adopted by the city. 
(1)  Single-family residential, government, and commercial users including hotels/motels and hospitals: A base rate as designated in Schedule A based on the service meter size plus a volumetric rate as designated in Schedule A based on the monthly consumption in 1,000-gallon increments. 
(2)  Multi-family dwellings: A base rate assessed on a per unit basis as designated in Schedule A plus a volumetric rate as designated in Schedule A to correspond with the 0—5,000 gallon per month rate as applied to the total monthly consumption in 1,000-gallon increments. 
(3)  Irrigation meters—All classes: A base rate as designated in Schedule A based on the service meter size plus a volumetric rate as designated in Schedule A based on the monthly consumption in 1,000-gallon increments. 
(4)  FY2022 rates shall remain in effect until this section is amended or repealed. 
Schedule A—Water Rate Schedule 
Water Base Fee 	FY2019 	FY2020 	FY2021 	FY2022 
Fee Per Apt Unit 	$14.00 	$14.00 	$14.00 	$14.00 
?" Meter 	14.00 	14.00 	14.00 	14.00 
¾" Meter 	14.00 	14.00 	14.00 	14.00 
1" Meter 	14.00 	14.00 	14.00 	14.00 
1½" Meter 	14.00 	14.00 	14.00 	17.25 
2" Meter 	15.75 	15.91 	16.07 	27.79 
3" Meter 	59.74 	60.34 	60.96 	105.41 
4" Meter 	76.04 	76.80 	77.59 	134.16 
 
Water Volumetric Rate 	FY2019 	FY2020 	FY2021 	FY2022 
Residential 
0—5,000/MF 	$2.50 	$2.61 	$2.71 	$2.81 
5,001—10,000 	2.63 	2.86 	3.08 	3.31 
10,001—15,000 	2.75 	3.11 	3.46 	3.81 
15,001—20,000 	3.03 	3.46 	3.88 	4.31 
20,001 and above 	3.53 	3.96 	4.38 	4.81 
Commercial/Government 	3.50 	3.60 	3.70 	4.13 
 
(b)  Monthly bills will be provided on or around the 1st day of the month and all water and sewer accounts are due on or before the 17th day of the billing month. There will be a ten (10) percent penalty assessed to any account making payment after the 17th day of the billing month. Services will be discontinued for non-payment on the 30th day of the billing month. Accounts lapsing into unpaid status on the 30th day of the month will be assessed a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) shut-off notice administrative fee. 
(c)  The city shall not render water and sewer services without charge to any person, firm, corporation, or organization. 
(d)  The above water rate Schedule A shall become effective for the November 1, 2018 billing cycle consisting of meter reads from approximately September 12, 2018 to October 15, 2018. Each fiscal year rate increase shall become effective for the November 1 billing cycle of that fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 76-185, § 1, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 78-221, § 1, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 80-253, §§ 1, 3, 5, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 82-289, §§ 1, 3, 5, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 83-302, §§ 1, 3, 5, 6-13-83; Ord. No. 86-333, 1-13-86; Ord. No. 86-347, §§ 1, 3, 5, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 90-390, §§ 1, 3, 5, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 91-412, §§ 1, 3, 5, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 93-426, §§ 1, 3, 5, 8-9-93; Ord. No. 2000-514, §§ 1—5, 5-8-00; Ord. No. 2001-540, §§ 1, 4, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 2002-548, §§ 1, 4, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 2002-551, §§ 1, 2, 8-12-02; Ord. No. 2003-574, § 1, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2004-581, § 1, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 2010-674, §§ 1, 3, 4, 10-11-10; Ord. No. O2015-731, §§ 1—3, 1-12-15; Ord. No. O2018-775, §§ 1, 3, 6-11-18)  
Sec. 20-2. - Private water wells prohibited. 
The drilling of any private water well within the city is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 72-99, 11-27-72)  
Sec. 20-3. - Sewer rate schedule. 
(a)  The following monthly sewer rate schedule is hereby established and adopted by the city. Sewer charges are not applied to irrigation meters. 
(1)  Single-family residential, government, and commercial users including hotels/motels and hospitals: A base rate as designated in Schedule B plus a volumetric rate as designated in Schedule B corresponding to the total monthly metered water consumption in 1,000-gallon increments. 
(2)  Multi-family dwellings: A base rate assessed on a per unit basis as designated in Schedule B plus a volumetric rate as designated in Schedule B corresponding to the total monthly metered water consumption in 1,000-gallon increments. 
(3)  FY2022 rates shall remain in effect until this section is amended or repealed. 
Schedule B—Sewer Rate Schedule 
Sewer Fees 	FY2019 	FY2020 	FY2021 	FY2022 
Base Fee 	$14.75 	$15.49 	$16.24 	$16.98 
Volumetric Fee 	2.66 	2.76 	2.86 	2.95 
 
(b)  Monthly bills will be provided on or around the 1st day of the month and all water and sewer accounts are due on or before the 17th day of the billing month. There will be a ten (10) percent penalty assessed to any account making payment after the 17th day of the billing month. Services will be discontinued for non-payment on the 30th day of the billing month. Accounts lapsing into unpaid status on the 30th day of the month will be assessed a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) shut-off notice administrative fee. 
(c)  The above sewer rates shall become effective for the November 1, 2018 billing cycle consisting of meter reads from approximately September 12, 2018 to October 15, 2018. Each fiscal year rate increase shall become effective for the November 1 billing cycle of that fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 76-185, § 2, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 78-221, §§ 2, 3, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 80-253, §§ 2, 3, 5, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 82-289, §§ 2, 5, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 83-302, §§ 2, 3, 5, 6-13-83; Ord. No. 86-333, 1-13-86; Ord. No. 86-347, §§ 2, 3, 5, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 90-390, §§ 2, 3, 5, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 91-412, §§ 2, 3, 5, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 93-426, § 2, 3, 5, 8-9-93; Ord. No. 2001-540, §§ 3, 4, 10-8-01; Ord. No. 2002-548, §§ 3, 4, 4-8-02; Ord. No. 2002-551, §§ 3, 4, 6, 8-12-02; Ord. No. 2003-574, § 2, 12-8-03; Ord. No. 2004-581, § 2, 10-11-04; Ord. No. 2010-674, §§ 2, 3, 5, 10-11-10; Ord. No. O2015-731, §§ 1, 3, 1-12-15; Ord. No. O2018-775, §§ 5, 7, 6-11-18)  
Sec. 20-3.1. - Sewer connection charges. 
Category 	Cost 	Description 
Standard Residential Meter (up to 1") 	$850.00 	City-installed, includes material and labor, residential meters over 1" will be treated as commercial meters 
Boring for Standard Residential Meter 	$400.00 	City-installed, fee is only charged when boring is determined to be necessary by Water Department for meter installation 
Commercial Meters (1" to 8") 	$200.00 + actual cost of meter 	Plumber-installed, meter must meet City specifications, permit and inspections necessary 
 
(Ord. No. 78-207, 3-13-78; Ord. No. O2012-695, Att. A, 2-13-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-207, adopted Mar. 13, 1978, was nonamendatory of the Code, hence inclusion as § 20-3.1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 20-4. - No free water or sewer service. 
The city shall not render water and sewer services without charge to any person, firm, corporation or organization. 
(Ord. No. 76-185, § 4, 12-13-76; Ord. No. 78-221, § 4, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 80-253, § 4, 2-25-80; Ord. No. 82-289, § 4, 9-13-82; Ord. No. 83-302, § 4, 6-13-83; Ord. No. 86-347, § 4, 11-10-86; Ord. No. 90-390, § 4, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 91-412, § 4, 10-14-91; Ord. No. 2002-551, § 5, 8-12-02)  
Sec. 20-5. - Drought contingency plan; penalty. 
(a)  [Findings.] The city council does hereby find and declare that sufficient and timely written notice of place and subject matter of this meeting adopting the ordinance from which this section derives was posted. The city council further ratifies, approves, and confirms such written notice and the posting thereof. 
(b)  [Adopted.] The city council adopts the water conservation and drought contingency plans attached to the ordinance from which this section derives. All ordinances that are in conflict with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed. 
(c)  [Serverability.] Should any paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of the ordinance from which this section derives be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of the ordinance from which this section derives shall not be affected. 
(d)  [Penalty.] Violation of the provisions of the ordinance from which this section derives shall result in the maximum fine allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 87-352, §§ 1—4, 8-10-87; Ord. No. O-2011-684, §§ 1—4, 6-13-11) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A," referred to in subsection (a) of this section, has not been included herein, but is kept on file and available for public inspection at the office of the city secretary. Designation of the provisions of Ord. No. 87-352, §§ 1—4, adopted Aug. 10, 1987, as § 20-5 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance not being specifically amendatory of the Code.  
Sec. 20-6. - Surrender of jurisdiction over central thermal energy system for heating and cooling. 
(a)  The city hereby surrenders its exclusive original jurisdiction to the public utility commission over the business of supplying thermal energy in the form of heat and cold from hot water and chilled water whereby chilled and heated water is pumped through pipes to buildings occupied by contracting parties who through the use of heat exchange equipment make use of such chilled water and heated water to produce air conditioning and heating for those buildings. 
(b)  It is the intention of the city to surrender its exclusive original jurisdiction over what it considers to be a service as hereinbefore described and it is specifically not the intention of the city to surrender its exclusive original jurisdiction over the sale or distribution of water per se and nothing herein shall be construed as a surrender of said exclusive original jurisdiction over the sale or distribution of water per se. 
(Ord. No. 76-196, §§ 1, 2, 8-8-77) 
State Law reference— See V.A.C.S. art. 1446c.  
Sec. 20-7. - Surrender of jurisdiction over entity engaged in supplying electricity to the city. 
The City of Nassau Bay hereby surrenders its exclusive original jurisdiction to the Public Utility Commission [of the State of Texas] over the rates, operations and services of a business entity engaged in supplying electricity to the City of Nassau Bay.  
Secs. 20-8—20-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Burning rubbish, § 8-7; cleanliness, sanitation and safety of premises, § 9-20 et seq. 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Disposal Act. V.A.C.S art. 4477—7, accumulations constituting nuisance, art. 4477—1, § 2(f). 
 
Sec. 20-20. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Commercial users: Includes but is not limited to, apartments, businesses, churches, schools, restaurants, hotels, motels, grocery stores and other commercial establishments. 
Contractor or private contractor: The party with whom the city contracts under this article for the removal and disposal of garbage, trash and refuse. 
Garbage: All animal or vegetable matter, such as waste material or refuse from kitchens, residences, including apartments and town houses, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, hotels and motels, and other deleterious substances and any other matter commonly understood to be garbage. 
Trash: Rubbish such as feathers, coffee grounds, ashes, tin cans, paper boxes, glass, shrubs, yard cleanings, grass clippings, leaves and tree trimmings, and any other matter commonly understood to be trash. This definition does not include dirt, concrete, tile, plaster, rocks and other such substances. 
(Ord. No. 702-8, §§ 2, 3, 11, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-21. - Removal and disposal permit—Required. 
The contractor will qualify for and obtain from the city a permit to collect, remove or dispose of garbage, refuse or trash, the requirements for which are set forth in this article. Said permit shall be obtained and continue in good standing prior to the execution of the contract contemplated herein. 
Any collector, including the successful bidder for the city contract, must be licensed by the city in accordance with the licensing requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, §§ 8, 20, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-22. - Same—Application; fee; issuance. 
Any person who desires to engage in the removal of garbage and trash of any kind within the jurisdiction of the city shall, before engaging in such work, file an application with the city secretary and state therein his name, address and a description of the equipment that he desires to operate and approximately the number of locations he expects to serve. The applicant shall submit the equipment, carts or vehicles he proposes to use for inspection by the city health officer and if, on inspection, said officer is satisfied that said equipment, carts or vehicles are so constructed that they will not litter or scatter garbage or trash or other articles of waste upon the streets, said officer shall approve the application if he believes it will be to the best interest and welfare of the public to grant such a permit. The applicant shall then obtain a permit from the city council upon the payment of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which shall permit said person to engage in such activities for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance of the permit. The city reserves the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder, upon reasonable notice, to any permittee who violates the terms and provisions of this article, or any health ordinance or any other ordinance of the city or state law applicable to the collection and disposition of garbage. No person, except the successful bidder for the contract for the collection and disposal of garbage with the city or a duly approved permittee under this section, shall remove from any garbage box, barrel, container, can or other receptacle, any garbage, trash, waste material or refuse, or in any way interfere with any such container or receptacle; provided, however, the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of premises on which such container or receptacle is located. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 23, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-23. - Removal and disposal contract—Authorized. 
Subject to the provisions of this article the mayor is authorized and empowered to enter into and to execute a written contract with a private corporation or individual on behalf of the city for the removal and disposal of garbage, trash and refuse as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-24. - Same—Contents. 
The contract to be entered into and executed by the mayor on behalf of the city shall contain the obligations and requirements on the part of the private contracting party as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 70-38, § 2, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-25. - Same—Form; bids. 
The contract for the collection of garbage shall be drawn in a form approved by the city attorney. Advertisement for written bids in accordance with article 2368a, V.A.C.S., as amended, shall be required of parties interested in entering into such a contract with the city. Notice for bidding shall be posted or published in accordance with said article and all bids shall be presented to the city council, which reserves the right to reject any or all bids. The acceptance of any bid shall be by resolution passed and approved by the city council. Following the entry of said resolution in the minutes of the city, the city secretary shall forthwith advise the winning bidder. The winning bidder shall thereafter, within seven (7) days, execute and enter into a written contract with the city in accordance with this article, or his right to such contract and award shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 9, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-26. - Same—Term. 
The term of the contract shall be for eighteen (18) months. Similar contracts for succeeding eighteen (18) month terms may be negotiated in the same manner as herein provided without the necessity of the passage of another ordinance. Provided, however, should the city council determine that succeeding contracts should be for terms more or less than eighteen (18) months, nothing herein shall be construed as a restriction on the city council from either expanding or constricting the term of future contracts. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 10, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-27. - Contractor's insurance. 
The private contractor will carry workmen's compensation insurance on each of his employees and public liability and property damage insurance on all of his equipment and employees. The public liability insurance shall be not less than $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per occurrence, together with a maximum property damage insurance coverage of $5,000.00. The city shall be furnished satisfactory evidence that the private contractor has purchased such insurance and shall be immediately notified upon the cancellation of such a policy of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 6, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-28. - Dumping grounds to be furnished by contractor. 
The contractor will furnish his own dumping grounds and means of disposal of the garbage, refuse and trash collected under this contract. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 5, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-29. - Systematic and efficient operation required; preventing scattering from trucks. 
The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, trash and refuse, shall be conducted in a systematic and efficient manner in order to keep the entire city in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition. The contractor shall operate such service in such a manner as to-prevent the scattering of garbage, trash and refuse from the contractor's trucks and equipment both within the city and outside of the city along the route to the dump grounds. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, §§ 7, 19, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-30. - Containers—Collection and removal therefrom; "back-door service." 
The collection and removal of all garbage, refuse and trash shall be made from containers meeting city specifications as contained in this article, which containers are to be placed in the rear of all commercial establishments and near the rear door or garage of all residential users. The contractor shall furnish what is commonly known as "back-door service" for all residential users. Any trash containers requiring hand loading from the commercial users are to be kept inside the building until the pickup man knocks on the door to pick up the refuse and load it on the truck. Such arrangements shall be made in advance. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, §§ 4, 17, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-31. - Same—Duty of owner, etc. to furnish. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee, using or occupying any building, house or structure within the city for residence, church, school, commercial, business or any other purpose, shall provide and maintain garbage cans and receptacles of sufficient number and size, as hereinafter specified, to hold the garbage, refuse and trash that will normally accumulate on the premises. Provided, however, if customized, containerized service, including but not limited to dempster dumpster service containers and equipment, are provided by the contractor, other types of additional containers shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 12, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-32. - Same—Specifications; condemnation. 
Garbage shall be placed in containers of not more than thirty (30) gallon capacity and the combined weight of the garbage and the container shall not exceed seventy-five (75) pounds, unless the private contractor provides the customized containerized service described in the preceding section. All containers shall be watertight receptacles of a solid and durable material and shall be provided with suitable handles on the outside and with a tightly fitting cover equipped with a handle. The container must not have any inside structures, such as inside bands and reenforcing angles, or anything within the container to prevent the free discharge of the contents. Garbage containers that have deteriorated to the extent of having holes or jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury to the garbage collectors or others whose duty it is to handle the containers, or to such an extent that the lids will not fit tightly or securely, will be condemned by the city, acting through its health officer or his duly authorized representatives, and if such containers are not replaced after notice to the owner or user of their defective condition, they shall be confiscated. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 13, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-33. - Same—Keeping lids closed. 
The lids or covers of all garbage and trash containers, including customized containerized service containers, shall at all times be kept secure and fastened so that insects and animals may not have access to the contents thereof. Such lids or covers shall only be removed while the containers or receptacles are being filled or emptied, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 14, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-34. - Same—Locations. 
(a)  In the event it is not practical to place the containers for collection as specified in this article, the city health officer shall determine the location for the containers and shall so notify each user. The location or relocation of such containers shall be left entirely to the discretion of the city health officer, but the city council would urge the city health officer to make every effort to preserve the status quo as to the current location of such containers, unless such location creates a health hazard. 
(b)  It is contemplated by the city council that the pickup locations currently being utilized for commercial users as a result of a contract between the Nassau Bay Homes Association, Incorporated, and the Gulf Coast Disposal Service, Incorporated, dated December 11, 1969, unless relocated for health and sanitation reasons by the city health officer in accordance with this article, shall continue as approved and authorized pickup locations for garbage collection in accordance with this article. 
(c)  If the contractor or if the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee described in this article desires to create an additional pickup station, permission must first be obtained from the city council or its designated representative, after the approval of the city health officer or his designated representative has been obtained; the sole purpose of this provision is to prevent and control the proliferation of locations of commercial containers in inappropriate locations. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 21, 10-26-76; Ord. No. 76-174, 8-9-76)  
Sec. 20-35. - Bundling of tree trimmings and hedge cuttings. 
Any person desiring the removal by the city of tree trimmings or hedge cuttings, when such trash cannot be put in the regulation containers, shall cause the same to be securely tied in bundles not heavier than fifty (50) pounds, nor more than five (5) feet in length and eighteen (18) inches in diameter. Not more than two (2) bundles of either tree trimmings or hedge cuttings will be collected on any one (1) day of collection. Said bundles shall be placed adjacent to the garbage containers required herein. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 15, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-36. - Days of pickup—From single-family residences. 
The contractor shall render service on Monday and Thursday or Tuesday and Friday of each week, to each single-family residence unless the state of said service, including frequency of pickup, is altered in the following manner: Contractor may designate a different day in the week for pickup service, provided he first so advises the city council two (2) weeks prior to the change of the day of the service. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 2, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-37. - Same—Commercial. 
The contractor shall determine in advance the particular needs of commercial users of this service and shall provide collection and disposal service as often as required to conform with this article. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 3, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-38. - Frequency of pickup. 
The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage and trash shall be made at least twice a week from houses and other single-family dwellings used for residential purposes, and as often as required to conform with this article from apartments, businesses, churches, schools, restaurants, hotels, motels, grocery stores and other commercial establishments. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 17, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-39. - Maximum quantity removed. 
On any one collection day, the contractor will empty and remove from the premises the contents of not to exceed six (6) thirty (30) gallon garbage and trash containers from any one residence, plus any additional trash or garbage that complies with the requirements of section 20-35. Service to the commercial areas, including apartment complexes, will be determined in advance by the contractor according to the needs of the particular commercial user. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 16, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-40. - Disposal of matter other than garbage and trash—At owner's expense. 
Any matter, material or item not covered under the definitions of "trash" or "garbage" herein must be disposed of by the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 11, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-41. - Same—Rock, other construction material. 
Rock, waste, scrap building materials or other trash resulting from construction or major remodeling, or resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property, just prior to its occupancy or resulting from sizeable amounts of trees, brush and debris cleared from property, including but not limited to clearing in preparation for construction, will not be removed by the city as a regular service. The owner will have such debris removed at his expense. It shall be the duty of any person employing, engaging or otherwise paying a contractor, tree expert or any other person to trim and prune his trees and shrubs, to have the trimmings and debris removed at the owner's expense. The city will not remove trimmings and debris created by such persons as a regular service. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 18, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-42. - Payment of rates and charges. 
It is the express intent and purpose of this article to fairly and reasonably apportion the costs of the collection and removal of all garbage and trash within the city. Therefore, after careful study, survey and investigation, it has been determined that rates and charges will be based on volume and number of garbage or trash collections per week as defined in the contract schedule of fees. The city will pay the full costs of residential service in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 20, 10-26-76; Ord. No. 76-174, 8-9-76)  
Sec. 20-43. - Enforcement—Inspections; official action. 
In addition to the usual enforcement agencies of the city, it is hereby declared to be the duty of the city health officer or his authorized representatives to make inspection trips at regular intervals to determine whether or not garbage, trash and refuse is being properly collected, removed and disposed of as required by the provisions of this article or any other applicable ordinance. In the event that a violation of this article or any other applicable ordinance is discovered, appropriate and timely action shall be taken to insure full compliance with the provisions of the ordinance in question. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 22, 10-26-76)  
Sec. 20-44. - Same—Punishment for violation; revocation of license or permit. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-6, and in addition, any permit or license issued hereunder may be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 70-28, § 26, 10-26-76)  
Secs. 20-45—20-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS AND DRAINS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Building and construction, Ch. 4; health and sanitation, Ch. 9. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 20-55. - Definitions. 
Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of specific terms in this article shall be as follows: 
Act: The Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
ASTM: The American Society for Testing and Materials. 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure during days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Commercial user (Class II): Shall include any property occupied by a nonresidential establishment not within the definition of an "Industrial User (Class III)" and which is connected to the wastewater facilities. 
Day: The 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. 
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Garbage: The solid animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic or commercial handling, storage, dispensing, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Groundwater: Water within the earth. 
Industrial user (Class III): Any nonresidential user identified in Division A, B, D, E, or I of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Class III, also shall include any user that discharges wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances as defined in section 307 and section 502 of the Clean Water Act, or any substance(s) causing interference in the wastewater facilities. Class III shall include any nonresidential user who: (1) is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, (2) has a nondomestic flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average work day, (3) contributes more than five (5) per cent of the average dry weather capacity of the wastewater facilities or, (4) is determined by the state regulatory agency or the manager to have the potential to adversely affect the wastewater facility. 
Interference: Inhibition or disruption of any sewer system, wastewater treatment process, sludge disposal system, or their operations, which substantially contributes to a violation of applicable discharge permits. 
Manager: The city manager of the City of Nassau Bay or an authorized designee. 
May is permissible; shall is mandatory. 
Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or any other body of surface or groundwater. 
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program, whether administered by the EPA or by the State of Texas. 
Owner: The person or persons who legally own, lease, or occupy private property with wastewater facilities that discharge, or will discharge, to the city's wastewater facilities. 
O&M: Operation and maintenance. 
Person: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership, corporation, municipality, or other similar organization, agency or group. 
pH: The logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter of solution, as determined by Standard Methods. 
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works. 
Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater before discharge from the city wastewater facilities. 
Properly shredded garbage: Garbage that has been shredded such that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in the wastewater sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
Residential user (Class 1): All premises used only for human residency and that are connected to the wastewater facilities. 
Sanitary wastewater: Wastewater discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions. 
Standard methods: The latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, Water Pollution Control Federation, and American Water Works Association. 
State: The State of Texas. 
Stormwater sewer: A sewer for conveying storm, surface, and other waters, that are not intended to be transported to a treatment facility. 
Surface water: Water that occurs when the rate of precipitation exceeds the rate at which water may percolate into the soil. 
Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or wastewater, as determined by 40 CFR 136. 
Toxics: Any of the pollutants designed by federal regulations pursuant to section 307(a)(1) of the Act. 
Wastewater: A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industries, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, or stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facility: The combination of wastewater sewers and treatment facilities. 
Wastewater sewer: The structures, processes, equipment, and arrangements necessary to collect and transport wastewaters to the treatment facility. 
Wastewater treatment facility: The structures, processes, equipment, and arrangements necessary to treat and discharge wastewaters. 
WEF: The Water Environment Federation (formerly WPCF). 
WPCF: The Water Pollution Control Federation (now WEF). 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. I, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-56. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the maximum possible beneficial public uses of the city's wastewater facilities through regulation of sewer construction, sewer use, and wastewater discharges, to provide for equitable distribution of the costs of the city's wastewater facilities, and to provide procedures for complying with the requirements contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-57. - Scope. 
(a)  The definitions of terms used in this article are found in section 20-55 above. The provisions of this article shall apply to the discharge of all wastewater to facilities of the city. This article provides for use of the city's wastewater facilities, regulation of sewer construction, control of the quantity and quality of wastewater discharged, wastewater pretreatment, equitable distribution of costs, sewer construction plans, issuance of wastewater discharge permits, minimum sewer construction standards and conditions, and penalties and other procedures in cases of violation of this article. 
(b)  This article shall apply to the City of Nassau Bay and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's wastewater sewers or wastewater treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 2, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-58. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the manager of the city's wastewater systems shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 3, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-59. - Notice of violation. 
Any person found in violation of this article or any requirement of a permit issued hereunder may be served with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for compliance. Any such notice given shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail. The notice shall be sent to the last address of the violator known to the manager. When the address is unknown, service may be made on the owner of record of the property involved. If satisfactory action is not taken in the time allotted by the notice, section 20-60 below shall be implemented. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 4, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-60. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who continues to violate the discharge provisions of this article beyond the time limit, provided in section 20-59 above, may be charged with commission of a misdemeanor and, after conviction thereof, shall be fined for each day the violation continues, or may be subject to disconnection from the city's wastewater facilities. 
(b)  Each day or portion thereof a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  The appropriate fine for any violation of this article shall be the fine(s) as specified in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 5, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-61. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this article shall be paid to the city. Such fees and charges shall be set forth herein or as established in the latest edition of the city's wastewater service charge ordinance. 
(b)  All fees, penalties, and charges collected under this article (and the wastewater service charge ordinance) shall be used for the sole purpose of constructing, operating or maintaining the wastewater facilities of the city, or the retirement of debt incurred for same required pursuant to federal law. 
(c)  All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this article are due and payable on the receipt of notice of charges. Unpaid charges shall become delinquent and shall be subject to penalty and interest charges as outlined for in the latest edition of the city's wastewater service charge ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 6, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-62. - Inspections. 
(a)  The manager, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter properties at any reasonable time for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, and sampling of the wastewater discharge to ensure that discharge to the city's wastewater facilities is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The manager, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall at reasonable times, be permitted to enter all private property through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any of the city's wastewater facilities within the easement. All entry and any subsequent work on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsections (a) and (b) above, the manager shall observe all safety rules established by the owner or occupant of the property and applicable to the premises. 
(d)  During the performance on private properties of inspections, wastewater sampling, or other similar operations referred to in subsections (a) and (b) above, the owner and occupant shall be: (1) held harmless for personal injury or death of the manager and the loss of or damage to city supplies or equipment; (2) indemnified against loss of or damage to property of the owner or occupant by the manager; and (3) indemnified against liability claims asserted against the owner or occupant for personal injury or death of the manager or for loss of, or damages to, the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions as required by division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 7, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-63. - Vandalism. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is part of the city's wastewater facilities. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 8, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-64. - Severability. 
A finding by any court or other jurisdiction that any part or provision of this article is invalid shall not affect the validity of any other part or provision of this article that can be implemented without the invalid parts or provisions. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 9, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-65. - Amendments to article. 
Public notice shall be given in accordance with applicable provisions of the City Charter, city ordinance, or state and federal law before adoption of any amendments of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. II, § 10, 7-10-95)  
Secs. 20-66—20-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE OF CITY'S WASTEWATER FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 20-76. - Waste disposal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. III, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-77. - Wastewater discharges. 
Wastewater discharges to the city's wastewater facilities are not authorized unless approved by the manager in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. III, § 2, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-78. - Wastewater disposal. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. III, § 3, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-79. - Connection to sewer required. 
The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes under the jurisdiction of this article, and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is or may be located a wastewater sewer connected to the treatment facility of the city, is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within twenty-one (21) days after date of official notice to do so, provided the proper wastewater sewer is within three hundred (300) feet (ninety-one (91) meters) of the property line. This section shall not apply to any person served by a privately constructed, owned, operated, or maintained wastewater sewer and wastewater treatment facility that discharges directly to a natural outlet in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. III, § 4, 7-10-95)  
Secs. 20-80—20-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 20-90—20-108. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 20-109. - Connection permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any wastewater sewer or storm sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the manager. 
(b)  There shall be three (3) classes of permits for connections to the city's wastewater facilities: Class I-residential, Class II-commercial, and Class III-industrial. In all cases, the owner shall make application for a permit to connect the city's wastewater facilities on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by wastewater information required to administer this article. A permit and inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a Class I, two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for a Class II, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a Class III connection permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Connections to a storm sewer shall be subject to a permit and inspection fee of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Such connections shall be subject to the provisions of this article and the approval of the manager. 
(d)  Connection permit fees are separate from, and in addition to, tap and/or other fees established in the city's wastewater service charge ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-110. - Connection costs. 
The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer installation and connection to the city's wastewater facilities shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that directly or indirectly may result from the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 2, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-111. - Separate connections required. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except when one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. In such cases, the building sewer serving the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The city assumes no obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any single building sewer that serves two (2) buildings. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 3, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-112. - Existing building sewers. 
Existing building sewers may be used for connection of new buildings only when they are found, after examination and test by the manager, to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 4, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-113. - Building sewer design. 
The size, slope, alignment, construction materials, trench excavation and backfill methods, pipe placement, jointing, and testing methods used in the construction and installation of a building sewer shall conform to the building and plumbing code and other applicable requirements of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 5, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-114. - Building sewer elevation. 
Whenever practical, the building sewer shall be brought to a building at an elevation below the basement or lowest floor. In buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the city's wastewater sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to a building sewer draining to the city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 6, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-115. - Surface runoff and groundwater drains. 
(a)  No person shall connect roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot, roadway, or other surface runoff or groundwater drains to any sewer that is connected to a wastewater treatment facility unless such connection is authorized in writing by the manager. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot, roadway, or other surface runoff or groundwater drains shall discharge to natural outlets or storm sewers. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 7, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-116. - Conformance to applicable codes. 
(a)  The connection of a building sewer into a wastewater sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable requirements of the city or to the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM or the WPCF. The connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in writing by the manager before installation. 
(b)  The connection of a surface runoff or groundwater drain to a storm sewer or natural outlet designed to transport surface runoff or groundwater drainage shall conform to the requirements of the applicable building code or other applicable requirements of the city. The connection of any such drain to a wastewater sewer under special permit as provided under section 20-115(a) shall conform to the requirements specified by the manager as a condition of approval of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 8, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-117. - Connection inspection. 
The applicant for a building sewer or other drainage connection permit shall notify the manager when such sewer or drainage connection is ready for inspection before its connection to the city's facilities. Such connection and testing, as deemed necessary by the manager, shall be made under the supervision of the manager. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 9, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-118. - Excavations guards and property restoration. 
Excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 10, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-119. - Protection of capacity for existing users. 
The manager shall not issue a permit for any class of connection of the city's wastewater sewers or wastewater treatment facilities unless there is sufficient capacity not legally committed to other users in the wastewater sewers and treatment facilities to convey and adequately treat the quantity of wastewater that the requested connection will add to the system. The manager may permit such a connection if there are legally binding commitments to provide the needed capacity. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. V, § 11, 7-10-95)  
Secs. 20-120—20-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS TO USE CITY'S WASTEWATER SEWERS 
 
Sec. 20-130. - Special uses of wastewater sewers. 
All uncontaminated discharges of stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or other waters not required to be treated in the treatment facility shall be made to storm sewers or natural outlets designed for such discharges, except as authorized under section 20-115(a). Any connection, drain, or arrangement that will permit such waters to enter any other wastewater sewer shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VI, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-131. - Restricted discharges. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any of the city's wastewater facilities any substances, materials, waters, or wastes in quantities or concentrations that will: 
(1)  Create a fire or explosion hazard including, but not limited to, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Cause corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater facilities, and in no case will discharges be allowed with a pH lower than 5.0. 
These requirements may be modified for facilities designed to accommodate greater ranges; 
a.  Having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 10.0 for more than five (5) per cent of the time in a 24-hour period. 
b.  Having a pH lower than 3.5 or greater than 12.0 for any period exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. 
(3)  Cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the operation of wastewater facilities due to accumulation of solid or viscous materials; 
(4)  Constitute a rate of discharge or substantial deviation from normal rates of discharge ("slug discharge") sufficient to cause interference in the operation and performance of the wastewater facilities; 
(5)  Contain heat in amounts that will accelerate the biodegradation of wastes, causing excessive amounts of hydrogen sulfide to form in the wastewater sewer, or inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment facilities, and in no case shall the discharge of heat cause the temperature in the city wastewater sewer to exceed 58°C (150°F) or the temperature of the influent to the treatment facilities to exceed 40°C (104°F) unless the facilities can accommodate such heat; 
(6)  Contain more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of nonbiodegradable oils of mineral or petroleum origin, 
(7)  Contain floatable oils, fat, or grease; 
(8)  Contain noxious, malodorous gas or substance in quantities that create a public nuisance or a hazard to life. 
(9)  Contain radioactive wastes in harmful quantities as defined by applicable state and federal guidelines; 
(10)  Contain any garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
(11)  Contain any odor or color-producing substances exceeding concentration limits that may be established by the manager to the city's NPDES permit. 
(b)  If on establishing discharge restrictions, discharge limits, pretreatment standards pursuant to this division the manager establishes concentration limits to be met by an industrial user, the manager in lieu of concentration limits may establish mass limits of comparable stringency for an individual industrial user at the request of such user. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VI, § 2, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-132. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any wastewater facilities, wastewaters containing substances in excess of the quantity prescribed by the applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard promulgated by EPA, except as otherwise provided in this section. Compliance with such applicable pretreatment standards shall be made within three (3) years of the date the standard is promulgated for existing systems; however, compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard for new sources shall be required upon connection to the POTW. 
(b)  Upon application by a Class III user, the manager shall revise any limitations on substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards to reflect removal of the substances by the wastewater treatment facility. The revised discharge limit for specified substances shall be derived in accordance with federal law. 
(c)  Upon application by a Class III user, the manager shall adjust any limitation on substances specified in the applicable pretreatment standards to consider factors relating to such users that are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA during the development of the pretreatment standard. Requests for and determinations of fundamentally different adjustments shall be in accordance with federal law. 
(d)  The manager shall notify any Class III user affected by the provisions of this section and establish an enforceable compliance schedule for each. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VI, § 3, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-133. - Special agreements. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any user of the wastewater facilities, whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any applicable payments or user charges. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VI, § 4, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-134. - Water and energy conservation. 
The conservation of water and energy shall be encouraged by the manager. In establishing discharge restrictions for industrial users, the manager shall consider already implemented or planned conservation steps revealed by the Class III user. At manager's request, each industrial user will provide pertinent information showing that the quantities of substances or pollutants have not been nor will be increased as a result of the conservation steps. After such a showing is deemed satisfactory, the manager shall adjust the discharge restrictions, which have been based on concentrations, to reflect the conservation steps. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VI, § 5, 7-10-95)  
Secs. 20-135—20-144. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CLASS III-INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 20-145. - Information requirements. 
(a)  All Class III dischargers shall file with the city all wastewater information deemed necessary by the manager for determination of compliance with this article, the city's NPDES permit conditions, and state and federal law. Such information shall be provided by completion of a questionnaire designed and supplied by the manager and by supplements thereto as necessary. Information requested in the questionnaire and designated by the discharger as confidential is subject to the conditions of confidentiality as set forth in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  A person who owns, operates, or occupies properties designated as a Class III discharger at more than one location shall submit separate information for each location as may be required by the manager. 
(c)  The manager shall take reasonable precautions to ensure the confidentiality of information provided by a Class III discharger pursuant to this article. In no event shall the manager delegate this responsibility or intentionally disclose any claimed confidential information to any person without prior written notice to the owner and without providing the owner the opportunity to protect such confidential information, including the right to seek judicial relief. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VII, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-146. - Provision for monitoring. 
(a)  When required by the manager, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying Class III wastewater discharges shall provide suitable access and necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurements of the wastewater. Such access shall be in a readily and safely accessible location and shall be provided in accordance with plans approved by the manager. The access shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense to be safe and accessible at reasonable times. 
(b)  The manager shall consider such factors as the volume and strength of discharge, rate of discharge, quantities of toxic materials in the discharge, wastewater treatment facility removal capabilities, and cost effectiveness in determining whether access and equipment for monitoring Class III wastewater discharges shall be required. 
(c)  When the manager determines access and equipment for monitoring or measuring Class III wastewater discharges are not practicable, reliable, or cost effective, the manager may specify alternative methods of determining the characteristics of the wastewater's discharge that will, in the manager's judgment, provide an equitable measurement. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VII, § 2, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-147. - Determination of wastewater characteristics. 
(a)  Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater to which reference is made in this article, shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136 methods approved by the manager and shall comply with state and federal law. Sampling locations, times, durations, and frequencies shall be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the manager. The discharger shall have the option to use, at his own expense, more complete approved sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies than specified by the manager. Any additional results beyond those required are also to be reported to the control authority. 
(b)  Measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater required by this article shall be performed by a qualified laboratory. When such analyses are required of a discharger, the discharger may, in lieu of using the city's laboratory, make arrangement with any qualified laboratory, including that of the discharger, to perform such analyses. 
(c)  Monitoring of wastewater characteristics necessary for determining compliance with applicable pretreatment standards shall be conducted on the basis of the schedule below, unless more frequent monitoring is required by authority other than this article, or if the manager determines that the characteristics of the specific discharge warrant more frequent monitoring. 
Average Actual Discharge (gpd) 	Monitoring Frequency 
Less than 100,000 	Semi-annually 
100,000—999,000 	Quarterly 
More than 999,999 	Monthly 
 
(d)  Monitoring of wastewater characteristics for any purpose other than determining compliance with pretreatment standards shall be conducted on a frequency deemed necessary by the manager. 
(e)  Upon demonstration by any person that the characteristics of the wastewater discharged by that person are consistent, the manager may reduce the monitoring frequency as may be required by authority other than this article. In no case shall the frequency of monitoring be less than semi-annual for determining compliance with pretreatment standards. 
(f)  In determining the discharge characteristics, factors such as continuous, batch, or seasonal operation, as well as the informational requirements of other provisions in this article, shall be considered by the manager. The manager may obtain wastewater samples as required to verify the consistency of discharge characteristics. 
(g)  Fees for any given measurement, test, or analysis of wastewater required by this article and performed by the city shall be the same for all classes of dischargers, regardless of the quantity or quality of the discharge, and shall reflect only direct cost. Costs of analyses performed by an independent laboratory at the option of the discharger shall be borne directly by the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VII, § 3, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-148. - Costs of damage. 
If the drainage or discharge from any establishment causes a deposit, obstruction, or damage to any of the city's wastewater facilities, the manager shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and supervision shall be borne by the person causing such deposit, obstruction, or damage. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VII, § 4, 7-10-95)  
Secs. 20-149—20-159. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PRETREATMENT 
 
Sec. 20-160. - Wastewaters with special characteristics. 
(a)  The manager should initially rely on the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards of section 20-132 to protect wastewater facilities or receiving waters; however, if any wastewater that contains substances or characteristics shown to have deleterious effect on the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or that constitutes a public nuisance or hazard is discharged or proposed for discharge to the wastewater sewers, the manager may: 
(1)  Require pretreatment to a condition acceptable for discharge to the wastewater sewers; 
(2)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharges; 
(3)  Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastewaters not covered by existing fees and charges; 
(4)  Require the development of compliance schedules to meet any applicable treatment requirements; 
(5)  Require the submission of reports necessary to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(6)  Carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring necessary to determine compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(7)  Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any user (such remedies may include injunctive relief, the civil penalties specified in division 1 of this article) or appropriate criminal penalties; or 
(8)  Reject the wastewater if scientific evidence indicates the discharge will create unreasonable hazards or have unreasonable deleterious effects on the wastewater facilities. 
(b)  When considering the above alternatives, the manager shall ensure that conditions of the city's NPDES permit are met. The manager also shall consider the cost effectiveness and the economic impact of the alternatives on the discharger. If the manager allows the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows, the installation of necessary facilities shall be subject to review. The manager shall review and recommend any appropriate changes to the program, within thirty (30) days of submittal. 
(c)  Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any wastewater, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VIII, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-161. - Compliance with pretreatment requirements. 
Persons requiring to pretreat wastewater in accordance with section 20-161 above shall provide a statement to be reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified person. Such statement shall indicate whether applicable pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, describe the additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment needed for the user to meet the pretreatment requirements. If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment requirements, the user shall submit a plan (including schedules) to the manager. The plan (including schedules) shall be consistent with applicable conditions of the city's NPDES permit or other local, state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VIII, § 2, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-162. - Monitoring requirements. 
Discharges of wastewater to the city's wastewater facilities from the facilities of any user shall be monitored in accordance with the provisions of sections 20-146 and 20-147 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VIII, § 3, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-163. - Effect of federal law. 
If the federal government promulgates a regulation for a given new or existing user in a specific industrial subcategory that establishes pretreatment standards or establishes that such a user is exempt from pretreatment standards, such federal regulations shall immediately supersede section 20-160(a) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VIII, § 4, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-164. - Revision of pretreatment standards. 
The manager shall promptly apply for and obtain authorization from the EPA to revise discharge limitations for those substances listed in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for which consistent removal occurs in the wastewater treatment facilities of the city. The manager shall not adopt or enforce discharge limitations more stringent than the requested limitations until the state or EPA acts on the application. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. VIII, § 5, 7-10-95)  
Secs. 20-165—20-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 20-175. - Wastewater service charge. 
Charges and fees for the use of the public wastewater facilities shall be based upon the actual use of such system or contractual obligations for use in excess of current actual use. Property value may be used to collect the amount due as permitted by federal law. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. IX, § 1, 7-10-95)  
Sec. 20-176. - Determination of system use. 
(a)  The use of the city's wastewater facilities shall be based on actual measurement and analysis of each user's wastewater discharge, in accordance with provisions of sections 20-146 and 20-147, to the extent such measurement and analysis are considered by the manager to be feasible and cost effective. 
(b)  Where measurement and analysis are not considered feasible, each user's use of the facilities shall be determined by the quantity of water used, whether purchased from a public water utility or obtained from a private source, or by an alternative means as provided by subsection (c) below. 
(c)  The manager when determining actual use of the city's wastewater facilities based on water use shall consider consumptive, evaporative, or other water use that results in a significant difference between a discharger's water use and wastewater discharge. When appropriate, such consumptive water use may be metered to aid in determining actual use of the wastewater facilities. The type of meters used to measure such water uses and their installation shall be approved by the manager. 
NOTE: If the discharger makes a claim that any information requested on this form is confidential, such information shall be submitted on a separate sheet of paper. 
(Ord. No. 95-452, Art. IX, § 2, 7-10-95)  
Chapter 21 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Towing vehicles away, § 19-30; following emergency vehicles prohibited, § 19-49. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 21-1—21-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WRECKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-234, adopted Oct. 9, 1978, did not specifically amend the Code. Codification herein as Art. II, §§ 21-21—21-36 was, therefore, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 21-21. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this article: 
Emergency vehicle: Any ambulance, fire vehicle or police car. 
Motor vehicle: Every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Owner: Any person who holds the legal title to a motor vehicle or who has the legal right of possession thereof, or the legal right to use said vehicle. 
Person: An individual person, firm, corporation or association. 
Street: Any street, alley, public place, square or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
Vehicle: Every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rail or tracks, and shall include trailers and semi-trailers. 
Wrecker: Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing disabled or wrecked vehicles. 
Wrecker business: The business of towing or removing improperly parked, disabled or wrecked vehicles on the public streets, regardless of whether the purpose of the towing is to remove, repair, wreck, store, trade or purchase such improperly parked, disabled or wrecked vehicles. 
Wrecker company: Any person engaged in the wrecker business. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-22. - Business permit application; fee. 
Every person desiring to engage in the wrecker business in the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, shall make application in writing, on a form provided for the purpose, to the City of Nassau Bay, for a permit to engage in the wrecker business, and for a permit for each wrecker proposed to be operated. Such application shall contain the applicant's name, address, telephone number, the numbers and types of wrecker equipment operated, the true owner of the applicant company, including the names in which title to said vehicles are held, and a statement that the applicant does or does not desire to appear on the wrecker rotation list. Every application when filed shall, as a part of the application, be sworn to by the applicant and accompanied by an inspection fee in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for each wrecker proposed to be operated, and the additional sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each wrecker requested to be placed on the wrecker rotation list, and this fee shall not be returned to applicant. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-23. - Permit issuance; minimum requirements; insurance. 
(a)  The City of Nassau Bay shall issue a permit to engage in the wrecker business to all applicants complying with the provisions of this article, and shall issue a permit to all wreckers of such applicants so complying. The chief of police, or a designated representative, will insure that all wreckers meet the requirements contained herein. Wrecker companies operating more than one wrecker will make all wreckers available for simultaneous inspection and approval prior to issuance of any permit. 
(b)  No permit authorizing the operation of a wrecker business, and no permit authorizing the operation of a wrecker on the streets of the City of Nassau Bay shall be issued: 
(1)  Unless all wreckers proposed to be used by the applicant complies with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Each wrecker shall be not less than three-quarters (¾) of a ton in size, and be equipped with booster brakes. 
b.  Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power operated winch, winch line, and boom, with a factory-rated lifting capacity (or a city-tested capacity) of not less than five thousand (5,000) pounds, single line capacity. 
c.  Each wrecker shall carry at all times, as standard equipment: Tow bar, safety chains, a fire extinguisher, wrecking bars, a broom, axe, shovel, a waste container, a trailer hitch, and a minimum of six (6) safety flares. 
d.  No person shall operate, and no permittee hereunder shall permit to be operated, a wrecker that fails to contain the equipment listed in subsection (b)(1) a. through c. above. 
(2)  Unless the applicant shall procure and keep in full force and effect a policy or policies of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas and in the standard form approved by the board of insurance commissioners of the State of Texas, and the coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a wrecker owned or used by such company and providing that the amount of recovery on each wrecker shall be in limits of not less than the following sums: 
a.  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death, in any accident—$100,000 per person, $300,000 per occurrence. 
b.  For injury to or destruction of property in any one accident—$50,000. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-24. - Driver's requirements. 
(a)  Every wrecker licensed to operate in the City of Nassau Bay, under the provisions of this article, will be operated by a driver possessing a current Texas Commercial Drivers License. The chief of police may, at his discretion, periodically check the driving record of drivers operating wreckers within the City of Nassau Bay and place on probation any driver with five (5), or more, convictions for moving traffic violations. The holder of the permit and such person(s) will be notified of their probationary status, in writing, describing the details and length of probation. 
(b)  Wrecker drivers responding to a request for service at an accident scene will be responsible for removing all debris from the situs of the accident. The street will be swept and all debris placed in the trash container on the wrecker. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-25. - Wrecker service towing charges. 
(a)  Each applicant shall, prior to being issued a permit to operate a wrecker service in the City of Nassau Bay, provide the chief of police, in writing, with a schedule of amounts to be charged for each of the following services: 
(1)  Storage charges per day or any fraction thereof. Note: "Day" is defined as twenty-four (24) hours after the vehicle has been removed from the scene. 
(2)  Routine towing service, e.g., removing a vehicle from a tow-away zone, removal of a wrecked vehicle which does not require special equipment, etc. 
(3)  Towing services which require special equipment, e.g. wheels, heavy duty equipment, etc. 
(4)  If a maximum mileage is involved, charges for each additional mile will be included. 
(b)  In all instances not listed above, the driver will advise the officer on the scene of the amount to be charged for the services provided or as soon as practicable thereafter, not later than two (2) hours. This information will be duly noted on the wrecker selection form. The chief of police, City of Nassau Bay, is responsible for insuring that wrecker service charges are fair and reasonable to both the wrecker companies and the customers they serve. Charges considered exorbitant and/or unreasonable will be verified by checking with at least three (3) other wrecker companies in the Pasadena-Bay area. The first violation of the provisions of this section will result in the wrecker company concerned being warned, in writing, that they are in violation and citing the maximum charges for the same service obtained from the other companies contacted. Continued violations will result in removal from the rotation list for periods ranging from thirty (30) days to indefinite. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-26. - Vehicle permits; exhibition; nontransferable; expiration date. 
In addition to a permit authorizing a person to engage in the wrecker business there shall also be issued a permit for each approved wrecker vehicle owner by the permittee. Each permit for a wrecker vehicle shall state that such wrecker has been inspected and approved under direction of the chief of police and shall be affixed securely to the inside of the windshield of the appropriate wrecker vehicle. No person shall operate a wrecker on the public streets of the City of Nassau Bay unless a permit to engage in the wrecker business has been issued to the owner of such wrecker. No permit shall be transferable and every permit shall expire at midnight on the thirty-first day of December of the calendar year in which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-27. - Vehicle permit required. 
No person shall operate a wrecker on the public streets of the City of Nassau Bay, unless an inspection permit for such vehicle wrecker has been issued for such vehicle by the City of Nassau Bay, and no person shall operate a wrecker on the public streets of the city unless the permit duly issued to such wrecker is posted on the windshield of such wrecker as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-28. - Call to scene of accident by police. 
No person shall drive a wrecker to or near the scene or situs of an accident or collision on the streets of the City of Nassau Bay, unless such person has been called to the scene by the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-29. - Solicitation prohibited. 
No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the City of Nassau Bay, the business of towing any vehicle which is improperly parked or wrecked or disabled on a public street, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, or purchasing said vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-30. - Interception of police messages prohibited. 
No person shall utilize any information emanating through the medium of the Nassau Bay police radio station for his own benefit or for the benefit of another person. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-31. - Wrecker selection form. 
The chief of police shall cause a wrecker selection form to be prepared which shall: 
(1)  Contain a statement by the owner of the disabled vehicle designating in a blank space therein the wrecker company (one authorized under this article to engage in the wrecker business) which he desires to remove the disabled vehicle, and the place to which he desires said vehicle removed; 
(2)  Contain a statement authorizing any police officer to call the designated wrecker company to remove the disabled vehicle; 
(3)  Contain a statement in the alternative that the owner has no preference as to a wrecker company and authorizes any police officer to call the wrecker company next in line on the wrecker rotation list maintained at the police headquarters, and a statement that he desires the vehicle to be removed to the place designated by him in blank space therein; and 
(4)  Provide for the signature of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-32. - Designation of desired wrecker; authorization; approval; failure to designate. 
(a)  When a police officer investigating an accident determines that any vehicle which has been involved in a collision or accident upon a public street is unable to proceed safely under its own power, or when the owner thereof is physically unable to drive such vehicle, such officer shall request the owner to designate on a wrecker selection form, the wrecker company the owner desires to remove the vehicle. Such designation by the owner shall be indicated on said form and, when completed, shall be signed by the owner. The police officer shall give a copy of the authorization thus made on the form to the owner and shall retain for record the original thereof. Upon leaving duty on the same day, the police officer shall place such original in a well-bound book in the police department provided for that purpose. When the owner has designated the wrecker company desired, the police officer shall communicate the fact immediately to police department headquarters; and, it shall be the duty of the officer receiving such information at headquarters to call the designated company to send a wrecker to the scene of the accident or collision. 
(b)  In the event the owner of a vehicle involved in an accident or collision is physically unable to designate the wrecker company desired, or fails to or refuses to designate one, the investigating officer shall communicate that fact immediately to police department headquarters. The police department shall keep a master list (wrecker rotation list), in numerical order of those wreckers for which permits have been issued hereunder and the owners of which: 
(1)  Have applied to be on such list; provided, however, the number of wrecker operators authorized to be put on such list shall be limited to one wrecker operator per one thousand (1,000) population of the city, as determined by the last preceding federal census, or by any other method of determining population approved by the city council. If a person engaged in the wrecker business in the city and licensed shall have more than one wrecker owned by it and licensed by it, such person shall nonetheless be entitled to only one position on such rotation list. 
(2)  Maintain twenty-four (24) hour wrecker service; and, on receiving the first communication after the effective date of this article, the police officer receiving such communication at police headquarters shall call the first wrecker company on the list to tow the improperly parked or disabled vehicle and remove the same from the public streets of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. On each succeeding communication of the inability or refusal of the owner to designate a wrecker, or in the event that the wrecker company called, can not or does not have a wrecker at the scene within fifteen (15) minutes of the call, the next company on the list shall be called, and proper notation of each such call shall be made on the master list. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-33. - Influence by officers prohibited. 
No police officer investigating or present at the scene or situs of any wrecker, accident, or collision on a public street shall, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise recommend to any person the name of any particular person engaged in the wrecker services or repair business; nor shall any such police officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a wrecker or repair service. Provided, that any police officer, in the exercise of his discretion as a police officer, may direct that any vehicle (whether towed by a wrecker selected by the owner of the vehicle or from the wrecker rotation list) shall be taken by the driver of the wrecker towing the vehicle directly to the city police station and there held by the City of Nassau Bay for any lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-34. - Exceptions to article. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit an unlicensed wrecker company, on specific request of any owner of a vehicle, from dispatching a wrecker not licensed under this article to tow away or remove a disabled vehicle when such disabled vehicle is not in a location or position obstructing traffic or endangering the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-35. - Cumulative nature of article. 
This article shall be cumulative of all laws of the State of Texas, and the United States governing the subject matter of this article. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Sec. 21-36. - Penalty. 
Any person, either by himself, or agent, who shall do any act or thing prohibited by the terms of this article, or in anywise violate the provisions thereof shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). It shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege or for proof to be made that the act was knowingly done; nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negate any exception contained in this article concerning any prohibited act, but any such exception made herein may be used as a defense by any person charged by such complaint. 
(Ord. No. 78-234, 10-9-78)  
Chapter 22 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Stream maintenance, § 9-121 et seq.; parking of boats, motor vehicles, trailers, etc., on residentially zoned property, § 12-6; parks and recreation generally, Ch. 13; operation of motor-powered boats on Lake Nassau without city manager's approval prohibited, § 13-10(7). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Marine regulatory and warning devices. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section: 
Marine regulatory device: A sign, buoy, marker, beacon, light or other visual device used to control, limit or regulate speed, entry, direction of travel, wakes, swells, diving, swimming, fishing, anchoring, mooring or other regulated activities on or in public waterways. 
Marine warning device: A bell, horn, whistle, sign, buoy, marker, beacon, light or other audible or visual device used to warn or caution any person or vessel involved in activities in or on public waterways of marine hazards including, but not limited to, submerged obstacles, pipelines, cables, suction or discharge pipes, flammable substances. 
(b)  Authorization placement, etc., required. No person shall erect, place, display, maintain, light or otherwise present a marine regulatory device or marine warning device on public property, a public waterway or on private property in such a manner that it would appear to apply to a public waterway, unless placement of such device has been authorized by a government agency having regulatory jurisdiction. 
(c)  Obstruction, damage, etc., prohibited. No person shall deface, alter, obstruct, move or damage any marine regulatory device or marine warning device authorized by a government agency having regulatory jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 94-434, 8-8-94)  
Secs. 22-2—22-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SAFETY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 22-21. - Title. 
This article may be cited as the "Water Safety Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 1(A), 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-22. - Policy. 
It is the policy of this city to promote recreational water safety for persons and property in and connected with the use of all recreational water facilities in the city, to promote safety in the operation and equipment of facilities, and to promote uniformity of laws relating to water safety. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 1(B), 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-23. - Definitions. 
The following terms, for the purposes of this article, are defined as follows: 
Boat: A vessel not more than sixty-five (65) feet in length, measured from end to end over the deck, excluding sheer, and manufactured or used primarily for noncommercial use. 
Boat livery: A business establishment engaged in renting or hiring out motorboats for profit. 
Dealer: A person customarily engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging motorboats or outboard motors at an established or permanent place of business in this city and at each place of business there is a sign conspicuously displayed showing the name of the dealership so that it may be located by the public and with sufficient space to maintain an office, service area and display of products. 
Excessive wake: Any wake or wash generated by a vessel operated at greater than headway speed that creates a substantial risk of personal injury or damage to property by causing one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Swamping of a floating dock, barge or another vessel; 
(2)  Washing water over a swimmer or other person in the water; 
(3)  Severe rocking or heaving of another vessel; 
(4)  Unavoidable collision of a floating dock, barge or vessel into another fixed or floating object; 
(5)  Wave crests eighteen (18) inches above ambient wave action that strike a buoy, bulkhead, breakwater, dock or pier. 
Manufacture: A person engaged in the business of manufacturing new and unused motorboats and outboard motors for the purpose of sale or trade. 
Motorboat: Any vessel propelled or designed to be propelled by machinery, whether or not the machinery is permanently or temporarily affixed or is the principal source of propulsion. 
New: Every motorboat or outboard motor after its manufacture and before its sale or other transfer to a person not a manufacturer or dealer. 
Operate: To navigate or otherwise use a motorboat or a vessel. 
Outboard motor: Any self-contained internal combustion propulsion system, excluding fuel supply, which is used to propel a vessel and which is detachable as a unit from the vessel. 
Owner: The person who rightfully claims lawful possession of a vessel by virtue of the legal title or an equitable interest. 
Personal watercraft: A motorboat up to ten (10) feet in length, which is designed to be operated by a person or persons sitting, standing or kneeling on the vessel rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel. 
Public bulkhead: Any bulkhead or component of a bulkhead owned and/or maintained by the city for the purpose of retaining land and does not include docks or other improvements intended for other purposes or uses. 
Reasonable time: Fifteen (15) days. 
Undocumented motorboat: A vessel that is not required to have, and does not have, a valid marine document issued by the Bureau of Customs of the United States government or its successor. 
Vessel: Any watercraft, other than a seaplane on water, used or capable of being used for transportation on water. 
Water of this city: Any public water within the territorial limits of this city. 
Headway speed: Slow, idle speed or speed only fast enough to maintain steerage on course. 
Slow, No Wake: Forward speed without creating a swell or wake. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 1(C), 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-24. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article apply to all public water in this city and to all watercraft navigated or moving on the public water. Privately owned water is not subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 1(D), 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-25. - Identification of vessels requiring numbering. 
(a)  Required numbering. Each undocumented vessel on the water of this state shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department unless specifically exempted. 
(b)  Texas certificate of number. When motorboat is in operation, the certificate of number (registration) or facsimile thereof must also be aboard and available for inspection by an enforcement officer. A certificate is valid until the expiration date shown thereon. When a certificate is renewed, the same number shall be reissued, if application is made to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department within the ninety-day period preceding the expiration date. All motorboats regardless of length or horsepower are required by law to be registered. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 2, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-26. - Required equipment. 
(a)  Operation of vessels without required equipment prohibited. No person may operate or give permission for the operation of a vessel that is not provided with the equipment required by this article. 
(b)  Classes of motorboats. Motorboats subject to the provisions of this article are divided into four (4) classes according to length as follows: 
Class A. Less than sixteen (16) feet in length. 
Class 1. Sixteen (16) feet or over and less than twenty-six (26) feet in length. 
Class 2. Twenty-six (26) feet or over and less than forty (40) feet in length. 
Class 3. Forty (40) feet in length or over. 
(c)  Lights. A vessel or motorboat when not at dock must have and exhibit at least one bright light, lantern or flashlights from sunset to sunrise in all weather. A vessel or motorboat when underway between sunset and sunrise in all weather must have and exhibit the lights prescribed by the commandant of the Coast Guard for boats of its class. No other lights that may be mistaken for those prescribed may be exhibited. 
(d)  Sound-producing devices. A motorboat must have an efficient whistle or other sound-producing device if one is required by the commandant of the Coast Guard. 
(e)  Life preserving devices: 
(1)  A motorboat must have at least one life preserver, life belt, ring buoy or other device of the sort prescribed by the regulations of the commandant of the Coast Guard for each person on board, so placed as to be readily accessible. 
(2)  A motorboat carrying passengers for hire must have a readily accessible life preserver of the sort prescribed by the regulations of the commandant of the Coast Guard for each person on board. 
(3)  The operator of a Class A or Class 1 motorboat, while underway, shall require every passenger under thirteen (13) years of age to wear a life preserver of the sort prescribed by the regulations of the commandant of the Coast Guard. A life belt or ring buoy does not satisfy this requirement. In addition, a Type IV personal flotation device must be aboard Class 1 motorboats immediately available for use as a throwable device. 
(f)  Fire extinguishers: 
(1)  A motorboat must have the number, size and type of fire extinguishers prescribed by the regulations of the commandant of the Coast Guard. 
(2)  The fire extinguishers must be capable of promptly and effectively extinguishing burning gasoline. They must be kept in condition for immediate and effective use at all times and must be placed so as to be readily accessible. 
(g)  Flame arrestors; backfire traps. A motorboat must have the carburetor or carburetors of every engine using gasoline as fuel, except outboard motors, equipped with an efficient flame arrestor, backfire trap, or other similar device prescribed by the regulations of the commandant of the Coast Guard. Certain engines that are labeled "Model DU Engine accepted for use without an external back fire flame arrestor" is exempted. 
(h)  Ventilators. Each motorboat and vessel, except an open boat, using as fuel any liquid of a volatile nature must have the equipment prescribed by the regulations of the commandant of the Coast Guard designed to ventilate properly and efficiently the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartments so as to remove any explosive or inflammable gasses. 
(i)  Exhaust water manifold; muffler. A motorboat operating on the water in this city must have and required to use an exhaust water manifold or a factory-type muffler installed on the engine. 
(j)  Rear view mirrors: 
(1)  A vessel used to tow a person or persons on water skis or an aquaplane or similar device on the water in this city must have a rearview mirror of a size no less than four (4) inches from bottom to top and across from one side to the other. The mirror must be mounted firmly so as to give the boat operator a full and complete view beyond the rear of the boat at all times. 
(2)  Subparagraph (1) above does not apply to vessels used in water ski tournaments, competitions or exhibitions, or to a vessel that, in addition to its operator, has on board a person thirteen (13) years of age or older observing the progress of the person being towed. 
(k)  Canoes, punts, rowboats, sailboats and rubber rafts; equipment exemptions. All canoes, punts, rowboats, sailboats and rubber rafts when paddled, poled, oared or windblown are exempt from all required safety equipment except the following: 
(1)  One Coast Guard-approved lifesaving device for each person aboard; and 
(2)  The lights prescribed for Class A vessels by the commandant of the Coast Guard. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 3, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-27. - Boating regulations. 
(a)  Rules of the road. The United States Coast Guard Inland Rules apply to all public water of this city to the extent they are applicable. 
(b)  Reckless or negligent operation. No person may operate any motorboat or vessel or manipulate any water skis, aquaplane or similar device in a willfully or wantonly reckless or negligent manner that endangers the life, limb or property of any person. 
(c)  Excessive speed: 
(1)  No person may operate any boat at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the conditions and hazards, actual and potential, then existing, including weather and density of traffic, or greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the boat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(2)  City water known as Cow Bayou extending to Lake Nassau Spillway is designated a "Slow, No Wake Zone." 
(3)  No person may operate a vessel within fifty (50) feet of any other vessel, person, stationary platform, bulkhead or other object, or shore, except at headway speed. Markers or aids to safe operation are excluded. 
(d)  Hazardous wake or wash. No person may operate a motorboat so as to create a hazardous wake or wash. 
(e)  Circular course around fisherman or swimmer. No person may operate a motorboat in a circular course around any other boat any occupant of which is engaged in fishing or around any person swimming. 
(f)  Interference with markers or ramps: 
(1)  No person may moor or attach a boat to a buoy, beacon, light marker, stake, flag, or other aid to safe operation placed upon the public water of this city. No person may move, remove, displace, tamper with, damage or destroy the markers or aids to safe operation. 
(2)  No person may moor or attach a vessel to a public boat launching ramp except in connection with the launching or retrieving of a boat from the water. 
(3)  No person may moor or attach a vessel or seaplane to a public bulkhead without express permission from the city. 
(4)  No person operating a vessel may board passengers from a public bulkhead nor discharge passengers to a public bulkhead. This paragraph does not apply to patrol or rescue craft, nor other vessels in any case of an emergency. 
(g)  Obstructing passage: 
(1)  No person may anchor a boat in the traveled portion of a river or channel so as to prevent, impede or interfere with the safe passage of any other boat through the same area. 
(2)  No person may anchor a vessel near a public boat ramp so as to prevent, impede or interfere with the use of the boat ramp. 
(h)  Operating boats in restricted area. No person may operate a boat within a water area that has been clearly marked by buoys or some other distinguishing device as a bathing, fishing, swimming or otherwise restricted area by the city. This subsection does not apply to a patrol or rescue craft or in any case of an emergency. 
(i)  Operating vessels in scuba diving or snorkeling areas: 
(1)  No person may operate a vessel within fifty (50) feet of a buoy or of another vessel displaying a "diver down" flag that marks an area in which a person is scuba diving or snorkeling. 
(2)  No person may operate a vessel at a speed greater than the minimum speed necessary to maintain steerageway and headway while the vessel is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a buoy or a vessel displaying a "diver down" flag that marks an area in which a person is scuba diving or snorkeling. 
(3)  To be entitled to the protections of this subsection, a scuba diver or snorkeler must prominently display a "diver down" flag from a buoy or vessel. 
(4)  This section does not apply: 
a.  To a person who is operating a patrol or rescue craft; or 
b.  In an emergency. 
(5)  Subparagraph (1) above does not apply: 
a.  To a person who is already operating a vessel in an area when another person displays a "diver down" flag within one hundred fifty (150) feet of that vessel; 
b.  To a person who is operating a vessel in a waterway that is less than three hundred (300) feet wide; or 
c.  To a person who has permission to enter the area from the person who placed the buoy or the person who is operating the vessel displaying the "diver down" flag. 
(6)  In this subsection, "diver down flag" means a square or rectangular red flag that has a diagonal white stripe and is at least twenty-four inches by twenty-four inches (24? × 24?) in size. 
(j)  Water skis, aquaplanes, etc.; time and manner of operation: 
(1)  No person may operate a vessel on any water of this city towing a person or persons on water skis, surfboards or similar devices and no person may engage in water skiing, surfboarding or similar activity at any time between the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. This subsection does not apply to motorboats or vessels used in water ski tournaments, competitions or exhibitions or trials therefor if adequate lighting is provided. 
(2)  All motorboats having in tow or otherwise assisting in towing a person on water skis, aquaplanes or similar contrivances shall be operated in a careful and prudent manner and at a reasonable distance from persons and property so as not to endanger the life or property of any person. 
(3)  A person being towed on water skis, aquaplanes or similar devices by a vessel is considered an occupant of the vessel. 
(k)  Personal watercraft: 
(1)  No person shall operate a personal watercraft in the following manner or under the following circumstances: 
a.  Unless each person riding on or towed behind the vessel is wearing a U.S. Coast Guard approved Type I, II, III, or V personal flotation device; 
b.  If the vessel is equipped by the manufacturer with a lanyard type engine cutoff switch, unless such lanyard is attached to the person, clothing or personal flotation device of the operator as appropriate for the vessel involved; 
c.  During the period between sunset and sunrise; 
d.  Within fifty (50) feet of any other vessel, person, stationary platform or other object or shore, except another personal watercraft, or except at headway speed; 
e.  If the operator is under thirteen (13) years of age, unless the operator: 
1.  Is accompanied by a person at least seventeen (17) years of age; or 
2.  The operator has successfully completed a boating safety course prescribed and approved by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department; 
f.  If the personal watercraft is a motorboat within any area prohibited for operation or a motorboat by state law or local rule or regulation; 
g.  While towing water skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard, a tube or any other similar device, unless the towing vessel is designed to carry on board a minimum of two (2) persons; 
h.  By jumping the wake of another vessel recklessly or unnecessarily close to that vessel; or 
i.  In a manner that requires the operator to swerve at the last possible moment to avoid collision. 
(2)  The provisions of this section do not apply to professional exhibitions or an officially sanctioned race, tournament or exhibition. 
(3)  Subsection (1)d. above does not prohibit the operation of personal watercraft on bodies of water less than one hundred (100) feet in width. 
(l)  Operation of motorboat. No person may operate a motorboat of over fifteen (15) horsepower on the public waters of this city unless the person is thirteen (13) years of age or older or: 
(1)  Is accompanied by a person sixteen (16) years of age or older; or 
(2)  Has successfully passed a boating safety course prescribed and approved by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. 
(m)  Creating an excessive wake. No person shall operate any vessel in the body of water known as Nassau Bay (area bounded by Upper Bay Road and the peninsula) in a manner that creates an excessive wake with reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 4, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-28. - Swimming and diving. 
(a)  Swimming prohibited near certain vessels. No swimmer or diver may come within two hundred (200) yards of a sightseeing or excursion motorboat except for maintenance purposes or unless within an enclosed area. 
(b)  Swimming prohibited from public bulkheads. No person may dive or otherwise enter the water from a public bulkhead. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 5, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement officers: 
(1)  All peace officers of this city are enforcement officers for the purposes of this article. 
(2)  The enforcement officers may enforce the provisions of this article by arresting and taking into custody any person who commits any act or offense prohibited by this article or who violates any provision of this article. 
(b)  Water safety vessels; lights. Only police water safety vessels may use rotating or flashing blue beacon lights. 
(c)  Required response to police water safety vessel. The operator of a vessel underway, on sighting a rotating or flashing blue beacon light, shall reduce power immediately and bring the vessel to a no-wake speed and subsequent stop until the intention of the water safety vessel is understood. 
(d)  Inspection of vessels: 
(1)  In order to enforce the provisions of this article, an enforcement officer may stop and board any vessel subject to this article and may inspect the boat to determine compliance with applicable provisions. 
(2)  An officer boarding a vessel shall first identify himself by presenting proper credentials. 
(3)  No person operating a boat on the water of this city may refuse to obey the directions of an enforcement officer when the officer is acting under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The safety of the vessel shall always be the paramount consideration of an arresting officer. 
(5)  If an enforcement officer determines that a vessel and its associated equipment is being used in violation of this article so as to create an especially hazardous condition, he may direct the operator to return to mooring, and the vessel may not be used until the condition creating the violation is corrected. 
(e)  Violation; notice to appear: 
(1)  An enforcement officer who arrests a person for a violation of this article may deliver to the alleged violator a written notice to appear within fifteen (15) days after the date of violation before the court having jurisdiction of the offense. 
(2)  The person arrested shall sign the notice to appear promising to make his appearance in accordance with the requirements set forth in the notice. After signing the notice the person may be released. Failure to appear before the court having jurisdiction constitutes a violation of this article. A warrant for the arrest of the person failing to appear may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 6, 10-10-94)  
Sec. 22-30. - Violation of sewage disposal regulations. 
A person who violates or fails to comply with the Texas Department of Water Resources and federal laws concerning the disposal of sewage, trash or oil from boats in city water commits a prohibited offense. A separate offense is committed each day a violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 94-437, § 7, 10-10-94)  
ARTICLE III. - RAFTING SAFETY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Rafting. 
This article may be cited as the "Rafting Safety Regulations". 
(Ord. No. 2007-628, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
Rafting means the anchoring, tying, fastening, linking, or joining of any combination of two (2) or more vessels together. 
Shoreline means any permanent area of dry or semi-dry ground above the normal water line. 
Vessel means every type of watercraft or structure used or capable of being used as a means of transportation or habitation on the water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-628, 7-23-07)  
Sec. 22-33. - Regulations for rafting. 
(a)  Rafting of two (2) to six (6) vessels shall not be conducted within one hundred (100) yards of any lot line of a private residence directly abutting the waterway area known as Nassau Bay, Clear Creek or Clear Lake within the boundaries of the City of Nassau Bay. In no case shall any rafted vessels be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from any other vessel or group of vessels that are tied or anchored together. Rafting of more than six (6) vessels shall be prohibited within the waterway boundaries of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(b)  Rafted vessels may not block or obstruct any waterway to the extent that it is made inaccessible to other boaters. 
(c)  Rafted vessels shall not block the egress or ingress to any private dock, inlet, or access way to private property, or a marina located in the City of Nassau Bay. 
(Ord. No. 2007-628, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 2007-631, 8-27-07)  
Sec. 22-34. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person or vessel operator, who violates any of these regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-628, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 2007-631, 8-27-07)  
Sec. 22-35. - Enforcement. 
Any police officers with territorial jurisdiction are authorized to enforce these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-628, 7-23-07; Ord. No. 2007-631, 8-27-07)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
  
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix A is derived from Ord. No. 80-255, enacted March 24, 1980, which ordinance is included herein as superseding Ord. No. 71-50, adopted June 14, 1971, as amended by Ord. No. 73-110, adopted June 11, 1973; Ord. No. 78-211, adopted April 10, 1978; Ord. No. 78-224, adopted Aug. 14, 1978; and Ord. No. 79-238, adopted Jan. 8, 1979. Absence of a history note following a particular section or subsection in App. A indicates that such section or subsection derived unchanged from Ord. No. 80-255; conversely, a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section or subsection indicates amendment by the ordinance or ordinances shown in such history note. 
Cross reference— Buildings and construction, Ch. 4; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 8.5; noise, Ch. 10; parking of vehicles on residentially zoned property, § 12-6; planning and development, Ch. 15; signs, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public ways, Ch. 17; subdivisions, App. B. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - ENACTMENT OF ORDINANCE 
 
1-100. - [Scope; conflict with building code.] 
This ordinance is the zoning ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas and is the result of a detailed study of the existing land and water use within the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. This zoning ordinance represents a comprehensive land and water use plan for the regulation of development and land use within the city. Construction according to land and water uses permitted herein must meet the standards as contained in the City of Nassau Bay Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94)  
ARTICLE 2. - PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE 
 
2-100. - [Statement of purpose.] 
The regulations and provisions of this Nassau Bay Zoning Ordinance shall be the minimum requirements adopted for protecting and promoting public health, safety, comfort, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare; for lessening congestion in the streets or roads or reducing the waste of excessive amounts of roads; for reducing flood hazard; for securing safety from fire and other dangers, providing adequate light and air, and preventing, on the other hand, excessive concentration of population; for promoting such classification of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate adequate provisions for public requirements, transportation, water flowage, water supply, drainage, sanitation, educational opportunities, recreation; for preserving floodways; for protecting property values, securing economy in governmental expenditures; protecting urban developments; all to be consistent with the comprehensive land use plan. Whenever the regulations and requirements of this ordinance are in variance with the requirements of any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws, the most restrictive shall apply.  
ARTICLE 3. - CONSTRUCTION LANGUAGE/DEFINITIONS 
 
3-100. - Rules for construction of zoning ordinance language. 
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this ordinance: 
(a)  The particular shall control the general. 
(b)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(c)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(d)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(e)  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(f)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(g)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(h)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(i)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character.  
3-200. - Definitions. 
The definition of terms used in the Nassau Bay Zoning Ordinance are recorded and can be found in Appendix A, "Definitions."  
ARTICLE 4. - DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS, ZONING MAP INTERPRETATION 
 
4-100. - Establishment of districts. 
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the use of land, water, buildings and structures; to regulate and restrict the height and density of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open space about buildings; to regulate the intensity of land use; to promote the additional growth of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, the area within the legally defined city boundaries is divided into thirteen (13) zoning districts: 
R-1 	Residential Single-Family Detached District (Section 13-100) 
R-2 	Residential Single-Family Detached District (Section 13-200) 
R-3 	Residential Single-Family Detached District (Section 13-500) 
RM-1 	Multiple-Family Residential District (Section 13-300) 
RM-2 	Multiple-Family Residential District (Section 13-400) 
C 	Commercial District (Section 15-100) 
U 	Urban District (Section 15-200) 
PO-1 	Public Ownership District (Section 15-300) 
L 	Lake District (Section 13-403) 
M-R 	Residential Marine District (Section IX-100) 
M-RM 	Multi-Family Residential Marine District (Section IX-200) 
M-C 	Commercial Marine District (Section IX-300) 
M-P 	Public Marine District (Section IX-400) 
 
(Ord. No. 83-300, 5-9-83; Ord. No. 86-341, § A(1), 9-8-86; Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 95-449, 6-12-95; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
4-200. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
The district boundary lines shown on the zoning map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
4-201. Boundaries indicated as approximately following streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow the center line of such public way. 
4-202. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
4-203. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
4-204. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, drainage ways or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
4-205. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in 4-200 through 4-204 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined from the graphic scale on the map. 
4-206. Wherever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, or whenever any street or alley area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the center line of such vacated street, alley or public way, and all area so involved shall then and hence forth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
4-207. Where physical features of the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning map, or when a question arises concerning how or whether a parcel of property is zoned, and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections 4-200, through 4-206, or the zoning of property is invalidated by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the property shall be considered as classified R-1, Residential Single-Family Detached District. 
4-208. All land territory hereafter annexed to the City of Nassau Bay shall be temporarily classified R-1, Residential Single-Family Detached District, until permanent zoning is established by the city council on the annexed land territory. All water territory hereafter annexed to the City of Nassau Bay shall be temporarily classified M-R, Residential Marine District, until permanent zoning is established by the city council on the annexed water territory. 
4-209. In an area determined to be temporarily classified as R-1, Residential Single-Family Detached District, no person shall construct any building or add to or alter any building or structure or cause the same to be done nor shall any use be located therein or on the land which is not permitted in an R-1, Residential Single-Family Detached District, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the R-1, Residential Single-Family Detached District, by the city council. 
4-210. In a water area determined to be temporarily classified as M-R, Residential Marine District, no person shall construct any building or structure or add to or alter any building or structure or cause the same to be done nor shall any use be located thereon which is not permitted in a M-R, Residential Marine District, by the city council. 
4-211. In the water districts, boundaries will nominally be established by: (1) extensions of the land property lines abutting the water districts into the water areas and (2) the boundaries of the annexed water areas of the City of Nassau Bay (city limits). Where extensions of property lines intersect prior to intersection with city limits, the city shall reserve the right to define the boundaries of these unusually shaped water districts. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94)  
4-300. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the zoning map of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, said map being hereby adopted as a part of this ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
4-301. Three (3) original, official and identical copies of the zoning map are hereby adopted bearing the signature of the mayor and attestation of the city secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
(a)  One copy shall be filed with the city secretary and retained as the original record and shall not be changed in any manner. 
(b)  One copy shall be filed with the building official and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in issuing building permits and certificates of occupancy and for enforcing subsequent amendments. 
(c)  One copy shall be maintained in the records of the planning commission for reference purposes and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments.  
4-400. - Map amendment. 
No changes or amendments to the official zoning map shall be made except in compliance and conformity with all procedures set forth in this ordinance. The official zoning map shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all official changes and amendments.  
4-500. - Map replacement. 
In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the planning commission may adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map.  
4-600. - [Effect of new zoning map on zoning ordinance.] 
The new official zoning map may correct drafting and clerical errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or subsequent amendment thereto without a duly noticed public hearing. 
4-601. Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining to its adoption and amendment.  
ARTICLE 5. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, amended Art. 5 to read as herein set out. Former Art. 5, §§ 5-100—5-500, pertained to interpretation and administration of the ordinance, and derived from Ord. No. 80-255, adopted Mar. 24, 1980; Ord. No. 86-341, § A(2), adopted Sept. 8, 1986; and Ord. No. 2009-654, adopted Nov. 9, 2009. 
 
5-100. - [Generally.] 
The interpretation and application of the regulations and provisions of this ordinance by the city shall be reasonable and uniformly applied to all property within the jurisdiction of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-200. - Applications. 
(A)  Types of applications. The application procedures and requirements in this article, and in the supplemental Appendix B, Application Submittal, shall apply to the following: 
(1)  District boundary changes (rezoning, including planned unit developments, or PUDs). 
(2)  Zoning regulation changes (ordinance amendment). 
(3)  Specific use permits. 
(4)  Zoning variance requests. 
(5)  Site plans. 
(6)  Administrative appeals. 
(7)  Administrative interpretations. 
(B)  Pre-application conference. The purpose of a pre-application conference with city staff is to familiarize the applicant with the development review and approval process and applicable provisions of this and other city ordinances that are required to permit the proposed development. 
(1)  When required. A pre-application conference is required for all applications for development approvals that require public hearings, unless waived by the administrative official as provided in subsection (2), below. A pre-application conference is optional for all other application types. Pre-application conferences do not apply to administrative appeals. 
(a)  Planned unit developments. Prior to filing an application for PUD approval, the prospective applicant shall participate in a pre-application conference with the administrative official and other city staff. At the conference, the general outline of the PUD proposal, evidenced schematically by sketch plans, shall be presented by the applicant. The applicant may also request pre-application reviews or workshops with the planning commission to allow for informal discussion of the potential parameters contained within the proposed PUD, prior to the formal application. 
(2)  Authority of administrative official. 
(a)  The administrative official may establish a regular schedule for conducting pre-application conferences. 
(b)  The administrative official may provide for conducting pre-application conferences in person, by telephone or by internet-based conferencing. 
(c)  The administrative official may waive a pre-application conference if the official and the applicant agree that such conference is unnecessary to serve the purposes set out in subsection (A), above. 
(d)  The administrative official may recommend that an applicant attend a planning commission meeting for additional pre-application discussions. An applicant also may request such a discussion opportunity with the commission. 
(C)  Application forms and fees. Every application for an approval required by this ordinance shall be submitted on a form furnished by the administrative official and shall include the corresponding application fee that is established by the city council from time to time. Application forms and associated submission requirements shall include the specific information that is necessary to process each type of application as itemized in Appendix B, Application Submittal. The specific information requirements shall be established and periodically revised by the administrative official to facilitate evaluation of applications for compliance with the standards of this and other city ordinances. No application or fee shall be required when an amendment to the official zoning map or the text of this ordinance is initiated by a city decision-making body or the administrative official. 
(1)  Applicant. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, applications for review and approval may be initiated by the owner of the property that is the subject of the application or the owner's authorized agent. When an authorized agent files an application under this ordinance on behalf of a property owner, the agent shall provide written documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. This requirement shall be satisfied upon the submittal of an application bearing the owner's name and signature, as verified by a notary public. 
(2)  Multiple and non-contiguous properties. All properties within a single application must be contiguous and immediately adjacent to one another or be the subject of separate applications and filing fees. 
(3)  Representation of facts. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully misrepresent or fail to include any information required by this ordinance on any application. If development is approved based on an application that contained misrepresentations or failed to contain material facts required by the application, then the city shall place a stay or stop work order on the development or use. The stay or stop work order shall remain in place until such time that the approval body receives the required information and is satisfied as to the appropriateness of the approval granted. 
(4)  Waiver of submittal requirements. The administrative official may waive certain submittal requirements in order to tailor the application to focus on the information necessary to review a particular case. The official may waive such requirement where he finds that the project size, complexity, anticipated impacts or other factors associated with the proposed development clearly, in the official's sole judgment, support such waiver. 
(5)  Additional requirements. The administrative official or any director of the city, a service or utility provider, or county which has authority to review and/or approve may also add requirements to the submittal when it is reasonably foreseeable that additional information will be needed to resolve questions of compliance with the requirements of this ordinance or other policies or plans of the city, any service or utility provider, or county that is associated with or may be affected by the project. 
(D)  Application completeness review. All permit and approval applications shall be reviewed for completeness by the administrative official. No application shall be deemed complete unless all of the information specified in Appendix B, Application Submittal, is included. 
(1)  Incomplete applications. 
(a)  Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant, along with a written explanation that describes in general terms the materials that must be submitted in order to complete the application. 
(b)  An application that does not include the applicable processing fee shall not be considered complete. 
(c)  Incomplete applications are not considered filed. 
(2)  Complete applications. Complete applications shall be processed according to the applicable procedures of this ordinance. 
(3)  Waiver of application requirements. The administrative official may waive application requirements, except application fees, if it is obvious that they do not relate to the processing of the specific application for which the waiver is requested. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-300. - Staff review and referral. 
(A)  Upon determination that an application is complete, the administrative official shall cause the application to be reviewed for technical compliance with all applicable requirements of this and other applicable city ordinances. 
(B)  Recommended revisions. 
(1)  The administrative official shall provide comments from city staff to the applicant, who shall revise and resubmit materials with appropriate changes within the time required by section 5-400, Termination of stale applications. 
(2)  The resubmittal shall not require an application fee unless both of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The revisions are inappropriate or incomplete; and 
(b)  Repeated failure to address comments requires more than three (3) rounds of revisions. 
(C)  Administrative recommendations. Promptly after the administrative official deems an application complete and responsive to city staff comments (and, where applicable, comments from referral agencies): 
(1)  If the application is for a public meeting or public hearing approval, the administrative official shall make a recommendation regarding the application and forward the recommendation to the next development review body that will consider it for further recommendation or approval. 
(D)  Meeting logistics. 
(1)  If the application requires only a public meeting (not hearing) prior to approval, the administrative official shall set the application on the next available agenda of the development review body that will decide the application, consistent with the legal requirements for public notice, if any. 
(2)  If the application requires a public hearing prior to approval, the administrative official shall set the application on the next available agenda of the next development review body that will consider the application, consistent with the legal requirements for public notice. 
(3)  The administrative official shall notify applicants regarding the time, place and format of public meetings and hearings. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-400. - Termination of stale applications. 
(A)  Applications for development approval must be diligently pursued by the applicant. Accordingly, this section extinguishes applications that become stale due to inaction by the applicant, whether this inaction is during an administrative review process conducted by city staff, or after staff has forwarded an application and it is under consideration by a city decision-making body. 
(B)  Expiration of stale applications. 
(1)  When an action by the applicant is required for further processing of an application (for example, submittal of supplementary documentation or payment of outstanding fees), the application shall become void six (6) months after the date that the action is requested if: 
(a)  The applicant fails to take action; or 
(b)  The applicant fails to request an extension of time pursuant to subsection (C), below. 
(2)  No refunds of application fees will be issued to applicants whose applications expire pursuant to this subsection. 
(C)  Extension of time. The time for expiration of an application may be extended by up to six (6) additional months upon written request of the applicant before the end of the period set out in subsection (B), above. 
(D)  Effect of expiration. Applications that expire pursuant to this section shall automatically become null and void, closed and discarded without further notice or activity by the city. Any application proposal for a lot, parcel or tract, regardless of the commonality with an expired application, will be treated as a new application, subject to requirements in effect at the time of the most recent submittal, and with new fees. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-500. - Additional recommendations. 
(A)  The city council, planning commission and zoning board of adjustment may, at their discretion, seek additional recommendations from any city department, city board/commission, ad hoc committee, task force, subcommittee, other public agency at any level of government, community group or organization, or others as felt necessary to make any decision or to gain insight or information related to any case or decision pending before them if within their purview to seek such evidence. 
(B)  Documentation. The additional information and/or recommendations shall be made a part of the record of the case. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-600. - Public notice. 
(A)  Public notice. Public notice, if required, shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section. The content of notices shall be according to the policies adopted by the City of Nassau Bay and/or as required by law. 
(B)  Mailed notice. If a mailed notice is required, the administrative official shall deposit such notice of the time, place and purpose of the meeting into first class mail not less than eleven (11) days prior to the date of the hearing. Written notice shall be mailed to all persons listed on the records of the Harris County Appraisal District as owners of land subject to the application or, at minimum, owners of the parcels within two hundred (200) feet of the outer boundary of the land subject to the application, at the mailing addresses of such persons in the records of the appraisal district. 
(C)  Published notice. If a published notice is required, the administrative official shall cause a notice of the time, place and purpose of the meeting to be published in the official city newspaper at least eleven (11) days prior to the scheduled meeting of the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment, and at least sixteen (16) days prior to the scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(D)  Content of notice. All notices shall include the following contents: 
(1)  The street address of the property (if a street address is assigned); 
(2)  The name of the applicant; 
(3)  The type of approval sought (e.g., rezoning); 
(4)  A brief description of the application; 
(5)  The case number (provided by the administrative official); 
(6)  The date, time and location of the meeting at which the application will be considered for approval; 
(7)  The phone number of the administrative official; and 
(8)  For mailed and published notices, the legal description of the property. 
(E)  Computation of time. In computing the time periods for providing notice pursuant to this section, the day of mailing, publication and/or posting shall not be counted, but the day of the hearing shall be counted. 
(F)  Constructive notice. Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice shall be limited to errors in a legal description or location map that are not substantial with respect to the general location of the property, typographical or grammatical errors, or errors of actual acreage that do not impede communication of the notice to affected parties. Failure of a party to receive written notice shall not invalidate subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date and place of a hearing shall be strictly construed. If questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the decision-making body shall direct the administrative official to make a formal finding as to whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this ordinance, and such finding shall be made available to the decision-making body at the same meeting or prior to final action on the application. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-700. - Public meetings and public hearings. 
(A)  All meetings of the city council and appointed boards and commissions shall be open to the public except as otherwise provided in the "Open Meetings Act" (Texas Local Government Code Chapter 551). However, not all decisions require public hearings. Therefore, recommendations and decisions that are authorized by this ordinance are classified as requiring a "public meeting" or "public hearing." 
(1)  Matters requiring a public hearing before the planning commission and city council. The planning commission and city council shall conduct public hearings on: 
(a)  District boundary changes (rezoning, including planned unit developments). 
(b)  Nonconforming uses. 
(c)  Changes to the text of this ordinance. 
(d)  Modification of commission requirements. 
(e)  Specific use permits. 
(f)  Site plans. 
(2)  Matters requiring a public hearing before the zoning board of adjustment. The zoning board of adjustment shall conduct public hearings on: 
(a)  Zoning variances. 
(b)  Administrative appeals. 
(B)  Joint meetings. Any public hearing required by this ordinance or the laws of the State of Texas may be held jointly with any public hearing required to be held by the city council or any other city board or commission, except the zoning board of adjustment. Such joint meetings may be held after published notice as required by law. 
(C)  Public hearings. 
(1)  Procedures. All decision-making bodies shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of public hearings. The following general procedures shall be reflected in the adopted rules of procedure: 
(a)  Any person may appear at a public hearing, submit evidence and be heard. 
(b)  If a speaker represents an organization, the body conducting the hearing may request written evidence of that person's authority to speak on behalf of the group in regard to the matter under consideration. 
(c)  Persons appearing at a public hearing shall identify themselves and state their address and similar information about any organization they represent. 
(d)  Citizens, applicants and the city have the right to present expert witnesses. 
(e)  The chairperson may impose a reasonable time limit on speakers and may limit testimony that is deemed irrelevant or redundant. 
(2)  Representation. Persons appearing before a decision-making body may appear in person or through a representative or agent. The representative or agent shall provide satisfactory proof of his or her authority upon the request of the city or the particular decision-making body. 
(3)  Decisions. 
(a)  Except where this ordinance, the City Code of Ordinances or Texas statutes provide otherwise, official action requires the favorable vote of a majority of a quorum present. 
(b)  A favorable vote by the zoning board of adjustment shall be governed by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 211.009 and/or Chapter 241, as applicable. 
(c)  All decisions of the decision-making bodies shall be by motion. 
(d)  Except when voice votes are authorized, a vote shall be conducted in such a manner that the public may know the vote of each person entitled to vote (e.g., by visible raising of hands). 
(e)  At its discretion, a decision-making body or any of its members may inspect the premises, site or area under consideration prior to public hearing and/or final decision. 
(D)  Conditions of approval. Some procedures set forth in this ordinance authorize the decision-making body to impose such conditions upon the premises benefited by the approval as may be necessary to reduce, minimize or eliminate potential adverse impact upon other property in the area, or to carry out the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan and this ordinance. In such cases, any conditions attached to approvals shall be directly related to the impacts of the proposed use or development and shall carry out the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan and this ordinance. No conditions of approval, except for those attached to variance or minor modification approvals, shall be less restrictive than the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-800. - Continuances and withdrawals. 
(A)  Consideration of applications may be continued, or applications withdrawn, as provided in this section. 
(B)  Continuances. 
(1)  Request or motion to continue. Consideration of an application may be continued upon motion of the decision-making body or upon request of the applicant before a decision is made on the application. 
(2)  Period of continuation. Should any item before a decision-making body be tabled in anticipation of information or events to occur prior to rendering a decision, such tabling shall be for no longer than the second meeting following the meeting at which the item was tabled. 
(3)  Decision required. If at the conclusion of the continuation period the item under consideration remains in the same and/or unchanged state or condition as existed when the item was initially tabled, the item shall be removed from the table, and shall either be approved based on the available information or shall be disapproved. 
(C)  Withdrawals. An application may be withdrawn without prejudice by the applicant as a matter of right provided the request for withdrawal is in writing and filed with the city within the two-week period after official acceptance of the application; otherwise, all such requests for withdrawals shall be with prejudice save and except that the planning commission may allow withdrawal without prejudice at the time the application is being considered; provided further, no application may be withdrawn after final action has been taken. When an application is permitted to be withdrawn without prejudice, the provisions of this ordinance regarding successive applications shall not apply. The applicant shall not be entitled to the return of any application fees. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-900. - Reconsideration or rehearing of decisions. 
(A)  Decisions of any appointed board of commission may be brought up for reconsideration or rehearing according to this section. Reconsideration or rehearing is not a substitute for an appeal and is intended to be applied only in rare instances. 
(B)  Limitations. A request for reconsideration or rehearing will be granted only if the board or commission finds, by majority vote of a quorum present, that: 
(1)  There was substantial procedural error in the original proceeding; 
(2)  The board or commission acted without jurisdiction in the original proceeding, and such jurisdictional defect has been since remedied; or 
(3)  The original decision was based upon misunderstanding, fraud or misrepresentation. 
(C)  City initiation. If the reason for reconsideration or rehearing is based on subsection (B)(3), above, then only the city is authorized to present a case for rehearing or reconsideration. If there was or is suspected by the city to be intentional fraud or misrepresentation, the city may pursue any remedy at law through criminal or civil proceedings for compensatory and punitive damages allowed by law. 
(D)  Private initiation. Any person seeking reconsideration or a rehearing by the planning commission or zoning board of adjustment, under conditions of subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2), above, must file a request with the administrative official, together with materials supporting one or more of the grounds stated in subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2), above, within fifteen (15) days of the original decision. 
(E)  Conduct of rehearing. A rehearing shall be conducted in the same manner as required for the original proceedings before the board or commission, and shall be subject to all requirements under this article as applicable. If the initial hearing required a public hearing, any rehearing of a case or requested action shall also require a public hearing. 
(F)  Timing of rehearing. 
(1)  Same meeting. At the same meeting, the decision-making body may reconsider its decision based on reasons under subsection (B), above. 
(2)  Different meeting. An exception to subsection (F)(1), above, may be authorized by the administrative official, who shall consider changed conditions not previously known or addressed. 
(3)  Delayed consideration. Any reconsideration of a decision for a reason not listed under subsection (B), above, shall only occur after a period of six (6) months from the date of the original decision. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1000. - Effect of approval. 
(A)  Approval of an application shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use, plan or other specific activity for which the approval was granted. Approvals shall run with the particular land for which approval is given. Text amendments to this ordinance are not related to particular parcels. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1100. - Successive applications. 
(A)  It is the policy of the City of Nassau Bay not to hear successive applications for a substantially similar application after an application is denied. The limitations of this section prevent the consideration of successive applications. 
(B)  Time required between substantially similar applications. The city shall not accept any application that is substantially similar to an application that was denied within the periods set out below: 
(1)  Rezonings and specific use permits. One year shall elapse between the date an application is denied and the date a substantially similar application is filed. If a substantially similar application is denied twice, two (2) years shall elapse from the last date of denial before a new substantially similar application is accepted for processing. 
(2)  Nonconforming use change. Six (6) months shall elapse between the date that an applicant withdraws a request for a nonconforming use change and the date a substantially similar application is filed. However, if said application is withdrawn without prejudice, then there shall be no prohibition on the filing of a subsequent application. 
(3)  Variances, special exceptions and appeals heard by the zoning board of adjustment. One year shall elapse between the date an application is denied and the date a substantially similar application is filed. 
(4)  Appeals heard by the city council. One year shall elapse between the date an application is denied and the date a substantially similar application is filed. 
(C)  Appeals and waiver of restrictions. The determination by the administrative official that an application is substantially similar to a denied application is subject to administrative appeal to the zoning board of adjustment. In the alternative to an appeal, the applicant may seek a waiver of the successive application rules from the city council, which may grant the waiver for good cause shown. Such good cause shall include, but not be limited to, such factors as: 
(1)  An approved amendment to the comprehensive plan or this ordinance would potentially allow for the application to be processed to approval; 
(2)  Changed conditions justify the waiver (e.g., the proposed use requires spacing from another use, and the other use moves away; or, infrastructure was not sufficient to support the proposed development, but has since been improved); or 
(3)  The city council finds that there was an error in the processing of the application that could not have been remedied by administrative appeal (successive applications shall not be used as a substitute for an appeal if an appeal could be used to resolve an allegation of error). 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1200. - Termination of approvals. 
(A)  Development approvals may be terminated as set out in this section. 
(B)  Inconsistent subsequent approvals. If a parcel proposed for development is subject to an approval that has not lapsed, then the approval of an inconsistent application (except approval of a request to modify the application) shall automatically terminate prior inconsistent approvals and prior subordinate approvals if construction has not commenced. For example, if property is rezoned from one classification to another, and a site plan is approved under the prior zoning classification, then a subsequent rezoning to the new classification would terminate the earlier district designation (a prior inconsistent approval) and the site plan approved under it (a prior subordinate approval to the inconsistent approval). However, if the prior site plan was built out, then it would remain as a nonconforming use under the new zoning designation until it was redeveloped according to the new site plan. 
(C)  Inconsistent subsequent development. Variances shall terminate automatically if: 
(1)  Development that is approved by variance is modified in a manner that makes the variance unnecessary (i.e., the modified development complies with this ordinance); or 
(2)  Development that is approved by variance is demolished, and an application to rebuild according to the previously approved plans is not filed within six (6) months of the date of demolition. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1300. - Discretionary reviews. 
(A)  Variances from zoning standards. The zoning board of adjustment shall approve or deny variances from the zoning related development standards (such as height, bulk or area) of this ordinance, but not from any subdivision related standards (which are considered by the planning commission as provided in Appendix B, Subdivisions, in the City Code of Ordinances). 
(1)  Approval standards. The board of adjustment may grant a variance under this section only if the variance is not prohibited elsewhere in this ordinance of the City Code of Ordinances, and if the board makes a determination in writing that all of the following are demonstrated: 
(a)  The request for the variance is rooted in special conditions of the applicant's property that do not generally exist on other properties in the same zoning district. 
1.  Other nonconforming uses and structures in the same district shall not be the sole grounds for granting a variance. 
(b)  Due to said special conditions, the literal enforcement of the strict terms of this ordinance would impose an unnecessary and exceptional hardship on the applicant. 
(c)  The variance is not contrary to the public interest in that it does not allow applicants to impair the application of these regulations for: 
1.  Self-imposed hardships, which involve actions of the applicant that resulted in the conditions or circumstances which necessitated the request for a variance; 
2.  Hardships based solely on financial considerations, convenience or inconvenience; or 
3.  Conditions that are alleged to be "special," but that are actually common to many properties within the same zoning district. 
(d)  The variance will not have a detrimental impact upon: 
1.  The current or future use of adjacent properties for purposes for which they are zoned; 
2.  Public infrastructure or services; and 
3.  Public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
(e)  The degree of variance allowed from this ordinance is the least that is necessary to grant relief from the identified unnecessary hardship and allow reasonable use of the land or structure. 
(f)  The variance shall not be used to circumvent other procedures and standards of this ordinance that could be used for the same or comparable effect (e.g., if alternative development patterns, alternative development standards, or other flexible measures in these regulations are available that would avoid or mitigate hardship without using a variance, then they must be used). 
(g)  By granting the variance, the intent of this ordinance as outlined in section 2-100, as well as the spirit of this ordinance, is observed and substantial justice is done. 
(2)  Federal compliance. The board of adjustment shall abide by the Federal Insurance Administration's Rules and Regulations for compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(B)  Specific uses. In addition to those uses of land and buildings provided for in other portions of this ordinance, such other uses are permitted as are compatible with the purposes of this ordinance when approved individually and specifically by the city council. Exercise of these specific uses may commence only following issuance by the city council of a specific use permit expressing approval thereof, and continue only in compliance with such conditions and/or restrictions as are imposed by city council. 
(1)  Standards for all specific uses. All uses classified as specific uses by this ordinance shall comply with all of the following standards: 
(a)  The specific use will be consistent with any applicable goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and any adopted neighborhood or special area plans. 
(b)  The specific use will not materially detract from the character of the immediate area or negatively affect the anticipated development or redevelopment trend. 
(c)  The specific use is conducted in a manner that is not materially more disruptive to adjacent properties than uses permitted as-of-right in the district, unless the specific use is temporary and its limited duration will help to minimize the impact. Conditions of approval may be attached to the specific use to ensure that this requirement is satisfied. 
(2)  Lapse of specific use approval. Failure to exercise the right granted under a specific use permit for six (6) months shall constitute prima facie evidence of abandonment of this right. The applicant may submit evidence to the planning commission that the disuse was involuntary. 
(a)  Planning commission review. Any specific use permit which is not exercised for six (6) months and not transferred directly to a like user shall be subject to review by the planning commission at a public hearing after notice has been given to the holder of the specific use permit and all owners of real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property which is the subject of the specific use permit. If the planning commission determines that the abandonment was voluntary, it may recommend that the city council revoke the specific use permit. 
(b)  Transfer of specific use permit to a like user. Transfer of a specific use permit shall be subject to review at a public hearing by the planning commission after notice to the transferee and notice to the owners of real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be reclassified. In the event of transfer of a specific use permit to a like user, the six-month timeframe for determining a lapse of permit approval shall begin to run against the transfer at the time of transfer of any interest in the specific use permit or the property subject to the specific use permit. 
(3)  Revocation of permit. If the planning commission determines that the conditions of the specific use permit are not met, they may recommend to the city council that the permit be revoked. The city council shall hold a public hearing on such recommendations after at least fifteen (15) days' notice in the official city newspaper of the time and place of the hearing and may revoke the specific use permit. 
(a)  Notice to permittee. The administrative official shall give written notice to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the permit application. The notice shall include: 
1.  The specific grounds upon which the permit in question may be revoked; 
2.  The fact that there will be a hearing in which the city will seek the revocation of the permit; 
3.  The date, time and place of the hearing; 
4.  The fact that the permittee may appear in person and/or be represented by an attorney; and 
5.  Any notice required by other city ordinance. 
(b)  Hearing rules. The following specific rules shall apply during the hearing before city council: 
1.  All parties shall have the right to representation by a licensed attorney, though an attorney is not required. 
2.  Each party may present witnesses in its own behalf. 
3.  Each party has the right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
4.  Only evidence presented at the hearing may be considered in making the final decision. 
(c)  Failure to appear. If the permittee fails to appear at the hearing on the date and time specified, the city shall introduce evidence to establish a prima facie case on behalf of the city showing that grounds exist for revocation of the permit. 
(d)  Written findings and decision; notice to permittee. After completion of the presentation of evidence by all parties appearing, the city council shall make written findings and render a final decision as to whether grounds exist for the revocation of the permit. If grounds exist, the city council shall revoke the permit; provided that the city council may, in the interest of justice, take such other lesser actions as deemed appropriate including, but not limited to, the temporary suspension of the permit, the revision of the permit, or the addition of permit conditions. A true and accurate copy of the order shall be personally delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permittee. 
(e)  Permit fees forfeited. In the event a permit is revoked, suspended or revised, the city shall not be liable to any person for any refund of any part of any permit fees. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1400. - Site plans. 
(A)  Applicability. All non-residential and multi-family residential development in Nassau Bay shall be subject to a site plan review and approval as a precondition for new construction, subsequent construction, exterior remodeling, expansion and demolition of structures (including in marine zones). Plans for all such activity shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission (or a recommendation made to city council for its final decision) prior to commencement of any building or construction on-site activity. The city council shall retain final approval power as is required in zoning decisions by statute and by the city zoning ordinance. Such final approval shall be presumed granted by council unless said site plan review is scheduled on council's agenda for the meeting next following the planning commission meeting wherein said commission approval was recommended. 
(1)  Combination of preliminary and final plan review. At the discretion of the administrative official, submission and review of preliminary and final plans may be combined into one step in appropriate cases. 
(2)  Timing of review for final plans. Processing time by the city staff and the planning commission may be slightly longer for final plan review and may include referral to a qualified outside consultant. 
(3)  Other reviewers in marine districts. Development in the marine districts shall also require review and approval of plans by: (1) U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, (2) Texas General Land Office, (3) applicable homeowner's associations, (4) U.S. Coast Guard and (5) other cognizant government bodies. 
(B)  Public hearing required. The planning commission shall review all non-residential and multi-family residential development plans within the City of Nassau Bay in a public hearing. 
(C)  Review considerations. These requirements are intended to help land developers in planning their non-residential and multi-family residential and/or marine projects. The requirements provide direction to the builder/developer by defining certain items and areas which are common to the project as a whole and items over which the City of Nassau Bay will exert strict control. 
Considerations for site plan review shall include: 
(1)  The health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(2)  Satisfaction of the purposes and standards of this ordinance. 
(3)  Provisions for adequate public improvements, such as streets, drainage facilities, etc. 
(a)  The site plan shall confirm that no surface drainage to adjacent tracts will occur. 
(4)  Protection and preservation of natural features and adjacent properties. 
(5)  Siting of structures and landscaping appropriate to good overall design. 
(6)  Efficient, functional development. 
(7)  Adherence to any architectural standards for non-residential and/or multi-family development adopted by the city. 
(D)  Building compliance. The planning commission's approval of preliminary plans shall not constitute the Nassau Bay building inspector's acceptance of the final construction drawings or approval to begin construction. The final construction plans, including site plan, floor plans, utility plans, elevations, sign plans, lighting plans, landscaping plan and exterior materials shall be submitted to and approved by the building inspector prior to any construction. Approval of segments of plans is only an intermediate step in the planning commission's approval process, and the planning commission's approval of final plans will be contingent upon compliance with city building codes and any plan revisions requested by the planning commission through preliminary plan review. 
(1)  Compliance with conditional agreements. The building inspector shall ensure that all agreements leading to final approvals by the planning commission and city council on items in this ordinance are incorporated prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1500. - Planned unit developments. 
(A)  Constitutes a rezoning. The designation of a planned unit development (PUD) district is an amendment to the zoning ordinance and shall meet all the requirements of an application for rezoning. 
(B)  Public notice. 
(1)  Planning commission workshops. Any pre-application workshops involving the applicant and the planning commission shall be open to the public in accordance with section 5-700, and notice of the meetings shall be given in accordance with section 5-600. In addition to these standard notices of these meetings, the city shall endeavor to place notices of these meetings in any one or all of the following: 
(a)  The city website; 
(b)  Public service television channel; 
(c)  City newsletter; 
(d)  City marquee sign. 
These notices shall provide a description of the proposed PUD and its planned location. 
(2)  Public hearings. Notice of the public hearings before the planning commission and city council shall be given in the same manner as the notice required for any zoning amendment. 
(C)  Public hearings. Prior to formal consideration of a plan for a PUD, the planning commission and city council shall each hold a public hearing at which parties or interested citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard in the same manner as required for a rezoning application. 
(1)  Planning commission. The decision of the planning commission on an application for a PUD shall be forwarded to the city council, as a recommendation to grant or deny, after the planning commission holds a public hearing thereon. 
(2)  City council. The city council shall then hold at least one public hearing on said application. 
(D)  Decision. The city council may approve a PUD master plan as submitted, amend and approve the plan as amended, or disapprove the plan. The city council's approval of a PUD shall be by amendment to the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Amendment provisions. Said amendment shall designate and define the boundaries of the PUD and include such conditions as the city council determines are necessary to secure and protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Ordinance exhibits. The PUD master plan, which is submitted by the developer and approved by the city council, and supporting documents shall form part of the ordinances and be attached as exhibits thereto. 
(3)  Documentation for building official. Three (3) copies of the approved PUD master plan, together with supporting documents, shall be submitted to the building official for use prior to issuing building permits. 
(E)  Changes to a PUD master plan. 
(1)  Minor changes. After an approval by city council, minor alterations (as determined by the administrative official) to the development PUD master plan required by engineering or other circumstances that do not substantially change the concept of the PUD may be approved by the city manager. 
(2)  Major changes. Major changes (as determined by the administrative official) in fact or in concept shall be resubmitted following the same procedure required as in the original PUD application. Such changes include modifications prior to, during construction, or after construction. 
(3)  Notification of determination. The administrative official will inform the mayor and chairman of the planning commission within two (2) business days of his determination of the category of the proposed changes. The mayor and chairman of the planning commission (or their designees) will respond if they disagree with the categorization within three (3) business days. 
(F)  Platting. The need for platting will be determined based on the proposed PUD master plan. The PUD master plan shall be approved prior to or simultaneously with the approval of any plat. All land in a PUD shall be platted in accordance with the subdivision ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(G)  Recording a PUD. The PUD agreement and PUD master plan shall be recorded in the official deed records of the county. The recording costs shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1600. - Map amendments. 
(A)  The boundaries of any zoning district in the city may be changed, or the zone classification of any parcel of land may be changed, as provided in this section. 
(B)  Initiation of rezoning. 
(1)  A rezoning may be initiated by the owner of the property to be rezoned or their authorized agent, the city council, the planning commission, or by the administrative official. Rezoning applications by property owners and/or their agents shall be submitted on a form approved by the administrative official. 
(2)  The administrative official may require the submission of such other information as may be necessary to permit the informed exercise of judgment under the criteria for the review of a rezoning application. Such information shall be related to the scale, location and impacts of the rezoning application and may include, by way of illustration and not limitation, analysis of the capacity of the land to support development (e.g., soil characteristics and hydrology) or the additional impacts (or reduction in impacts) that may be created by changing the district designation, in terms of: traffic (trip generation); drainage; visual, aesthetic and land use adjacency impacts; water and wastewater use and availability; and other information determined by the city as necessary to make an informed analysis and decision. 
(C)  Criteria for approval. The planning commission may recommend approval, and city council may grant the approval of a rezoning request if it is demonstrated that: 
(1)  The proposed zoning is preferable to the existing zoning in terms of its likelihood of advancing the goals, objectives and policies of the city's comprehensive plan and other adopted plans applicable to the area; 
(2)  The proposed zoning is generally consistent with the future land use map of the comprehensive plan (a future land use map amendment may be processed concurrently with the rezoning); 
(3)  The proposed change is consistent with the implementation of existing or pending plans for providing and/or upgrading streets, water and wastewater, other utilities and the delivery of public services to the area in which the parcel proposed for rezoning is located; 
(4)  The range of uses and the character of development that is allowed by the proposed zone will be compatible with the properties in the immediate vicinity of the parcel proposed for rezoning, and the parcel proposed for rezoning has sufficient dimensions to accommodate reasonable development that complies with the requirements of this ordinance, including parking and buffering requirements; and 
(5)  The pace of development and/or the amount of vacant land currently zoned for comparable development in the vicinity suggests a need for the proposed rezoning in order to ensure an appropriate inventory of land to maintain a competitive land market that promotes economic development. 
(D)  Procedures. Applications for rezonings are processed according to the sequential steps set out in section 5-200, Applications, through section 5-700, Public meetings and public hearings, and shall be decided by the city council after recommendation of the planning commission pursuant to the public hearing provisions of section 5-700. All involved bodies shall hold public hearings. The procedure shall incorporate the following additional requirements, which supersede any conflicting provisions elsewhere in this ordinance: 
(1)  A pre-application conference is required for an application for rezoning. 
(2)  At any time during or after application completeness review, if the administrative official requires additional information pursuant to subsection (B)(2), above, the official may retain the application and notify the applicant regarding the specific information requested. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide the additional information requested in a timely manner; otherwise, the application shall lapse in accordance with the termination of stale applications provisions of this article. 
(4)  The planning commission shall make a preliminary report and hold a public hearing on the proposed rezoning before making a final report to the city council. The commission may defer its report for no longer than its next meeting to have an opportunity to consider revisions to the submittal that are requested from or volunteered by an applicant, which may have a direct bearing on the proposed rezoning. 
(5)  The administrative official shall forward the final report from the planning commission to the city council with a recommendation. 
(E)  Decision. 
(1)  After receiving the final report of the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed rezoning and, at the close of the hearing shall, based upon the recommendations of the commission and/or administrative official: 
(a)  Approve the rezoning by ordinance; 
(b)  Approve the rezoning by ordinance with modifications; 
(c)  Deny the rezoning; or 
(d)  Refer the proposed rezoning back to the planning commission, to the administrative official, to a committee of the city council, or to an ad hoc committee for further consideration and recommendation. 
(2)  The city council shall support its decision with written findings of fact regarding the approval criteria in subsection (C), above. 
(F)  Purposes and considerations for map amendments. 
(1)  Purposes. Map amendment proposals shall serve the following purposes: 
(a)  Advancing the goals, objectives and policies of the city's comprehensive plan and other adopted plans; 
(b)  Securing adequate light, air, convenience of access and safety from fire, flood and other danger; 
(c)  Lessening or avoiding congestion in public ways; 
(d)  Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare; and 
(e)  Otherwise accomplishing the purposes of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority. 
(2)  Considerations. In preparing and considering proposals for map amendments, the planning commission and the city council shall pay reasonable regard to: 
(a)  The comprehensive plan and any other adopted and relevant plans; 
(b)  Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in each district; 
(c)  The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted; 
(d)  The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction; and 
(e)  Responsible development and growth. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1700. - Text amendments. 
(A)  The city council may amend the text of this ordinance in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article to implement the comprehensive plan as it may be amended from time to time; conform to state or federal legal requirements; address changing or changed conditions; or otherwise advance the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(B)  Initiation of amendment. The city council, the planning commission or the zoning board of adjustment may initiate an amendment by motion. The administrative official may also initiate an amendment. Others who wish to propose potential text amendments shall do so in writing to the administrative official. 
(C)  Criteria for text amendments. Recommendations and decisions regarding petitions for amendments to the text of this ordinance are legislative in nature, but shall be based on consideration of all the following criteria: 
(1)  The proposed amendment will help to implement the adopted comprehensive plan, or, if it involves a topic that is not addressed or not fully developed in the comprehensive plan, the proposed amendment will not impair the implementation of the adopted comprehensive plan and other adopted plans when compared to the existing ordinance. 
(2)  The proposed amendment is consistent with the stated purposes of this ordinance. 
(3)  The proposed amendment will maintain or advance the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(4)  The proposed amendment will help to mitigate adverse impacts of the use and development of land on the natural or built environment, including, but not limited to mobility, air quality, water quality, noise levels, stormwater management, wildlife protection and vegetation; or will be neutral with respect to these issues. 
(5)  The proposed amendment will advance the strategic objectives of the city council, such as fiscal responsibility, efficient use of infrastructure and public services, and other articulated city objectives. 
(D)  Procedures. Text amendments are processed according to the sequential steps set out in section 5-200, Applications, through section 5-700, Public meetings and public hearings, and shall be decided by the city council after recommendation of the planning commission pursuant to the public meetings provisions of section 5-700. Each body shall hold a public hearing. The procedure shall incorporate the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Staff review. The administrative official shall review each proposed amendment in light of the approval criteria of subsection (C), above, and refer the application to city departments or other entities as deemed necessary. Based on the results of those reviews, the official shall provide a report and recommendation to the planning commission. 
(2)  Planning commission recommendation. 
(a)  The planning commission shall make a preliminary report to the city council and hold a public hearing on the proposed text amendment. Following the hearing, the commission shall make a final report to the city council. 
(b)  Upon receiving the final report of the planning commission, the administrative official shall draft, or cause to be drafted an ordinance, submit it to the city attorney for approval as to form, and shall forward the ordinance to the city council for consideration. 
(3)  City council action. After receiving the final report of the planning commission, the city council shall vote to approve, approve with amendments, or reject the proposed amendment, based on the approval criteria in subsection (C), above. The city council also may refer the proposed amendment back to the planning commission for further consideration, continue a public hearing, or postpone action on an application for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days (or shorter period if the application is being processed concurrently with a plat and the plat application is still pending at the time the amendment is postponed). 
(E)  No retroactive cure of violations. The amendment of the text of this ordinance may transform a legally nonconforming situation into a conforming one. However, no petition for a text amendment shall be used to cure a violation of any part of this ordinance. 
(f)  Purposes and considerations for text amendments. 
(1)  Purposes. Text amendment proposals shall serve the same purposes specified for map amendments in subsection 5-1600(F)(1), above. 
(2)  Considerations. In preparing and considering proposals for text amendments, the planning commission and the city council shall pay reasonable regard to the same factors specified for map amendments in subsection 5-1600(F)(2), above. 
(G)  Unlisted and functionally similar uses. If a proposed use is not listed in Table 15-400.A, or if the classification of the use is ambiguous, then a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows: 
(1)  The administrative official shall evaluate the proposed use and develop a statement of the facts concerning the nature of the proposed use, particularly with regard to whether the proposed use is functionally similar to or a subcategory of a use already listed in Table 15-400.A, and whether the proposed use is expected to have no greater impacts than a permitted or specific use with which it is functionally similar. The administrative official shall then make a recommendation to the planning commission based on such facts, after consultation with the city attorney as necessary. 
(2)  The planning commission shall initiate one or more amendments to the text of these regulations, which shall be processed as provided in section 5-1700, Text amendments, to: 
(a)  Add the new or unlisted use to Table 15-400.A, as appropriate, and make other necessary text revisions to address the use; or to 
(b)  Make adjustments to the text of these regulations, such as in Appendix A, Definitions, to clarify that a new or unlisted use is functionally similar to or a subcategory of a use already listed in Table 15-400.A, in which case the proposed use shall be subject to the same zoning district classifications in Table 15-400.A and the same applicable standards of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-1800. - Zoning amendment protests. 
(A)  Protests are a way for nearby landowners to object officially to a rezoning of property, or to a proposed amendment to the text of this ordinance. 
(B)  Effect of protest. If a protest is filed according to the requirements of this section, a rezoning shall not be granted for a parcel that is the subject of a protest, nor shall a protested text amendment be approved, without a favorable vote of three-fourths (¾) of all the members of city council. 
(C)  Requirements for protests. Protests are initiated by way of a petition, which shall include: 
(1)  The signatures of the owners of: 
(a)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the land within such area that would be directly affected by the proposed rezoning or amendment; or 
(b)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots immediately adjoining the area included in such proposed change and extending two hundred (200) feet from the subject area, including any area within streets and alleys. 
(2)  A list, map or index of the lot and block number, subdivision name or description of each signer's property, along with the street address. 
(D)  Timing of protest. Protest petitions shall be filed with the administrative official not less than one week before the city council's public hearing on the requested amendment to the text of this ordinance or the proposed rezoning.  
5-1900. - Administrative appeals. 
(A)  Administrative appeals are processed according to the provisions of this section. 
(B)  Appellate bodies designated. 
(1)  Appeals from decisions of city staff involving zoning matters under this ordinance are heard by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(2)  Appeals from final decisions of the planning commission regarding site plans are heard by the city council. 
(a)  If the city council denies an appeal of a final decision of the planning commission regarding a site plan, then a subsequent appeal of the final decision of the city council is heard by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  Appeals from final decisions of the city council or from the zoning board of adjustment with respect to appeals from city staff decisions are heard by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(C)  Initiation and timing of appeal. 
(1)  The applicant, or any party aggrieved by a final decision, may appeal that decision to the body specified in subsection (B), above, by filing a notice of appeal with the administrative official. The notice of appeal must be filed not more than ten (10) business days from the date of the final decision. The right of appeal terminates if the notice of appeal is not filed in this time period. 
(2)  The notice of appeal shall specify the decision appealed from and the basis for the appeal, which shall include the specific section(s) of this ordinance which is(are) alleged to have been overlooked or applied in error, and in what specific way this has affected or will affect the aggrieved party who initiated the appeal. Such statement of the basis of the appeal shall provide sufficient detail to put the city on notice with respect to the matters to be raised. 
(D)  Process. Appeals shall be processed by the body specified in subsection (B), above, according to the general procedures set out in section 5-200, Applications, through section 5-700, Public meetings and public hearings, except that: 
(1)  Staff shall provide a report describing the nature of the decision and the notice of appeal; and 
(2)  No recommendations are required from boards or commissions other than the decision-maker. 
(E)  Hearings and sworn testimony. A public hearing shall be held on the appeal. Testimony at the public hearing shall be sworn. 
(F)  Decision. In exercising the power to decide an appeal, the decision-maker may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken. 
(1)  With respect to decisions of the zoning board of adjustment, the concurring vote of three-quarters (¾) of the members of the board is necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of a city staff member. 
(2)  With respect to appeals from final decisions of the planning commission regarding site plans, the city council may refer a site plan back to the planning commission with specific instructions to consider new information raised through the appeal. In such event, the planning commission shall reconsider the site plan at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-2000. - Administrative interpretations. 
(A)  Any person may request an administrative interpretation of the terms, provisions or requirements of this ordinance if the application of the terms, provisions or requirements is not obvious. 
(B)  Applicable fee. 
(1)  It is the intent of the city council that this ordinance be accessible and clear to the residents, business owners and landowners in the city, and that the spirit of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 552, Public Information, be observed. As such, city staff shall provide: 
(a)  General information to residents, business owners and landowners with respect to the zoning districts that apply to property; 
(b)  References to the standards that may be applied to individual uses or buildings; and 
(c)  Requested public records that are related to the administration and enforcement of these regulations. 
(2)  It is not the intent of the city council that the administrative official affirmatively evaluates the full development potential of individual properties or resolves other such detailed inquiries about specific properties or issues without a pending application. 
(3)  Within these guidelines, the administrative official is authorized to waive the application fee for specific inquiries that do not involve material time commitments or copying costs, and to charge an hourly research fee for broad inquiries that are likely to involve material time commitments. Such fee shall be according to a fee schedule promulgated by city council resolution. 
(C)  Process. The interpretation is made by the administrative official or other city staff member charged with administering the provision for which an interpretation is requested. Neither the administrative official (or other city staff member) nor the city are obligated to render an interpretation. The interpretation is not subject to appeal, although related appeals may proceed as provided in this ordinance (e.g., appeals of decisions on applications which may be impacted by the interpretation). After an interpretation is issued, the administrative official may propose a text amendment to this ordinance to codify the interpretation. 
(D)  Decision. Within ten (10) business days after the application for an interpretation is filed, the administrative official or other responsible city staff member shall make a good faith effort to interpret the provision that is the subject of the application. The response to the interpretation request may require more time if additional information is needed or input from others is pending. The response to the applicant shall be in writing, and the administrative official shall keep a copy of the response in a record of interpretations. 
(E)  Standards for interpretations. The interpretation shall be based on: 
(1)  The materials or scenario posed by the applicant; 
(2)  The plain and ordinary meaning of the terms that are subject to the application for an interpretation as set out in Webster's Third New International Dictionary or other current and authoritative dictionaries; 
(3)  The purpose statement, where available, for the section of this ordinance that is the subject of interpretation; 
(4)  Any other provision of the comprehensive plan, the City Code of Ordinances, state law or federal law that are related to the same subject matter; 
(5)  Any technical meanings of the words used in the provision subject to interpretation; 
(6)  Other interpretations rendered by the city relating to the same or related provisions of this ordinance; 
(7)  The consequences of the interpretation; 
(8)  The legislative history; 
(9)  The problem or issue that is addressed by the provision subject to interpretation; and 
(10)  Sources outside of the regulatory provision that provide a related source for the definition, such as technical or professional literature. 
(F)  No legal advice. The city does not provide legal advice to applicants or property owners. Private parties, including purchasers, lenders, title insurers and others are advised to seek legal opinions from their attorneys with respect to specific potential applications of this ordinance. No interpretation provided by city staff pursuant to this section shall be construed as legal advice. 
(G)  No binding effect. The city does not provide legal advice to applicants or property owners. Private parties, including purchasers, lenders, title insurers and others are advised to seek legal opinions from their attorneys with respect to specific potential applications of this ordinance. No interpretation provided by city staff pursuant to this section shall be construed as legal advice. 
(H)  Recordkeeping. The administrative official shall keep records of interpretations made pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-2100. - Fees. 
(A)  Fees for the administration of this ordinance shall be established as provided in this section. 
(B)  Authority. The city council shall, from time to time, establish fees by resolution for the processing and review of the various applications that are required by this ordinance. The fees shall be reasonable, but shall not exceed the actual costs to review the applications, while also providing for monitoring of permit compliance and of developments approved subject to conditions. The city council may provide for a flat fee, plus require the reimbursement of extraordinary costs to the city that are necessitated by an application, such as fees for expert technical review or advice from consultants. 
(C)  Relationship to application. No application shall be eligible to be determined complete until all application fees are paid in full. 
(D)  Fee schedule. A comprehensive schedule of fees for the administration of this ordinance shall be attached as an appendix. The fee schedule shall reflect particular exemptions from fees which are provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-2200. - Enforcement, violations, penalties, other remedies. 
The Nassau Bay City Council by itself or through the planning commission shall adopt the procedures in this article for enforcing and administering this ordinance and to employ those persons necessary for such administration and enforcement. No district boundary or regulation change, modification of council requirements, variance, building permit, certificate of occupancy and use, or other permit shall be granted by the planning commission, board of adjustment, or city council except in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-2300. - Penalty for violations. 
For any and every violation of the provisions of this ordinance, and for each and every day that such violation continues, said violation(s) shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day any such violation continues shall be considered to be a separate offense. 
5-2301. Persons charged with such violation(s) may include: 
(1)  The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, subcontractor or any other person using the land, building, or premises where such violation has been admitted or shall exist. 
(2)  Any person who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in such violation. 
(3)  Any person who maintains any land, building, or premises in which such violation shall exist. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
5-2400. - Other legal remedies. 
(A)  Cease and desist orders. The planning commission and/or city council shall serve cease and desist orders in the form of written official notices given to the owner of the subject building, property, or premises, or to his agent, lessee, tenant, contractor, or to any person using the land, building, or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist. 
(B)  Building permits and certificates of occupancy and use. 
(1)  Issuance. No building permit or certificate of occupancy and use shall be issued by the city for any purpose except in compliance with the provisions of this code and other applicable ordinances and laws, a decision of the board of adjustment, or court decision. 
(2)  Failure to comply with the conditions of a building permit or specific use permit will result in the revocation of such permit or the withholding of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Notice and appeal. All city decisions concerning the issuance, revocation, or suspension of building permits and certificates of occupancy and use shall be stated in official written notice to the permit applicant. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
ARTICLE 6. - APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR PETITIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, § Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, amended Art. 6 to read as herein set out. Former Art. 6, §§ 6-100—6-700, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 80-255, adopted Mar. 24, 1980; Ord. No. 82-280, adopted Feb. 22, 1982; Ord. No. 82-285, adopted Apr. 12, 1982; Ord. No. 90-389, adopted Nov. 13, 1990; Ord. No. 92-418, adopted Sept. 14, 1992; and Ord. No. 94-435, adopted Sept. 12, 1994. 
 
6-100. - Application submittal. 
Applicants seeking approvals required by this Appendix A, Zoning, shall refer to Appendix B, Application Submittal, which itemizes the information required for particular types of development applications. 
(1)  The administrative official shall promulgate necessary forms for the administration, interpretation and enforcement of this Appendix A, Zoning. Such forms shall reflect the information requirements itemized in Appendix B, Application Submittal. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
6-200. - Helistops. 
(a)  Application for specific use permit. The installation, use and operation of a helistop shall require a specific use permit in conformance with this section. Application for a helistop permit shall be made in writing to the planning commission on forms prescribed by the planning commission. The planning commission shall make an investigation as to the financial responsibility and general fitness of the applicant and shall make strict inquiry and investigation of the proposed helistop as to whether or not it will jeopardize the public welfare and safety because of its location, layout or proposed method of operation and whether or not there is a public need for it and if it is in the public interest if it is proposed as a public facility. Within sixty (60) days after an application has been submitted to the planning commission, or as soon as FAA airspace approval is received, whichever is later, the planning commission shall make its determination recommending approval or disapproval of the same to the city council. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
ARTICLE 7. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
7-100. - Authority, functions, powers, and duties of the planning commission. 
The planning commission shall have the authority and duty: 
(a)  To hear and review all preliminary and final plat applications in accordance with all city ordinances as adopted or hereafter amended. The planning commission has authority to approve or disapprove all preliminary and final plat applications. 
(b)  To hear applications for rezoning and recommend these changes to the city council for action. 
(c)  To recommend to city council amendments, extensions, or revisions of the building code. 
(d)  To hear and recommend specific use permits permitted by ordinances. In doing so, the planning commission may prescribe reasonable conditions, restrictions and limitations it deems necessary to maintain the comprehensive plan and recommend to city council for action. 
(e)  To recommend any proposed zoning changes to city council and act in an advisory capacity to the council on all matters affecting the development of the city. 
(f)  To establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area. This includes development and modification of the comprehensive plan. These principles and policies shall have city council approval. 
(g)  To act as authorized or specified in any section of the zoning ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(h)  To, at its discretion, require approval(s) or permits of any other governmental body or agency which may have jurisdiction over any phase of an application or area being developed prior to considering the application. In the event that other governmental approval is required, official acceptance of the application shall be deferred until such approval(s) is submitted to the planning commission.  
7-200. - Meetings and procedures. 
(a)  All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Minutes shall be kept of all public meetings and proceedings and shall include and state the vote of each member on each question, and the motion shall state the reason upon which it is made; such reason or reasons being based upon the prescribed guides and standards of good zoning and planning principles. If a member is absent or abstains from voting, the minutes shall so indicate. 
(c)  The planning commission shall keep accurate records of its public hearings which shall be filed, together with its minutes and resolutions, with the city. The same shall be open for public inspection at reasonable times and hours. 
(d)  All decisions of the planning commission shall be by motion. 
(e)  The planning commission or any of its members may inspect the premise, site, or area under consideration. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 7-200 which pertained to procedure: planning commission applications and derived from Ord. No. 80-255, adopted Mar. 24, 1980; and Ord. No. 82-285, adopted Apr. 12, 1982. Ord. No. O2013-712 also renumbered § 7-300 as § 7-200.  
ARTICLE 8. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
8-100. - Authority and procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall have authority to consider and take actions on all matters heard by or brought before the planning commission for advisory recommendations. Their decision shall be guided by the standards and guidelines applicable to the planning commission.  
8-200. - Official decisions at hearing. 
(a)  The city council as the governing body, shall either approve or disapprove the application as submitted; approve the application as amended or conditioned; or defer action on any matter before it in order to inspect the site in question, to refer the matter to the planning commission for further consideration and recommendation, to refer the matter to the planning commission for the purpose of conducting further hearings with the taking of additional testimony, if deemed advisable, at the request of the applicant, or to defer for any other justifiable reason. In the event of a tie or evenly split vote, action shall be deferred to the next subsequent meeting. 
(b)  Prior to certifying a copy of any record or portion thereof, the city secretary shall make all necessary corrections in order that the copy is a true and correct copy of the record, or of those portions requested, and shall make a charge of not less than fifteen cents ($0.15) for each page, instrument, map, picture, or other exhibit; provided the charges here authorized are not intended to repeal or amend any fee or schedule of fees otherwise established. A transcript of the proceedings before the governing body, when certified by the city secretary, may be used in any court review of the matter at issue. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 8-200 which pertained to notice and hearing and derived from Ord. No. 80-255, adopted Mar. 24, 1980. Ord. No. O2013-712 also renumbered § 8-300 as § 8-200.  
ARTICLE 9. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
 
9-100. - [Created; authority, composition.] 
There is hereby created a board of adjustment. The authority and composition of this board shall be governed by the Charter of the City of Nassau Bay, Article X, Sections 10.05 and 10.06, and Title 28, Article 1011g, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes.  
9-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 9-200 which pertained to special exceptions and derived from Ord. No. 80-255, adopted Mar. 24, 1980.  
ARTICLE 10. - NONCONFORMING USES 
 
10-100. - Nonconforming uses, lots, buildings, structures and nonconforming uses of buildings, structures, and premises. 
Scope. It is the intent of this section to permit the continuation of those uses of land and structures and characteristics of use which were lawful before the passage of this ordinance, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this section or future amendments; to permit such nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but to discourage their survival; that nonconforming structures may be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, subject to the property development regulations of the district in which the structure is located, but that said structures may not be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.  
10-200. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
10-201. The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption of this ordinance, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located. 
(b)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption of this ordinance. 
(c)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
(d)  No structure which does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
10-202. Community unit development specific use permits. Any and all community unit development specific use permits granted before the passage of this ordinance shall continue in full force and effect.  
10-300. - Nonconforming buildings and structures. 
The lawful existence of a structure or building at the effective date of adoption of this ordinance, although such structure or building does not conform to the property development regulations of this ordinance for minimum lot areas and dimensions, minimum yard setback requirements, maximum building height, total floor area, lot coverage and minimum floor area requirements, or other characteristics of the structure, or its location on the lot, may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Nonconforming buildings and structures may be enlarged upon, expanded or extended subject to all the property development regulations including minimum lot area and dimensions of the district in which the building or structure is located. No such building or structure shall be enlarged upon or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity. Such building or structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity except as may be hereafter provided. Such nonconforming buildings or structures shall not be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(b)  Should such structure or building be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) per cent of its assessed value at the time of destruction, as determined by the Nassau Bay tax assessor, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Should such structure or building be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the property development regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. No. 2009-648, § I, 6-6-09)  
10-400. - Nonconforming uses of buildings, structures and premises. 
If a lawful use involving individual structures, buildings, and/or premises in combination thereof exists at the effective date of adoption of or amendment to this ordinance that would not be allowed in the district in which it is located under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, except as may otherwise be provided herein. 
(b)  A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building or structure which is manifestly arranged as designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(c)  Any structure or building, or structure or building and premises in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall therefore conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(d)  When a nonconforming use of a structure or building, or structure or building and premises in combination is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period except when government action impedes access to the premises, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulation of the district in which it is located. 
Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land unless the land itself is in a nonconforming use. Destruction for the purpose of this section is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) per cent of the assessed value of the structure at the time of destruction.  
10-500. - Alterations, construction, repairs and maintenance, and change. 
(a)  Alterations. A nonconforming building may be maintained and repairs and alterations may be made, except that in a building which is nonconforming as to use regulations, no structural alterations shall be made except those required by law. Repairs such as plumbing or the changing of partitions or other interior alterations are permitted. 
(b)  Construction. This ordinance shall not be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of the passage of or amendment to this ordinance, and upon which actual built-construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(c)  Normal repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on normal repairs, or on repairs or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding twenty (20) per cent of the current assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic volume of the building as it existed at the time of passage of our amendment to this ordinance shall not be increased.  
ARTICLE 11. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND SPECIFIC USES, PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
11-100. - Intent. 
General rules and regulations for uses, buildings and structures applying to all zoning districts as well as special uses regulations applying to specific zoning districts shall be enumerated herein.  
11-200. - Accessory uses and buildings and structures. 
(a)  Scope. This section includes those accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to the main use for building and located on the same lot. 
(b)  Development regulations. 
(1)  Location. All accessory uses, buildings and structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal or main use and not within any required yard setbacks, except as provided herein. 
(2)  Height. No accessory use, building or structure shall exceed the height permitted in the district in which the principal use is located. 
(3)  Use. Such accessory building shall not be rented or leased as a separate dwelling unit.  
11-300. - Home occupations. 
An occupation, not involving the conduct of a business, customarily carried on in a single-family dwelling as an incidental but not the principal use thereof by a member of the occupant's family residing on the premise, without the help of any assistant or employee; without structural alterations in the building or any of its rooms; without the installation of any machinery or equipment other than that customary to normal household operations; without the use of any sign, display or advertisement of the occupation or the telephone number of the same, the person conducting the same, or of the occupant; and which occupation does not cause the generation of any traffic in the street nor involve the storage or display of any property other than household goods used on the premise; and which occupation is not detrimental or injurious to adjoining property; and which occupation does not include a beauty school, parlor or shop, a doctor's or dentist's office for the treatment of patients, a barbershop, carpenter's shop, electrician's shop, shoe shop, plumber's shop, radio shop, tinner's shop, auto repairing, auto painting, furniture repairing, sign painting or real estate office, but not limited to those so enumerated; and which occupation does not involve the conduct of a school, day care center or office; and which occupation does not include the keeping, stabling, pasturing, boarding or caring for any horses, cattle, dogs, cats or other animals belonging to persons other than the occupants of the main building.  
11-400. - Commercial new and used motorcycles, auto, truck, boat, mobile home, recreation vehicle sale and rental and repair facilities and lots. 
The following requirements and regulations shall be met: 
(a)  Parking. All parking areas for display, sale, rent, or storage purposes shall comply with the requirements set forth in this ordinance. In addition, none of the above parking areas may be located between the base building line and the pavement edge of a public street. 
(b)  Operating conditions. Motorcycles, auto, truck, boat, mobile home, and recreational vehicles shall be maintained in a safe operating condition at all times. If in a used condition, all of the above shall have a current valid Texas Vehicle Inspection Sticker and license plate displayed in the appropriate manner. 
(c)  Repair facilities. Any repair facilities contained within the buildings shall conform to the Nassau Bay Building Code. 
(d)  Sales office (restrictions). None of the above shall be used as sales offices, storage space, or for sleeping purposes. Sales offices and storage shall be contained in buildings in conformance with the Nassau Bay Building Code. 
(e)  Setbacks. All buildings and structures shall comply with the setback requirements for the district in which the use is located. 
(f)  Fencing and screening. Where deemed necessary by the planning commission to protect the general public, safety fences of up to a height of six (6) feet may be required. The planning commission may also require screening of at least seventy-five (75) per cent opaqueness to protect neighboring property from potential loss of use of diminishment of land value or use. 
On property lines not adjacent to a public street, there shall be provided a brick or wood fence or wall six (6) feet in height from the finished grade. 
(g)  Lighting. Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent properties and streets, shining only on the subject site. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 11-400 which pertained to child care facilities and derived from Ord. No. 80-255, adopted Mar. 24, 1980. Ord. No. O2013-712 also renumbered §§ 11-500—11-1300 as §§ 11-400—11-1200.  
11-500. - Swimming pools and clubs, commercial and private. 
The following requirements and regulations shall be met: 
(a)  ["Swimming pool" defined.] A swimming pool is any confined body of water, located either above or below the existing (finished) grade of the site, exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in surface area, and two (2) feet in depth, designed, used, or intended to be used for swimming or bathing purposes. 
(b)  Principal use. Any swimming pool owned and operated by a governmental agency or operated as a commercial enterprise existing singularly or in combination with other commercial recreation uses on the same property shall be considered as a principal use subject to the "property development regulations" of the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  Accessory use. Any swimming pool operated by a fraternal, social, or civic organization, or by a residential homeowner's association, or by the resident of a single-family dwelling or of multi-family residences shall be considered as an accessory use, and shall exist in conjunction with the principal use on the same lot, subject to the setback regulations stated herein. 
(d)  Setbacks (accessory use). If the swimming pool is located at or below finished grade, it is permitted on any interior side yard and rear yard provided that in no case shall it be located closer than three (3) feet from any side or rear property line. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Swimming pools located at finished grade shall not be considered as lot coverage unless totally enclosed by an opaque obstruction. 
(f)  Fencing and screening. Every swimming pool shall be surrounded by a natural barrier, retaining wall, or other structure, constructed or installed in a manner which will obstruct access thereto by persons other than the owners or occupants of the premise on which such swimming pool is located. Such obstruction around a principal use shall not be less than six (6) feet in height from finished grade. Single-family dwelling accessory swimming pools require not less than a four-foot high barrier, wall or fence. 
(g)  Access commercial and club facilities. The primary access to a principal use shall be from the interior of a building or structure serving as a club house or shower facility. Exterior access to the principal use must be through a self-closing and self-latching gate with latches placed at least four (4) feet above the underlying ground and operable from the interior of the swimming pool area only. All gates opening through such enclosure shall be kept securely closed and latched at all times. 
(h)  Lighting. Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from the adjacent properties and streets, shining only on the subject site. 
(i)  Performance standards. The operation of these facilities shall conform to all rules and regulations of all governmental agencies having appropriate jurisdiction and to the performance standards of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
11-600. - Fences, walls. 
(a)  Building permit required. Fences and walls enclosing any permitted use shall comply with the building permit procedures of the Nassau Bay Building-Code. 
(b)  Sight distance maintained. Within the area formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets, the area formed by the long chord of a twenty-five-foot radius or a greater radius if deemed necessary and the intersecting right-of-way lines shall be a clear space with no obstruction to vision. Fences, walls, and plantings shall be restricted to a height of thirty (30) inches or less above the average grade of each street as measured at the center line thereof. 
(c)  Residential restrictions. On residentially zoned property, fences, walls, and hedges may be erected, planted, or maintained along or adjacent to a lot line to a height not exceeding six (6) feet in the required side and rear yards unless otherwise specified. The fence, wall or other structure shall not extend beyond the building setback line. A rear yard fence height of 8 feet 6 inches shall apply to the residential properties on the north side of Lazy Lake Drive, between Swan Lagoon Drive and Sandy Cove, for privacy and protection from NASA Road One traffic. This specific height is established for consistent appearance along NASA Road One and applies to individual properties. New or replacement fences shall comply with this height requirement. In addition, if repairs to existing fences would exceed 50 percent of the area of the existing fence or the costs of the repairs exceed 50 percent of the value of the fence, the repairs shall comply with this height requirement. 
(d)  Dangerous materials. Walls, fences or similar structures erected in any residential district shall not contain any substances such as broken glass, barbed wire, spikes, nails, or similar materials designated to inflict pain or injury to any person or animal. 
(Ord. No. 90-391, § 3, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 2003-560, § 1, 2-13-03; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
11-700. - Performance standards. 
All uses and activities permitted as of right, (or specific use permit) in any district shall conform to the standards of performance described below and shall be so constructed, maintained, and operated so as not to be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire, explosive hazard or glare. 
(a)  Noise. Every use shall be so operated as to comply with the maximum performance standards governing noise set forth below: 
(1)  Objectionable noises of an intermittent nature shall be controlled as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(2)  Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured in compliance with standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
(3)  At no point on a property line or district boundary as indicated shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant exceed the decibel levels in either of the designed octave bands shown in the following tables: 
TABLE 1—ALL DISTRICTS 
Between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels) 
Octave Band Frequency Cycles per Second 	Along Residential District Boundaries 	Along Commercial District Boundaries 
0 to 75 	68 	72 
75 to 150 	54 	67 
150 to 300 	46 	59 
300 to 600 	41 	52 
600 to 1,200 	39 	46 
1,200 to 2,400 	33 	40 
2,400 to 4,800 	30 	34 
Above 4,800 	28 	32 
 
Preferred Frequencies 
Octave Band Frequency Cycles per Second 	Along Residential District Boundaries 	Along Commercial District Boundaries 
63 	64 	71 
125 	52 	65 
250 	45 	57 
500 	40 	50 
1,000 	36 	45 
2,000 	33 	39 
4,000 	30 	34 
8,000 	27 	32 
 
Maximum permitted sound level shall be reduced by three (3) decibels in each octave band between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  Vibration. No use shall be operated which produces ground vibrations noticeable without instruments, at the lot line of the premise on which the use is located. 
(c)  Smoke emissions and other particulate matter. To be in compliance with state and county regulations. 
(d)  Odors. No use shall be operated so as to produce the emission of objectionable or offensive odors in such concentration as to be readily perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. Table III, Chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement Manual" of the Manufacturing Chemist's Association, Inc., Washington D.C., is hereby adopted as the guide in determining the quantities of offensive odors as are the guides and standards contained in the prohibitions against air pollution of the state department of pollution control. 
(e)  Toxic or noxious matter. No use shall for any period of time, discharge across boundaries of a lot line on which it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare, or cause injury or damage to persons, property, or the use of property or land, or render unclean the waters of the state to the extent of being harmful or inimical to the public health, animal or aquatic life, or the use of such waters for domestic water supply, recreation, or other legitimate and necessary uses. 
(f)  Radiation. Any operation involving radiation, i.e. the use of gamma rays, x-rays, alpha and beta particles, high speed electron, neutrons, protons, and other atomic or nuclear particles, shall be permitted only in accordance with the codes, rules, and regulations of the state board of health and the state department of pollution control. 
(g)  Electromagnetic radiation and interference. 
(1)  Radiation. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated for any purpose and planned or unplanned source of electromagnetic radiation which does not comply with the current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. Any operation in compliance with the Federal Communication Commission regulation will be deemed unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation of performance of any electromagnetic receptor of quality and proper design. The determination of "abnormal degradation in performance" and "of quality and proper design" shall be made in accordance with good engineering principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers, and the Electronic Industries Association. 
(2)  Interference. No use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in any district. 
(h)  Humidity, heat or glare. 
(1)  In all districts, any activity producing heat or glare shall be carried on in such a manner that such heat or glare is not perceptible at any lot line. 
(2)  Exposed sources of light, including bare bulbs and tubes and immediately adjacent reflecting surfaces, shall be shielded to avoid creating a nuisance across lot lines. The light intensity from illumination of any kind shall not exceed fifty (50) foot lamberts at any point along the line of the lot containing the light source. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400. 
Cross reference— Noise, Ch. 10.  
11-800. - Off-street parking regulations (general). 
(a)  Driveways. Driveways shall be considered as constituting off-street parking spaces for single-family and two-family duplex dwellings in residential districts provided that sufficient spaces are available on such driveways to meet the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Locations of off-street parking spaces. Parking spaces shall be located so that no spaces are a greater distance than six hundred (600) feet from the building or use to which they are assigned. 
(c)  Design. All nonresidential parking and driveway areas shall be paved in accordance with city specifications maintained by the city engineer to provide for safe and efficient circulation and protect against potholes, erosion and dust. The proposed grading and drainage for the off-street parking facilities shall be approved by the city engineer. 
1.  Maintenance. Off-street parking areas and other vehicular use areas shall be maintained in sound and litter-free condition. Property owners/managers are responsible for maintaining compliance with related provisions of City Code chapter 9, Health and Sanitation, including section 9-41, Damaged or defective parking lots—holes or depressions; section 9-42, Maintenance of painting of stripes; section 9-43, Same—Correction of violations; and section 9-44, Same—repair specifications. 
(d)  Parking space dimensions. Standard parking spaces shall be dimensioned as specified in this subsection. Spaces dimensioned for and indicated by signage as limited to compact cars shall be permitted only after providing the minimum number of standard spaces required by this section. 
1.  Angled parking spaces (zero to ninety (90) degrees): Nine (9) feet by nineteen (19) feet (or eighteen (18) feet where vehicle overhang of a pavement edge is anticipated). 
2.  Parking spaces designated for compact cars: Nine (9) feet by sixteen (16) feet. 
3.  Parallel parking spaces: Eight (8) feet by twenty-three (23) feet. 
4.  Parking spaces for disabled persons shall be designed and located as required by the Texas Accessibility Standards. 
5.  Vertical clearance. Vertical clearance of not less than eight (8) feet (including structures and trees/vegetation) shall be provided over all parking spaces. Additional clearance shall be provided for vans, light trucks, and other larger vehicles that require such greater clearance. All parking garage entrances shall include an overhead bar to alert drivers of oversized vehicles regarding clearance. 
(e)  Parking access; drive aisle dimensions. Each parking stall shall have appropriate access to a street or alley, and maneuvering space and access aisles shall be sufficient to permit vehicles to enter and leave the parking area in a forward motion, with the exception of single-family and duplex areas. Driveways shall be paved and meet the requirements outlined below unless special circumstances warrant variations approved by the planning commission. Drive aisles shall be dimensioned based on the directional flow of traffic and the angle of the parking spaces accessed by the aisle, as set out in Table 11-800.A, Drive Aisle Width. 
Table 11-800.A 

DRIVE AISLE WIDTH 

Direction of 
Traffic Flow in 
Aisle 	Angle of Parking Spaces (degrees) 
	0 (parallel) 	45 	60 	90 
One-way 	12 ft 	16 ft 	20 ft 	24 ft 
Two-way 	20 ft 	20 ft 	22 ft 	24 ft 
 
(f)  Access dimension guidelines. 
Dimension at street: 
Width (in feet)* 
Minimum, one-way .....15 
Minimum, two-way .....25 
Maximum .....35 
Right turn radius (in feet)** 
Minimum .....10 
Maximum .....30 
 *Measured along right-of-way line at inner limit of curbed radius sweep or between radius and near edge of curbed island at least fifty (50) square feet in area. The minimum width applies principally to one-way driveways. 
**On side of driveway exposed to entry or exit by right turning vehicles. 
(g)  Circulation. Circulation systems within lots or parcels proposed for development shall provide for continuous traffic flow with efficient, non-conflicting movement throughout the site, subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. 
1.  Configuration of parking aisles. If one-way parking aisles are utilized, parallel rows of parking shall run in alternating directions and shall intersect with two-way aisles. 
2.  "Tandem parking" (where vehicles are parked nose-to-end to maximize the number of vehicles that can be parked in a limited space, which restricts the independent movement of all vehicles and periodically requires rearrangement of the parked vehicles) shall not be used to comply with the requirements of this section, except in the case of single-family detached and duplex residential uses. 
3.  Stacking areas and drive-through lanes. Vehicle stacking areas and drive-through lanes shall be configured so that their use does not block ingress to or egress from: 
a.  Parking spaces; 
b.  Driveways and access points; and 
c.  Emergency access lanes. 
Stacking lanes shall provide a bypass lane that is not less than eight (8) feet in width. 
4.  Vehicular-pedestrian conflict areas. Conflicts between areas of significant pedestrian movement and vehicular circulation shall be minimized. Areas that are accessible to vehicles but likely to be put to significant use by pedestrians (as determined by the city engineer) shall be striped or otherwise differentiated (e.g., with decorative pavers). 
(h)  Marking of parking areas; traffic control devices. All parking spaces shall be marked and maintained on the pavement, and any directional markings/signs shall be installed and maintained by the property owner according to the approved site plan. Pavement markings shall be yellow or white, except as may be required by state or federal regulations. 
1.  Disabled parking spaces. As required by the Texas Accessibility Standards, each disabled parking space shall be marked with a free-standing or wall-mounted sign using the standard uniform words and/or symbols that signify the space as parking for disabled persons only. In addition, the disabled symbol shall be painted on the pavement within the parking space. This requirement shall automatically change to conform to applicable amendments to the Texas Accessibility Standards after the effective date of this ordinance. 
2.  Traffic control devices. All traffic control devices (signs, marking and/or signals) shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
(i)  Site development plan requirements (parking). At the time of the application for a building permit for C, U, RM-1, RM-2 land use and M-R, M-RM, M-C and M-P marine use for which parking spaces are required to be constructed a site development plan for such parking facilities shall be submitted to the city for approval. The following regulations shall be required: 
1.  Landscaping and screening plans. (See subsection 16.5-300(B) for plan requirements for all development which requires a site plan approval.) 
2.  Channelization and division of parking areas within the interior of the parking lot for pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be accomplished by the use of landscaped areas with trees, walls, fences, other natural growth or artificial features, or raised curbs. Marked directional lanes and controls, change of grade or other devices to mark points of turns, to separate parking areas shall be used to control traffic movement. 
3.  Each parking site or lot shall be designed individually with reference to the size, street pattern, adjacent properties, buildings and other improvements in the general neighborhood, numbers of cars to be accommodated, hours, and kinds of use. 
4.  When the parking facilities are housed in an underground garage or a multi-storied structure or on the roofs of buildings, a site development plan shall be submitted hereunder for approval of interior traffic circulation, slope of ramp, ease of access and utilization of ramps, for parking stall and aisle dimensions, proper traffic-control signing and pavement marking for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian operation, for location of entrances and exits on public roads, for approval of sight distances at such entrances and exits and at corners of intersecting public roads, and for approval of the effective screening of the cars located in or on the parking structures from adjoining properties and from public roads. 
5.  The site development plan shall be prepared with careful regard to the location of the parking facilities in relation to adjoining and neighborhood commercial, industrial, multifamily, and other residential improvements, and shall be devised to have the least adverse effects on such adjoining or neighboring properties. 
(j)  Off-street parking regulations. All uses permitted under this zoning ordinance shall be subject to the minimum requirements displayed in Table 11-800.B, Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards. Generally, the total number of required parking spaces is equal to the sum of the required parking for each use of a parcel proposed for development. However, parking requirements may be reduced in some cases when anticipated vehicular parking demand will tend to be less through implementation of the provisions of subsections (l), Credits for on-street and public parking, and/or (m), Reduction of parking requirements by provision of bicycle amenities, below. 
1.  The number of required parking spaces is calculated based on one or more independent variables, which are measured as provided below. When the number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, the fractional space shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number. 
a.  Per square foot (sf) of parking floor area, where parking floor area is equal to eighty-five (85) percent of the gross "floor area" (defined as the area of all floors in a building, extended to exterior walls, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features, and not including the area of voids between floors), plus (unless otherwise specified) the area of any parts of the parcel proposed for development that are delineated and used in a manner that is comparable in function and intensity of use to the use of the inside of the building (e.g., outdoor dining areas). 
b.  Per employee, which means that the number of parking spaces is based on the number of employees on the work shift in which the maximum number of employees are present ("maximum shift"). 
c.  Per seat, which means that the number of parking spaces is based on the number of seats that are provided to guests (patrons, members, etc.), with benches or pews measured as one seat per two (2) feet of width. 
d.  Per square feet (sf) of assembly area, which means that the number of parking spaces is based on the number of square feet in the largest room used for assembly (e.g., at a school, this is often a gymnasium, but it could also be a theater or a lunch room). 
2.  Unlisted and functionally similar uses. A proposed use that is not listed in Table 15-400.A, Uses, shall be required to meet the parking standards of the use category or functionally similar use it is determined to be most similar to, pursuant to subsection 5-1700(G), Unlisted and functionally similar uses. 
Table 11-800.B 

OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS 

Land Use 	Required Off-Street Parking Spaces 
Residential Uses 
Single-family (detached) 	2 spaces (covered) per dwelling unit, except 2.5 (or 2 for efficiency units) in the RM-2 district 
Single-family (attached) 	2 spaces (covered) per dwelling unit, except 2.5 (or 2 for efficiency units) in the RM-2 district 
Multiple-family 
(attached or detached) 	1.5 spaces per studio/efficiency unit 
	1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom unit 
	1.75 spaces per 2 bedroom unit (floor area less than 800 sf) 
	2.25 spaces per 2 bedroom unit (floor area 800+ sf) 
	2.75 spaces per 3 bedroom unit 
Institutional Uses 
Assisted living facility 	1 space per 2 residents 
Business or trade school 	1.1 spaces per student 
Child care facility, day care ("DCCCF") 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Hospital 	See Section 11-800(n), Special Parking Studies 
Medical office/clinic/lab 	1 space per 200 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Nursing or convalescent home 	1 space per 2 beds 
Place of Public Assembly 
Generally (community event centers, general gathering) 	1 space per 100 sf of Parking Floor Area 
 Library 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
 Mortuary/funeral home 	1 space per 165 sf of public area 
 Museum/aquarium 	1 space per 200 sf of public area 
 Place of worship (and conference centers) 	1 space per 3 seats OR 
	1 space per 30 sf of floor area used for moveable seating OR 
1 space per 6 ft of bench seating 
 Sports arena 	1 space per 3 seats 
Private club 	1 space per 125 sf of Parking Floor Area not used for dining 
	+ 1 space per 75 sf of Parking Floor Area used for dining 
School, Public or Denominational 
School, pre-kindergarten 	1 space per employee 
	+ 1 space per 5 students 
	+ 5 spaces for short-term loading and unloading 
School, elementary 	1 space per employee 
	+ 1 space per 5 seats in auditorium or assembly area 
School, middle 	The greater of: 
	1 space per 10 students OR 
	1 space per 5 seats in auditorium or assembly area 
School, high 	See Section 11-800(n), Special Parking Studies 
Commercial Uses 
Alcoholic beverage sales, package 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Bar/nightclub 	1 space per 75 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Commercial Amusement, Indoor 
Generally (if not listed below) 	1 space per 150 sf of Parking Floor Area 
 Bowling alley 	5 spaces per lane 
	+ 1 space per 100 sf of Parking Floor Area in restaurant and/or bar area 
 Pool room/billiard hall 	1 space per 150 sf of Parking Floor Area 
	+ 3 spaces per pool or billiard table 
 Movie theater 	1 space per 2.5 seats 
 Skating rink 	1 space per 200 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Commercial Amusement, Outdoor 
Generally (if not listed below) 	See Section 11-800(n), Special Parking Studies 
 Outdoor concert facility 	1 space per 3 seats OR 
	1 space per 6 ft of bench 
 Amusement/theme parks 	See Section 11-800(n), Special Parking Studies 
 Batting cages/miniature golf 	5 spaces per 4 playing stations/holes 
Commercial lodging (hotel or motel) 	1 space per guest room 
	+ 1 space per 300 sf of meeting rooms, ballrooms, administrative offices, and self-service breakfast areas only for guests 
	+ 75% of parking requirement for integrated restaurants and bars that are open to the public 
Commercial Retail 
Generally 	1 space per 200 sf of Parking Floor Area for the first 14,000 sf 
	+ 1 space per 250 sf of Parking Floor Area for the next 11,000 sf (14,001-25,000 sf) 
	+ 1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area for all floor area in excess of 25,000 sf 
 Convenience stores 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
	- 1 space per pump if the use also involves vehicle fueling or charging 
Heavy retail 	1 space per 250 sf of indoor Parking Floor Area 
	+ 1 space per 250 sf of outdoor sales and/or display area 
Heavy vehicle and watercraft sales or rental 	1 space per 500 sf of Parking Floor Area in office and indoor showroom space 
	+ 1 space per 1,500 sf of outdoor display and inventory storage area 
Kennel 	1 space per 400 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Light Auto Service/Fueling or Charging Station 
 Fuel or charging 	1 space per 4 pumps or Level 3 charging stations 
	+ 3 spaces per service bay 
 Other light automobile service 	3 spaces per service bay 
Mixed use 	See Section 11-800(n), Special Parking Studies 
Nursery or greenhouse, retail 	1 space per 250 sf of Parking Floor Area in enclosed space 
	+ 1 space per 3,000 sf of outdoor nursery area 
Office 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Passenger Motor Vehicle Sales or Rental 
 Vehicle sales 	1 space per 1,000 sf of Parking Floor Area in showroom space 
	+ 1 space per 20,000 sf of inventory storage 
 Vehicle rental 	5 spaces 
Pawn shop 	1 space per 200 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Personal fitness or music instruction 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Personal services 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Professional services, instruction or counseling 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Restaurant, drive-in/through and no drive-in/through 	1 space for each 4 seats of fixed seating (as defined in Section 11-800.(j)c.), and 1 space for each 40 sf of floor area for moveable seating under the maximum seating arrangement (including fixed and moveable seating associated with both indoor and outdoor dining areas) 
	5 spaces per 1,000 sf of Parking Floor Area for entirely "to go" or "stand-up" food service uses that provide no customer seating 
Vehicle service 	3 spaces per service bay 
Vehicle wash 	3 spaces per bay or stall 
	+ 1 space per 2 stalls if attended 
Vending Kiosk/Automated Teller Machine (ATM) 
Generally (if not listed below) 	1 space per kiosk 
 Ice, water or food 	3 spaces per vending kiosk 
 Media (e.g., DVDs) 	2 spaces per vending kiosk 
 ATM (walk-up type) 	2 spaces per ATM 
Veterinarian, small animal 	1 space per 200 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Public and Other Uses 
Helistop 	2 spaces 
Park or Playground 
 Active recreation 	12 spaces per acre 
 Athletic fields 	30 spaces per field 
	+ 1 space per 4 seats or 6 ft of bench space 
 Passive recreation 	5 spaces per acre 
 Swimming pool 	1 space per 100 sf of swimming pool water surface area 
 Tennis (or handball or racquetball) courts 	4 spaces per court 
	+ 1 space per 2 courts for employee parking if the courts are attended 
Parking facility 	NA, except if the facility is attended, then 1 reserved space per employee on the maximum shift 
Post office 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Public Safety Facility 
 Fire station 	4 spaces per emergency vehicle bay 
	+ 1 space per 100 sf of Parking Floor Area in public meeting space 
 Police station 	1 space per 250 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Recreation facility or club 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Recycling drop-off center 	5 spaces 
	+ 1.5 spaces per collection vehicle that is stored on-site overnight 
Industrial Uses 
Commercial warehousing and logistics 	1 space per 400 sf of Parking Floor Area of retail, wholesale and office space 
	+ 1 space per 1,000 sf of Parking Floor Area of other space 
	+ 1 space per loading dock 
Light industry 	1 space per 500 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Research and testing laboratory 	1 space per 300 sf of Parking Floor Area 
Marine Zones 
On the land area abutting marine zones M-C and M-RM, one parking space shall be provided for each boat slip, plus one parking space for each thirty-five (35) linear feet of bulkhead and pier space along which a boat may be docked. These parking requirements are in addition to those associated with the land use of the land area. 
 
(k)  Required parking spaces for disabled persons. The number of parking spaces that are designed and designated for disabled persons shall comply with the requirements of the Texas Accessibility Standards. 
(l)  Stacking spaces. Uses with drive-through facilities shall provide vehicle stacking spaces as set out in this section and in Table 11-800.C, Required Stacking Spaces: 
1.  Size of stacking space: Eight (8) feet by eighteen (18) feet (exclusive of access drives and parking aisles). 
2.  Stacking spaces include the spaces at menu boards, service windows, and Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). 
Table 11-800.C 

REQUIRED STACKING SPACES 

Land Use with Drive-Through 	Stacking Requirement 
Convenience stores and pharmacies 	4 per drive-through lane or service window, including the position at the window 
Dry cleaner 	2 per drive-through lane or service window, including the position at the window 
Financial institutions 	Single drive-through lane: 6, including the position at the service window/station 
	Multiple drive-through lanes: 5 per lane, including the position at the service window/station 
	ATMs: 3, including the position at the ATM 
Fueling stations 	3 per fuel pump 
Restaurants 	8 to each menu board 
	3 between menu board and service window 
OR, if multiple windows (for payment and then service): 
	4 between menu board and the first window, including the position at the first window 
	2 between first and second windows, including the position at the second window 
Vehicle wash 	Automatic washes: 5 per bay 
	Full-service washes: 4 per bay 
	Self-service washes: 2 per bay 
 
3.  Other uses. Uses other than those listed in Table 11-800.C that propose drive-through facilities shall provide a number of stacking spaces as approved by the city engineer, based on either: 
a.  Functional comparability to a use that is listed in the table; or 
b.  A study of comparable uses in the community or surrounding region that demonstrates that the proposed number of stacking spaces is adequate to prevent circulation conflicts on the parcel proposed for development and the abutting streets. 
(m)  Uses that involve fleets or vehicle inventory. Uses that involve fleets of vehicles (e.g., home repair services) and uses that involve vehicle inventories (e.g., passenger vehicle sales or rental) shall provide parking for the fleet or inventory. Such parking shall not count toward the off-street parking requirements of this section. 
(n)  Special parking studies. Some of the uses that are listed in Table 11-800.B have nonlinear or widely varying parking demand characteristics. Accordingly, Table 11-800.B indicates that the parking requirements for such uses are established by a "special study," which shall be conducted according to the standards of this subsection. 
1.  Requirements. The special study shall provide: 
a.  A peak parking analysis of at least five (5) functionally comparable uses. 
b.  Documentation regarding the comparability of the referenced uses, including: name, function, location, floor area, parking availability, access to transportation network (including vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian and transit), use restrictions, and other factors that could affect the parking demand. 
2.  Conduct of study. The special study shall be conducted by a professional engineer or transportation planner with experience in parking analysis and planning. 
a.  The city may retain a qualified parking specialist, at the applicant's expense, to prepare the special study and provide recommendations to the city; or 
b.  The city may rely on the applicant's selected parking specialist to conduct the study, with review provided by city technical staff and/or consultant. 
3.  Parking determination and appeals. If the planning commission, in consultation with the city engineer, does not accept the off-street parking supply for the use, or mix of uses, as recommended by the special study, then the off-street parking supply shall conform to the standard requirement of this section. The applicant may appeal the decision to city council. 
4.  Future parking reserve. As a condition of approval of a special study, the planning commission may require a reserved open area on the site for additional parking if: 
a.  There is a demonstrably high probability the use could change, resulting in a higher demand for parking; or 
b.  The case involves a phased development with the potential for a change in the nature or mix of uses in later phases, resulting in a higher demand for parking; or 
c.  The variability in the special study justifies the reservation of additional land to mitigate a material risk that the use may be insufficiently parked. 
Areas that are reserved or land-banked shall be of appropriate location and dimension to provide for the additional parking by connection to existing parking areas. Once the project is occupied and well established, if there is a surplus of parking, the applicant may request approval for additional development capacity and parking using the reserved area. 
5.  The potential parking credits and reductions set out in subsections (l), Credits for on-street and public parking, and (m), Reduction of parking requirements by provision of bicycle amenities, below, are not available to uses that base their parking on a special study unless the study methodology specifically addresses these credits and reductions and determines that they are appropriate. 
(o)  Credit for on-street and public parking. In the Urban (U) district, on-street parking and parking in public lots and/or garages may be credited to particular uses in accordance with the formula: 
Parking Credit = 0.8 × (A × P), where: 
"A" is equal to the area of the applicant's parcel divided by the area within six hundred (600) feet of the boundaries of the parcel proposed for development that are within the same zoning district in which the parcel is located; and 
"P" is equal to the total number of unrestricted parking spaces on streets and in public parking lots and/or garages that are located within six hundred (600) feet of the boundaries of the parcel proposed for development that are within the same zoning district in which the parcel is located. 
The values for "A" and "P" shall be documented by the applicant. 
(p)  Reduction of parking requirements by provision of bicycle amenities. The planning commission may authorize up to a five (5) percent reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces, in addition to other potential parking reductions and credits provided under this section, for development that provides amenities for bicyclists on the subject property or incentives for bicycle use that are in addition to the required provision of dedicated bicycle parking spaces. Examples of accommodations that would qualify for the credit include: 
1.  Enclosed bicycle lockers; or 
2.  Employee shower facilities, lockers and dressing areas. 
(q)  Shared parking for mixed-use developments. The planning commission may grant reductions in the total number of required parking spaces for mixed-use developments in the Commercial (C) and Urban (U) districts, as provided in this subsection, as this tends to decrease impervious surfaces and enhance the efficiency of land use by capitalizing on the synergy between varied uses in close proximity that have different peak parking demand periods. 
1.  Shared parking table. Shared parking allows a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces when a parcel is occupied by two (2) or more uses that typically do not experience peak parking demands at the same time. When any land or building is used for two (2) or more use types that are listed below, the minimum total number of required parking spaces may be determined by the following procedure: 
a.  Multiply the minimum required parking for each individual use type by the appropriate percentage listed in Table 11-800.D, Shared Parking Table, for each of the designated time periods. Do not include parking spaces that are reserved for use by specified individuals (e.g., "Reserved for Dr. Smith") or classes of individuals (e.g., "residents only"). Round up all fractions to the nearest whole number. 
b.  Calculate a sum for all uses for each of the five (5) time periods (columns). The minimum parking requirement is the highest of these sums, plus the reserved spaces, if any, that were not included in the multiplication in the first step. 
c.  The maximum reduction pursuant to Table 11-800.D shall be twenty-five (25) percent. 
d.  If an applicant proposes to reduce required parking through the provisions of subsections (l), Credits for on-street and public parking, and/or (m), Reduction of parking requirements by provision of bicycle amenities, above, these reductions must be applied to one use within the proposed mixed-use development prior to calculating the shared parking reduction. 
2.  Special shared parking study. As an alternative to the Shared Parking Table methodology, above, an applicant may propose a special study to document the parking required for mixed uses. This shall involve review of the peak parking demand periods for the proposed uses during a 24-hour weekday and each weekend day, and shall result in a proposed number of parking spaces to accommodate the combined peak hour parking demand. The study shall be conducted as provided in subsection (n)2., above. The study shall provide data on: 
a.  The sensitivity of the proposed uses to change. For example, a center with no restaurant could have significant changes in parking if a restaurant was added. 
b.  Similar mixes of uses in other areas of the community or surrounding region. 
c.  Degree of variability of parking for individual uses (average, range and standard deviation). 
3.  Design of shared parking. Where shared parking is implemented: 
a.  A pedestrian circulation system shall be provided that connects uses and parking areas, making it easy and convenient to move between uses. 
b.  All shared parking shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any building which it serves, as measured along an established pedestrian route from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the use served. 
Table 11-800.D 

SHARED PARKING TABLE 

Land Use 	Weekday 	Weekend 
	Night 
(12 a.m. to 6 a.m.) 	Day 
(6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) 	Evening 
(6 p.m. to 12 a.m.) 	Day 
(6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) 	Evening 
(6 p.m. to 12 a.m.) 
Residential 	100% 	60% 	90% 	80% 	90% 
Office 	5% 	100% 	10% 	10% 	5% 
Commercial retail 	5% 	70% 	90% 	100% 	70% 
Commercial lodging 	80% 	80% 	100% 	50% 	100% 
Restaurant 	10% 	50% 	100% 	50% 	100% 
Commercial Amusement 	10% 	40% 	100% 	80% 	100% 
All others 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 	100% 
 
(r)  Shared parking among sites under different ownership. Adjoining developments with separate property ownership may propose shared parking arrangements in accordance with the purposes and procedure of subsection (m), above, with the following conditions: 
1.  Table 11-800.D shall be used to calculate the reduction in required parking to be achieved through a shared parking arrangement. 
2.  A plan for interconnected parking areas shall be provided. 
3.  Easements shall be recorded that provide for, at a minimum: 
a.  Cross-access among the parking areas and connections to permit parking by the different uses anywhere in the connected properties; 
b.  A pedestrian circulation system that connects uses and parking areas, making it easy and convenient to move between uses; 
c.  Allocation of maintenance responsibilities. 
(s)  Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be required for all parcels proposed for non-residential and/or multiple-family residential development that will have off-street parking with twenty (20) or more vehicular parking spaces. 
1.  Bicycle parking shall be provided in the following amounts: 
a.  Surface parking areas. One bicycle parking space per ten (10) required vehicle parking spaces. 
b.  Parking structures. One bicycle parking space per twenty (20) required vehicle parking spaces. 
c.  No more than thirty (30) bicycle parking spaces shall be required on any parcel proposed for development to which this subsection applies. 
d.  If the number of required vehicular parking spaces is reduced through the shared parking provisions of subsection (n), above, then the number of bicycle spaces provided shall be based on the number of such spaces required after application of subsection (n). However, if the number of vehicular parking spaces is reduced by application of subsections (l), Credits for on-street and public parking, and/or (m), Reduction of parking requirements by provision of bicycle amenities, above, then the number of bicycle spaces shall be based on the number of vehicular parking spaces that were required before application of subsections (l) and/or (m). 
2.  Design standards for bicycle parking. 
a.  Areas devoted to bicycle parking shall be hard surfaced. 
b.  Bicycle racks shall be provided, and must be securely anchored. 
c.  Bicycle racks are not required for bicycle parking associated with multi-family residential uses. Required bicycle parking for such uses may be provided in garages, storage rooms and other resident-accessible, well-lit and secure areas. 
3.  Location of bicycle parking. 
a.  Short-term bicycle parking (for visitors and customers versus longer-term parking for residents and employees) shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the principal building entrance, at the same grade as the sidewalk or accessible route. 
b.  If authorized by the planning commission, upon favorable recommendation of the city engineer, some or all of the required bicycle parking may be located within a public right-of-way, provided that pedestrian, wheelchair and bicycle circulation paths are not obstructed. 
4.  Shared bicycle parking. The planning commission may allow the required bicycle parking for a development to be consolidated with the bicycle parking of an adjacent development if the parking location is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the principal building entrance of the development that would benefit from the off-site bicycle parking. Such shared provision of required bicycle parking shall be evidenced by a written agreement executed by both property owners. 
5.  Adjustments. The planning commission may reduce the number of required bicycle spaces, potentially to zero, if the applicant demonstrates that: 
a.  The use is not likely to generate significant bicycle traffic; or 
b.  It is physically impractical to provide bicycle parking at the subject location. 
(t)  Loading spaces. Loading spaces shall be provided as required by this section: 
1.  Number required in C district. One loading space shall be required for the first fifty thousand (50,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area for commercial uses in the C district that have at least fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area. Then, one space shall be required for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of commercial floor area. 
a.  Loading space dimensions. Each required loading space shall have minimum dimensions of at least fourteen (14) feet by seventy (70) feet, with at least seventeen (17) feet of vertical clearance. 
2.  On-street loading in U district. On-street, over-the-curb loading is permitted in the U district between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(u)  Use of parking and loading areas. Required off-street parking spaces shall be available for operable passenger automobiles (and bicycles, as applicable) of the residents, customers, patrons and employees of the use to which they relate. The following activities are prohibited on portions of development sites devoted to required off-street parking: 
1.  Merchandise display and sales. The display, sale and/or storage of merchandise (or of vehicles for sale) is prohibited in any portion of a required off-street parking area, except as may be authorized elsewhere in this ordinance or the City Code (e.g., temporary outdoor sales). 
2.  Storage. 
a.  Storing materials, boats, campers, recreational vehicles or inoperable vehicles, or parking trucks or trailers, is prohibited in parking areas, unless: 
(1)  The outdoor storage use is permitted in the applicable zoning district and approved for the subject property; 
(2)  The areas that are set aside for such parking are not counted towards the parking requirements for the use; and 
(3)  The areas that are set aside for such parking comply with the requirements for outdoor storage (e.g., buffering or screening of outdoor storage areas). 
b.  The long-term storage of trailers in loading spaces is prohibited. Such spaces shall be available for routine use by delivery vehicles. 
c.  Trash enclosures, dumpsters and transformers shall not be located in parking areas. 
3.  Vehicle work. No work on vehicles, of any kind or nature (e.g., mechanical repair, cleaning, etc.), is permitted within off-street parking areas. 
4.  Blocking access. 
a.  Blocking loading spaces or parking spaces is prohibited. 
b.  Loading spaces or parking spaces shall not be designed or located in a manner that blocks access to other loading spaces, parking spaces, driving aisles, fire lanes, ingress or egress points, or building entrances. 
c.  Parking, loading and access areas shall be kept free of permanent or moveable structures, of any type (e.g., trash receptacles or compactors), which block access. 
d.  Parking within a driveway approach or across public sidewalks is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 2000-516, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 2000-528, § 1, 12-11-2000; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
11-900. - Building standards. 
Except for R-1, R-2, and R-3, the following improvement and building standards shall apply to all new construction, unless the specific district(s) to which they are to apply are identified below: 
(a)  Lighting regulations. All outside lights shall be directed or hooded so that their rays are directed toward the ground and away from adjacent residential property. No outside light shall be directed nearer to a side or rear property line than the height of the light. 
(b)  Sidewalk regulations. The property owners shall construct and maintain concrete sidewalks in accordance with the City of Nassau Bay specifications to provide the occupants with convenient access to the parking areas and adjacent streets and along abutting streets. 
(c)  Utility easement regulations. If any structure is not adjacent to the utility easements serving the structure, such structure shall not be used unless and until the owner of the lot dedicates an irrevocable adequate utility easement running with the land across any area existing between such serving utility easement and the structure. All utility easements must be at least fifteen (15) feet wide, unless they adjoin and abut upon a dedicated street, in which event, the minimum width shall be seven and one-half (7½) feet on each side of the paved portion of such street. The owner shall install, maintain and pay for all public utilities on the owner's property which shall be placed and kept underground outside of buildings. In the undeveloped property within the R-1, R-2 and RM-1 districts, all utilities shall be placed and kept underground outside of buildings at the developer's expense as a requirement for issuance of building permits and approval of plat plans. 
(d)  Partition and exterior wall regulations. The partition wall or walls of each attached one-family residence shall be nonbearing and shall have a fire resistance rating of at least two (2) hours. An exterior front or rear wall may be constructed of combustible material, permissible in single-family residences, provided that the end walls extend beyond such front or rear wall a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in all places. 
(e)  Interior street regulations. The term "interior street" shall apply to all streets, public and private, within an attached one-family residence building site. Interior streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width in accordance with city ordinance number 24-137 [Appendix B of this Code] and shall be developed with a minimum width thirty-six-foot concrete paved section, all in accordance with the City of Nassau Bay standards, and at the owner's expense. Interior streets paved in accordance with the City of Nassau Bay's specifications, and not a part of the parking area, shall be provided, at the owner's expense, for access to all attached one-family residence for fire and police protection, and for garbage pickup. Each row of attached one-family residences shall abut on an existing public street of the City of Nassau Bay, or upon an interior street, but in addition to abutting on such streets, it may also be additionally served by a concrete public alley without curbs, not less than thirty-six (36) feet in width, adequately drained with catch basins and storm sewers in the center, all constructed at the developer's cost, in accordance with the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, specifications, which alley shall form no part of the parking spaces required by this ordinance. 
(f)  Curb and gutter, street paving, and fire hydrant regulations. Before becoming entitled to a building permit for the erection of any building in any of the said districts, the lot owner, at owner's expense, shall cause a fire hydrant to be installed within three hundred (300) feet of the furthermost extremity of the proposed building, if none exist within that distance; and, at the owner's expense, shall provide concrete curbs and gutters, all in accordance with the specifications of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, on the abutting streets where they do not exist, and shall provide concrete paving for such curbs and gutters to the existing pavement on such abutting public streets, or the center thereof, if closer, in accordance with the specifications of the City of Nassau Bay for concrete paving. 
(g)  Storage area regulations. There shall be at least one storage area of at least forty (40) feet in ground area upon each attached one-family residence lot, which, except when completely enclosed and contained within the attached one-family residence proper, or garage, shall be enclosed by a screening wall. 
(h)  Platting regulations. The owners of each attached one-family residence building site shall prepare and submit to the planning commission of the City of Nassau Bay for approval a plat of the proposed attached one-family residence subdivision, setting forth all the matters required to be set forth in the platting of a subdivision by Article 974a of Vernon's Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, as amended, the dedications and acknowledgments required by that act, and shall also show on such plat the dimensions and all of the matters required for attached one-family residences by this ordinance and their dimensions, including, without limitation thereby, the location of all screening walls, streets, alleys, yards, lots, storage area, courtyard, parking area, living area, interior street, easement, setback lines, utility lines, fireplug, area for common use, and other matters required or permitted by ordinance. Such owners shall endorse on such plat a dedication and conveyance of all interior streets shown on such plat to the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, and of all other areas not shown on such plat as individual lots, to all of the individual lots, and their owners then, and hereafter, in equal undivided interests, as appurtenances running with the land. If the plat conforms to all the requirements of said Article 974a and of this ordinance, it shall be approved by said planning commission; otherwise, it shall be disapproved and no building permit or certificate of occupancy permit shall be issued for any structure on such site. 
(i)  Drainage regulations. Before becoming entitled to a certificate of occupancy, an adequate drainage system shall be provided by the property owner to drain each property into the city's storm sewer system, in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the building official. The finished floor elevation of all buildings shall be at least twenty-one and one half (21½) inches above the highest gutter elevation on streets adjacent to and abutting upon each lot. 
(j)  Landscaping and planting. Any portions of lots not required for buildings, entrances, sidewalks, or parking areas shall be landscaped and planted, and so maintained by the owners. 
(k)  Water and sewer regulations. Adequately sized circulating looped water lines approved by the building official shall be installed and connected with the city lines, at owner's expense for domestic use and fire protection. Adequately sized sanitary sewer lines approved by the building official to dispose of sanitary wastes shall also be installed and connected with the city's sanitary sewer system, at the owner's expense. 
(l)  Trash disposal regulations. Except for Dempster Dumpster-type containers which may be located outside the main building, trash disposal and storage shall be entirely within the main buildings and if there is an incinerator, it shall be located inside the main buildings and be built in accordance with the City of Nassau Bay's building code and approved by the city fire marshal. 
(m)  Fire regulations. All of the districts except residential structures and their accessory buildings in R-1, R-2, RM-1, and RM-2 residential districts covered hereby shall be, and the same hereby constitute, together with all improvements therein, the fire district of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
(n)  Motel and hotel regulations. No building used as a motel or a hotel shall contain less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area in each living unit. For motels and hotels, that lot shall contain not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of open space for each living unit. Each motel or hotel or suite of rooms shall have at least one complete bathroom. 
(Ord. No. 91-398, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-91; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
11-1000. - Accessory building regulations. 
Area regulations for accessory buildings and structures in residential and multi-family districts: 
Front yard. Attached accessory buildings shall have a front yard not less than the main building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear or to the side of the main building and in no case shall any part of such building be located within the required front yard. 
Side yard. There shall be a side yard for any detached accessory building of not less than three (3) feet from any side lot line when such detached accessory building is located in the rear of the lot (the rear of a line erected connecting the midpoints on the two (2) opposite side lot lines of any lot, tract or plat). When a detached accessory building is located in front of the line connecting two (2) midpoints of the opposite side lines as herein described, such accessory building shall observe the same side yard as specified for the main building. 
Garage access. An attached or detached garage shall have a front yard not less than that required for the main building and in no case shall a garage door be located nearer than twenty (20) feet to the street on which it faces. 
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for accessory buildings not less than three (3) feet from any lot line, alley line or easement line, except that if no alley exists the rear yard shall not be less than eight (8) feet as measured from the rear lot line. Where apartments are permitted, the main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) per cent of the rear of the lot (that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining at the midpoint of one side lot line with the midpoint of the opposite side lot line). 
Air conditioning or similar accessory equipment. Air conditioning compressors, cooling towers, pool pumps, pool filters, pool heaters, whole-house generators and similar accessory equipment located in residential districts are subject to all front, side or rear yard requirements specified for accessory buildings. When such accessory structures are located in the side yard of that portion of a lot herein designated as the rear of the lot, the minimum side yard clearance shall be three (3) feet. When such accessory structures are located forward of the line dividing the rear of the lot from the front of the lot, the accessory structures are subject to the same side yard requirements as for the main structures, except air conditioner compressors which may be no closer than three (3) feet to the side lot line. 
Accessory equipment (including, but not limited to air conditioner compressors, cooling towers, pool pumps, pool filters, whole-house generators), which are elevated above ground level and their associated support structure (attached or non-attached), must also be no closer than three (3) feet to the side lot line to assure ground-level accessibility and safety and minimize aerial intrusion. Accessory equipment shall not be enclosed (reference article IV). In addition, the area below the elevated equipment cannot be enclosed or used for storage. Accessory equipment may be screened (no solid walls). Screening of accessory equipment should be consistent manufacturer's air flow recommendations. 
An elevated building structure (e.g., porch) to provide access to elevated accessory structures (including, but not limited to air conditioner compressors, cooling towers, pool pumps, pool filters, whole-house generators) from the first livable-floor level is subject to the setback requirements for a building. 
Accessory uses in PO-1. Uses such as newsstands, drugstores and cafeterias which are permitted in the PO-1 district as accessory uses to primary office use shall be contained within the office building structure and no exterior advertising sign (unless flush with the building) or outside merchandise display shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13; Ord. No. O2017-767, § 1, 3-19-18) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
11-1100. - Special area and use regulations. 
Location of dwellings and buildings. Only one main building for one-family or multiple-family use with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract unless such structures are located on an officially approved site plan. Each dwelling shall face or front upon a public street, or approved place, other than an alley, which means of access shall have a minimum width of thirty-six (36) feet. Where a lot is used for retail, commercial or industrial purposes, or a combination of same, more than one main building may be located upon the lot, but only when such buildings conform to all the open space, parking and density requirements applicable to the use and districts in which they are located. Whenever two (2) or more main buildings, or portions thereof, are desired to be placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings will not face upon a public street, the same may be permitted when the site plan for such development is approved by the planning commission so as to comply with the normal requirements for platting. No parking area, loading area, or required open space for one building shall be computed as being the open space, yard or area requirements for any other dwelling or other use. 
Temporary construction buildings. Temporary buildings and temporary building material storage areas to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specific period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the building official and subject to periodic renewal for cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
11-1101. - Temporary storage containers. 
(a)  Temporary storage containers are defined as transportable box-like containers intended for the purpose of storing household goods and other personal property to be filled, refilled, or emptied while located outdoors on a residential property for a limited period of time. 
(b)  No temporary storage container shall be placed on or at a property without obtaining a permit. The property owner or property manager, in case of rental units, shall obtain a permit from the city building department. To obtain a permit, the property owner or property manager shall complete an application form provided by the city building official. 
(1)  Applications shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
a.  The names and phone numbers of the owner or manager of the property on which the temporary storage container is to be placed; and 
b.  The name, address, and telephone number of the individual or company that owns the temporary storage container; and 
c.  A plot plan showing the proposed location of the temporary storage container on the site in relation to the street, driveway, and primary structure; and 
d.  Any other information that the building official may require. 
(2)  In the case of a tenant or property owner using the same container to move between properties in the city, only one permit is required. A plot plan for both locations must be submitted. 
(c)  Duration. Temporary storage containers may be placed on a property for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) calendar days. At the end of the fourteen-day period, an extension of seven (7) days maybe granted for good cause by the building official. In no case shall a temporary storage container remain on a property more than twenty-eight (28) days in a calendar year. 
(d)  Size. A temporary storage container shall be no greater than one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic feet in size. 
(e)  Number of units. Only one permit for a temporary storage container shall be issued for a dwelling at any one time. 
(f)  Location. Placement of the temporary storage container shall meet the following provisions: 
(1)  The unit shall be placed in the driveway or on an approved paved parking area on the property. 
(2)  The unit shall not be placed on any public right-of-way. 
(3)  In a multi-family complex, the unit shall be placed as close to the dwelling unit as possible. 
(4)  At the discretion of the building official, the unit may be placed in an alternate location. 
(g)  Signs. The only signage allowed on a temporary storage container is the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the container. 
(h)  Storage of hazardous material within the temporary storage container is prohibited. 
(i)  During a recognized emergency, the mayor may order all temporary storage container permits revoked and the temporary storage containers to be removed from the city. 
Penalty. Penalty for violation of this ordinance shall be in accordance with section 5-300, Appendix A, Zoning, of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-630, 8-13-07; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
11-1200. - Creation of building site. 
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been created by compliance with of the following conditions. 
The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the planning commission and filed in the plat records of Harris County. 
The site plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the city council in a community unit development after recommendation by the planning commission, which site plan provides all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets and other public improvements necessary to meet the normal requirements for platting including the designation of building areas and such easements, alleys and streets that have been properly dedicated and the necessary public improvements provided. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following § 11-400.  
ARTICLE 12. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted Art. 12, § 12-100, which pertained to flood control and derived from Ord. No. 83-301, adopted May 9, 1983; Ord. No. 2009-648, § III, adopted June 6, 2009. Information pertaining to flood damage prevention can be found in Ch. 8.5 of the City Code. 
 
12-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 13. - ZONING DISTRICTS, RESIDENTIAL R-1, R-2, RM-1, RM-2, R-3; MARINE M-R, M-RM, M-C, M-P 
 
13-100. - Residential Single-Family Detached District (R-1). 
The purpose and intent of the R-1 district is to provide areas of the least dense residential development and more dense urban development. 
13-101. Permitted uses. In the R-1 district no building structure of land or water use shall be permitted except the following: 
(a)  Single-family residential dwelling (detached). 
(b)  Private garages. 
(c)  Swimming pools (residential). 
13-102. Special uses subject to approval. When the planning commission determines as a fact after the review of an application that proposed plan is consistent with the intent of this ordinance the following uses may be permitted: 
(a)  Private or public parks. 
(b)  Private or public utility services. 
(c)  Governmental services. 
(d)  Recreational facilities and clubs. 
(e)  Churches or places of worship. 
(f)  Schools, public or denominational.  
13-200. - Residential Single-Family Detached District (R-2). 
The purpose and intent of the R-2 district is to recognize the need to provide areas within which single-family detached dwellings can thrive and be protected from more intense uses. 
13-201. Permitted uses. In the R-2 district no building, structure, or land or water use shall be permitted except for the following: 
(a)  Single-family residential dwelling (detached). 
(b)  Private garages. 
(c)  Swimming pools (residential). 
13-202. Special uses subject to approval. When the planning commission determines as a fact after the review of an application that the proposed plan is consistent with the intent of this ordinance the following uses may be permitted: 
(a)  Public or private parks. 
(b)  Public or private utility services. 
(c)  Governmental services. 
(d)  Recreational facilities and clubs. 
(e)  Churches or places of worship. 
(f)  Schools, public or denominational.  
13-300. - Residential Multiple-Family District (RM-1). 
The purpose and intent of the RM-1 district is for the development of single-family attached or detached dwellings. 
13-301. Permitted uses. In the RM-1 district no buildings, structure or land or water use shall be permitted except the following: 
(a)  Single-family residential dwelling (detached), R-2. 
(b)  Single-family residential dwelling (attached). 
(c)  Private garages. 
(d)  Swimming pools (residential). 
13-302. Special uses subject to approval. When the planning commission determines as a fact after the review of the application that the proposed plan is consistent with the intent of this ordinance, the following uses may be permitted: 
(a)  Public or private parks. 
(b)  Public or private utility services. 
(c)  Governmental services. 
(d)  Recreational facilities and clubs. 
(e)  Churches or places of worship. 
(f)  Schools, public or denominational.  
13-400. - Multiple-Family Residential District (RM-2). 
The purpose and intent of the RM-2 district is for the development of concentrated residential populations and should be applied within high density areas. 
13-401. Permitted uses. In RM-2 districts no buildings, structures, or land and water use shall be permitted except for the following: 
(a)  Residential single-family dwelling, detached, R-2. 
(b)  Residential single-family dwelling, attached, RM-1. 
(c)  Multiple-family residential dwelling, attached or detached. 
(d)  Private garages. 
(e)  Swimming pools (residential). 
13-402. Special uses subject to approval. When the planning commission determines as a fact after the review of the application that the proposed plan is consistent with the intent of this ordinance, the following uses may be permitted: 
(a)  Public or private parks. 
(b)  Public or private utility services. 
(c)  Governmental services. 
(d)  Recreational facilities and clubs. 
(e)  Churches or places of worship. 
(f)  Schools, public or denominational. 
13-403. L (Lake). All of Lake Nassau, formerly known as Pearson's Lake, a controlled level fresh water lake, its waters, water bottoms and spillways. 
In district L, no water or water bottoms shall be used for any other purpose than recreational, nor shall any buildings, structures, docks or piers be erected or constructed thereon or therein, except as permitted under the guidelines of Ordinance No. 2001-535 [on file in the city clerk's office], nor shall any rip-rap, concrete, rock or dirt or any material other than wood be placed therein. 
(Ord. No. 2001-534, 6-11-01)  
13-500. - Residential Single-Family Detached District (R-3). 
The purpose and intent of the R-3 district is to recognize the need to provide areas that can be developed at higher densities than exist in other single-family residential areas. 
13-501. Permitted uses. In the R-3 district, no building, structure, or land or water use shall be permitted except the following: 
(a)  Single-family residential dwelling (detached). 
(b)  Private garages. 
(c)  Swimming pools (residential). 
(Ord. No. 83-300, 5-9-83)  
13-600. - Zoning Districts Marine M-R, M-RM, M-C, M-P. 
Structures built in the marine districts shall be subject to the city's approval of an architectural review. The plans presented at the review shall contain architectural and construction information on the proposed structures, shall be binding when approved by the city, and must be approved by the city prior to initiation of construction. The plans shall be submitted to the owner(s) of the abutting land area(s). 
Prior to the city's architectural review, the land owner and developer, who propose development in the marine districts, shall obtain prior approval of their plans from the general land office, Corps of Engineers and any other appropriate government agency. 
13-601. Residential Marine District (M-R). The purpose and intent of the M-R district is to recognize the need to provide water areas for uses consistent with the single-family land use of abutting land areas zoned (R-1, R-2, R-3). 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the M-R district, no water use shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  Mooring or docking a pleasure craft owned or operated by the residents of the abutting residential area. 
(2)  Temporary mooring or docking of pleasure craft of guests of the residents of the abutting single-family residential area. 
(3)  Water sports. 
(4)  Sport fishing. 
(5)  Navigation of pleasure craft. 
(6)  Commercial uses are not permitted. 
(7)  No person or persons shall be permitted to reside in any boat or structure in the M-R district. 
(b)  Permitted structures. In the M-R district, no structures shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  One private, recreational pier or dock. The pier or dock may have open shelter for recreational purposes. 
(2)  A private boat house for the use of the residents of the abutting single-family residential lot. 
(3)  Navigation control structures, devices and signs. 
13-602. Multi-Family Residential Marine District (M-RM). The purpose and intent of the M-RM district is to provide for use of the water areas consistent with the higher density residential development of the abutting RM-1, RM-2 land areas. 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the M-RM district, no water uses shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  Mooring or docking of pleasure craft owned or operated by the residents of the abutting multi-family residential lot (marina). 
(2)  Temporary mooring or docking of pleasure craft of guests of the residents of the abutting multi-family residential lot. 
(3)  Water sports. 
(4)  Sport fishing. 
(5)  Navigation of pleasure craft. 
(6)  Commercial uses are not permitted. 
(7)  No person or persons shall be permitted to reside in any boat or structure in the M-RM district. 
(b)  Permitted structures. In the M-RM district, no structures shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  Private, recreational pier(s) or dock(s) for use by residents and guests. The pier(s) or dock(s) may have an open shelter for recreational purposes. 
(2)  A private boat house(s) for the use of the residents of the abutting multi-family residential area. 
(3)  Navigation control structures, devices and signs. 
13-603. Commercial Marine District (M-C). The purpose and intent of the M-C district is to provide for the use of the water areas consistent with the commercial development on the abutting C and U land areas. 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the M-C district, no water uses shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  Docking of pleasure craft. 
(2)  Rentals and sales associated with pleasure craft. 
(3)  No person or persons shall be permitted to reside in any structure or boat in this district. 
(4)  Navigation of commercial and pleasure craft. 
(5)  Water sports. 
(6)  Sport fishing. 
(7)  Storage and dispensing of fuel and oil for sale are not permitted. 
(b)  Permitted structures. In the M-C district, no structures shall be permitted except for the following: 
(1)  Pier(s) or dock(s) may have an open or closed shelter not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. 
(2)  Navigation control devices, structures and signs. 
(c)  Special uses subject to approval. When the planning commission recommends and the city council approves, the following specific uses may be permitted: 
(1)  Restaurants. 
13-604. Public Marine District (M-P). The purpose and intent of the M-P district is to provide water areas of public development and use, consistent with the public ownership district use (PO-1) on the abutting land area. 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the M-P district, no uses shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  Water sports. 
(2)  Navigation of pleasure craft. 
(3)  Sport fishing. 
(4)  Recreational and other uses as determined by the city. 
(b)  Permitted structures. In the M-P district, no structures shall be permitted except the following: 
(1)  Navigation control structures, devices, and signs. 
(2)  Dock(s). 
(c)  Special uses for public events. At the discretion of the city, special use permits may be granted for temporary structures for exhibits and events in association with public events. These structures will be permitted only for specifically designated duration of time by the city and the individual or organization who erects the structure is responsible for its removal within the prescribed time limit, subject to maximum fines as allowed by the law. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 95-455, 9-11-95; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
ARTICLE 14. - PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS, RESIDENTIAL 
Property development regulations for all residential districts, R-1, R-2, RM-1, RM-2, and R-3, are listed in the following chart. In addition, a graphic description of the regulations as they pertain to each district can be found in Appendices B, C, D, E and I. 
PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
(RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS) 
	R-1 	R-2 	RM-1 	RM-2 	R-3 
Minimum lot area and dimensions 6 					
 Area (sq.ft.) 	8,400 	7,700 	2,500 	See 3 	4,000 
 Width 	70 ft. 	70 ft. 	25 ft. 	75 ft. 	40 ft. 
 Depth 	120 ft. 	110 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 
 Frontage 	50 ft. 	40 ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	30 ft. 
Frontage, cul-de-sac 	35 ft. 	25 ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	20 ft. 
Maximum building height 	See 13 	See 13 	2½ 	3 1 	See 13 
Maximum floor area and lot coverage 					
 Floor area 	35% 	35% 	N/A 	N/A 	60% 
 Lot Coverage 	35% 17 	35% 17 	60% 17 	40% 	60% 17 
Minimum Floor Area 2 					
 Single story (sq.ft.) 	2,000 18 	1,800 18 	1,250 18 	900 	1,400 18 
 Two story (sq.ft.) 	2,500 18 	2,200 18 	1,600 18 	1,200 	1,700 18 
Minimum Setbacks 7,14,19 					
 Front 9 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	10 ft. 	12/3+ 1 25/30 ft. 	20 ft. 
					
 Side 	7 ft. 	7 ft. 	10 ft. 8 	20/25 ft. 	See 10 
					
 Side (Property abutting 
water) 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 15 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 15 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 15 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 15 
					
 Side Corner 11 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	N/A 	25/25 ft. 	15 ft. 
					
 Rear 	20 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	12/25 ft. 	8 ft. 
					
 Rear (Property abutting 
water) 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 16 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 16 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 	20 ft. from bulkhead or mean high water line 
 
1  Can be exceeded if variance is obtained from the board of adjustment. 
2  As herein specified, minimum floor area shall be computed based on habitable area, exclusive of open porches, or accessory uses. 
3  Minimum lot area for two (2) units shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. For each additional unit, two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feel is required. 
4  If height variance is granted, an additional three (3) feet per story shall be added to all setback requirements. Category is divided into two (2) categories: One (1) to two (2) stories, and three (3) stories. 
5  Reserved. 
6  Note lot area calculated from land area only; lots abutting water must use bulkhead line or mean high water line as boundary. 
7  Existing setbacks may be retained, even if nonconforming as of the date of adoption of this ordinance change, subject to other restrictions defined in Section 10-300 and retention of the current height (story or stories) in the nonconforming areas with a story restricted to twelve (12) feet. This exemption shall not apply to the RM-2 zoning district. If the nonconforming structure/building is rebuilt to conform to existing code, this exemption is revoked. If the non-conforming structure/building is removed and the property sold, this exemption is revoked. 
8  Maximum building length is two hundred (200) feet with twenty (20) feet minimum distance between buildings (Re. Appendix D RM-1). 
9  Front properly line commences at the edge of the street right-of-way line. 
10  One (1) side may be zero (0) lot line; the other side must have a five-foot minimum setback. There shall be no common "0" lot line between units. In no case shall the setback on the property line that adjoins adjacent property be less than eight (8) feet. 
11  A corner shall be defined as a lot bounded on adjacent sides by a street or streets. 
12  Height shall be the number of stories above the base flood elevation. (See subsection 12-100(e)). 
13  Thirty-five (35) feet measured from base flood elevation (BFE) + two (2) feet or from existing grade, whichever is greater, to the highest roof surface on a flat-roof, or a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet measured from base flood elevation (BFE) + two (2) feet or from existing grade, whichever is greater, to a point half-way up the slope of a pitched roof. 
14  For a through lot (front and rear property lines are adjacent to public streets), the front setback shall be applied to both the front and rear property lines. 
15  May be reduced to no less than ten (10) feet with a certification of structural integrity from a Texas-certified professional structural engineer further certifying that the bulkhead and water line proximity has been taken into account in the design of the foundation and that the lesser setback is acceptable. 
16  May be reduced to no less than fifteen (15) feet with a certification of structural integrity from a Texas-certified professional structural engineer further certifying that the bulkhead and water line proximity has been taken into account in the design of the foundation and that the lesser setback is acceptable. 
17  Existing maximum floor area may be retained, even if nonconforming as of the date of adoption of this ordinance change, subject to other restrictions defined in section 10-300 and retention of the current height (story or stories) in the nonconforming areas with a story restricted to twelve (12) feet. This exemption shall not apply to the RM-2 zoning district. If the non-conforming structure/building is rebuilt to conform to existing code, this exemption is revoked. If the non-conforming structure/building is removed and the property sold, this exemption is revoked. 
18  Existing minimum floor area may be retained, even if non-conforming as of the date of adoption of this ordinance change, subject to other restrictions defined in section 10-300 and retention of the current height (story or stories) In the nonconforming areas with a story restricted to twelve (12) feet. This exemption shall not apply to the RM-2 zoning district. If the non-conforming structure/building is rebuilt to conform to existing code, this exemption is revoked. If the non-conforming structure/building is removed and the property sold, this exemption is revoked. 
19  Stairs are not structure and not subject to the setback requirements. However, the design of stairs may be subject to review and approval by the appropriate home owner's association. 
DU means dwelling unit. 
Table 503 of the 2006 International Building Code requires sprinkling for fire protection for residential, wooden frame structures (Type 5B), If the height of the structure is greater than forty (40) feet as measured from grade. 
Stilt residential buildings and structures are required to be enclosed on three (3) sides. All single family residential buildings within the various zoning districts including townhomes and duplexes shall be constructed of exterior fire-resistant construction having at least seventy-five (75) percent of the total exterior walls above grade level and below the first-floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, constructed of severe weather rated brick or stone veneer. The second floor or higher elevations above the first floor shall have exterior fire-resistant construction having at least sixty-five (65) percent of the total exterior walls constructed of severe weather rated brick or stone veneer. To maintain the overall appearance of the city, stucco, cementitious fiber board siding such as Hardy Plank or Hardy Board or material of equal characteristics as approved by the city in accordance with the city's building code and fire prevention code may be considered. 
CMU is considered the first choice for enclosing the ground level of elevated homes. CMU can be purchased as standard or as split face CMU which is textured. Stucco can be applied directly to the surface of standard CMU and an approved finish coating can be applied or the plain surface of the CMU may be painted with an approved finish coat of paint. 
Exceptions may be allowed on the ground level for the following: 
1.  Covered patios to the rear of the structure. 
2.  Interior pedestrian or guest passageways through enclosed structures that are accessed through a door. 
3.  An overhanging porch or structure supported by columns from the ground level below the existing overhang, when not in front of the building line. An enclosure wall must be at the back of the porch to maintain the seventy-five (75) percent enclosed area when on the front or either side of the structure but not required when on the rear of the structure. 
4.  Columns that are not within the enclosed walls must be decorative or clad and shall not be raw poles, driven pilings or unfinished concrete. 
These exceptions shall constitute no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the entire footprint of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 83-300, 5-9-83; Ord. No. 90-391, § 2, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 2000-515, 5-8-2000; Ord. No. 2000-529, § 2, 2.1, 12-11-2000; Ord. No. 2008-642, § 1, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 2008-643, § 1, 12-8-08; Ord. No. 2009-646, § 1, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 2009-648, § II, 6-6-09; Ord. No. 2009-655, § I, 11-9-09; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13; Ord. No. O2017-765, § 1, 12-11-17; Ord. No. O2018-776, 7-9-18)  
ARTICLE 15. - ZONING DISTRICTS FOR COMMERCIAL (C), MIXED USE (U) AND PUBLIC (PO-1) USES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, changed the title of Art. 15 from "Zoning Districts (CN-1, CS-1, SC-1 and SC-2), Local Retail (LR-1) and Public (PO-1)" to "Zoning Districts for Commercial (C), Mixed Use (U) and Public (PO-1) Uses." 
 
15-100. - Commercial District (C). 
The purpose and intent of the C district is to encourage the development of retail, service, office and entertainment uses that meet the needs of both Nassau Bay residents and those who work in and/or visit the community, while ensuring compatibility with nearby residential uses and neighborhoods. This also provides for economic development that will expand the community's non-residential property tax base and generate sales tax revenue. 
(A)  Uses. Permitted and specific uses in the C district are addressed in section 15-400. Additionally, in the C district: 
(1)  Commercial amusement - indoor uses shall not involve video arcades or computer gaming centers. 
(2)  Commercial lodging uses shall not involve bed and breakfasts, boarding houses, campgrounds, or recreational vehicle parks. 
(3)  Commercial retail and heavy retail uses shall not involve bait sales as a principal use. 
(4)  Dry cleaning/laundry pick-up station uses are permitted, but laundry self-service shops (e.g., laundromats, wash-a-terias) are not permitted. 
(5)  Heavy retail uses shall not involve manufactured home sales. 
(6)  Parking facility uses shall not involve vehicle or boat storage warehouses. 
(7)  Personal services shall not involve body piercing studios or tattoo parlors as defined in Appendix A, Definitions. 
(B)  Planned unit development. Applicants may propose a planned unit development (PUD) in the C district under the amendatory procedures of Article 16.7. This procedure will enable consideration of development proposals which might not strictly adhere to the established standards for the district but would meet the spirit and intent of the district. However: 
(1)  For PUD applications in the C district, proposed buildings shall observe the height-setback plane requirement for properties at an edge of the C district that abut property outside the district that is in entirely residential use or within a residential zoning district. Maximum building height within a PUD may also be restricted to less than the C district limit in accordance with section 16.7-700(b) to ensure compatibility with adjacent development. 
(C)  Special regulations. 
(1)  Enclosed areas. All uses, except automobile service stations, shall be operated entirely within enclosed buildings, except for outdoor seating areas associated with restaurants, bars or hotels. 
(2)  Lighting. Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises and/or advertising copy shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
(3)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of merchandise shall be permitted only when incidental to the commercial use located on the same premises, and provided that: 
(a)  The storage area shall not be located in any of the required setbacks or yards. 
(b)  The stored merchandise shall not protrude above the height of the enclosed walls or building. 
(4)  Parking. All uses may utilize the provisions of section 11-800, Off-street parking regulations, that provide for potential reductions in required parking, as applicable, including credits for on-street and public parking, shared parking for mixed-use developments, and shared parking among sites under different ownership. 
(5)  Parking setback. No off-street parking area or parking structure within the U district shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest point of an R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district boundary. 
(6)  A pawn shop or credit access business is not permitted within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another pawn shop or credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 86-341, § A(4), 9-8-86; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13; Ord. No. O2014-724, § III, 3-10-14)  
15-200. - Urban District (U). 
The purpose and intent of the U district is to encourage development and redevelopment with an urban character as envisioned in the city's comprehensive plan. An encouraged mix of commercial, office, entertainment and residential uses, together with physical design factors on both private sites and in public streets and spaces, promotes a more pedestrian-oriented setting compared to areas where vehicular circulation and access are primary. Desired development outcomes in the district will support expressed community planning objectives to capitalize on Nassau Bay's waterfront location, create more amenities for residents and visitors, boost the city's nonresidential tax base, and provide for changing housing needs over residents' life cycles. District development standards also ensure compatibility with nearby residential uses and neighborhoods with a more suburban character. 
Minimum district area. Given the district purpose and intent to achieve a unique development character in an area, each instance of the Urban (U) zoning designation on the official zoning map shall involve an area of at least five (5) contiguous acres. Preferably, the U designation will encompass the blockfaces on both sides of a public street rather than having one blockface designated Urban and the opposite blockface in a different zoning designation. 
(A)  Uses. Permitted and specific uses in the U district are addressed in section 15-400. Additionally, in the U district: 
(1)  All site development activity that involves more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of new or refurbished building floor area shall be a mixed-use project that: 
(a)  Consists of a combination of two (2) or more principal uses, each of which is allowed in the district either as a permitted use or a use subject to specific use approval; and where 
(b)  Each of the minimum two (2) uses occupies at least five thousand (5,000) square feet or ten (10) percent, whichever is less, of the total building floor area of the development project. 
(2)  No uses may have drive-in or drive-through facilities (e.g., banks, dry cleaners, pharmacies, restaurants, etc.). 
(3)  Commercial amusement - indoor uses are limited to bowling alleys and pool rooms, movie theaters and live performance theaters, museums, indoor skating rinks (ice or roller), and internet cafes. 
(4)  Commercial lodging uses are limited to hotels as defined in Appendix A, Definitions, and shall not involve bed and breakfasts, boarding houses, campgrounds, or recreational vehicle parks. 
(5)  Commercial retail uses shall not involve bait sales as a principal use. 
(6)  Dry cleaning/laundry pick-up station uses are permitted, but laundry self-service shops (e.g., laundromats, wash-a-terias) are not permitted. 
(7)  Medical office/clinic/lab uses are limited to medical offices. 
(8)  Multi-family dwellings, including residential condominiums with three (3) or more dwelling units, shall be designed to where all units are accessed from interior hallways and not from individual exterior entrances. 
(9)  Parking facility uses include below-grade and multi-level parking structures and commercial surface parking. 
(10)  Personal services shall not involve body piercing studios or tattoo parlors as defined in Appendix A, Definitions. 
(11)  Vending kiosk/automated teller machine (ATM) uses are limited to ATMs, and these shall be attached to or within the interior of a building and not in a stand-alone structure intended solely for housing one or more ATMs. 
(B)  Planned unit development. Applicants may propose a planned unit development (PUD) in the U district under the amendatory procedures of Article 16.7. This procedure will enable consideration of proposed single-use projects that could be a positive addition to the district, and of other development proposals which might not strictly adhere to the established standards for the district but would meet the spirit and intent of the district. However: 
(1)  A PUD application in the U district shall involve a site of five (5) acres or larger as opposed to the provision in subsection 16.7-700(a) that exempts PUDs from any minimum or maximum size. 
(2)  A PUD application in the U district shall involve only those uses allowed within the U district and not any type of land use as provided in section 16.7-500, Permitted uses (for PUDs). 
(3)  A PUD application in the U district shall involve buildings that meet the minimum and maximum building height standards established for the U district. Proposed buildings within PUDs shall also observe the height-setback plane requirement for properties at an edge of the U district that abut property outside the district that is in entirely residential use or within a residential zoning district. Maximum building height within a PUD may also be restricted to less than the U district limit in accordance with subsection 16.7-700(b) to ensure compatibility with adjacent development. 
(C)  Special regulations. 
(1)  Enclosed areas. All uses shall be operated entirely within enclosed buildings, except for outdoor seating areas associated with restaurants, bars or hotels. 
(2)  Lighting. Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises and/or advertising copy shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
(3)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of merchandise is prohibited. 
(4)  Parking. All uses may utilize the provisions of section 11-800, Off-street parking regulations, that provide for potential reductions in required parking, as applicable, including credits for on-street and public parking, shared parking for mixed-use developments, and shared parking among sites under different ownership. 
(5)  Buffering. All uses are exempted from the buffering requirements between residential and nonresidential development in subsection 16.5-300(8). when such uses abut within the interior of the U district. However, the required buffering shall be provided where a nonresidential use or mixed-use development in the U district abuts a property outside the U district that is in entirely residential use or within a residential zoning district. 
(a)  No off-street parking area or parking structure within the U district shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest point of an R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning district boundary. 
(Ord. No. 86-341, § A(5), 9-8-86; Ord. No. O2013-712, § Exh. B, 8-12-13; Ord. No. O2019-788, 9-9-19)  
15-300. - Public Ownership District (PO-1). 
The purpose and intent of the PO-1 district is to provide a coordinated land planning approach to the sale, rent, lease, purchase, management or alteration of publicly owned or operated property. Notwithstanding those public uses permitted elsewhere in this ordinance, the PO district is primarily concerned with, although not limited to, the enlightened planning of parks and recreation areas, public buildings and facilities, other capital improvements of a distinctly significant nature, and the coordination with other public agencies, in their future land planning efforts. 
15-301. Permitted uses. In a PO-1, Public Ownership District, no building, structure, or land and water use shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses: Public and private utility services and accessory buildings and structures including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Electric power and light substation. 
(2)  Gas and water regulation station. 
(3)  Sewage treatment plant. 
(4)  Telephone exchange building. 
(5)  Water tower, storage tank, reservoir, treatment plant. 
(6)  Government services and accessory buildings and structures including but not limited to the following: 
Fire stations; 
Police stations; 
Libraries. 
(7)  Commercial radio, television, microwave transmission and relay stations and towers and accessory equipment buildings. 
(8)  Publicly owned and operated parks and recreation areas. 
(9)  Military installations.  
15-400. - Permitted and specific uses in C and U districts. 
(A)  Symbols in uses table. The following symbols are used in Table 15-400.A, Uses, to indicate whether a particular use is permitted by right or permissible by specific use review in the C and U districts: 
(1)  "P" indicates a permitted use, where the use is permitted as a matter of right, subject to any use standards or limitations of the particular district, and all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  "S" indicates a specific use, which is allowed only upon the granting of a specific use permit as provided in subsection 5-1300(B), Specific uses. The planning commission and then the city council review specific use permit applications for compliance with the standards of subsection 5-1300(B)(1). Not all properties or project designs may meet these requirements, thus the use may not be allowed to be established on every parcel within the district. 
(3)  Any proposed use which is not explicitly identified in Table 15-400.A shall require a specific use permit (SUP). 
Table 15-400.A 
USES 
(subject to any limitations under each district, 
as indicated by an asterisk in the table) 

Land Use 	C 
Commercial 	U 
Urban 
Alcoholic beverage sales, package 	P 	P 
Assisted living facility 	S 	— 
Bar/nightclub 	S 	S 
Business or trade school 	P 	P 
Child care facility, day care (DCCCF) 	S 	P 
Commercial amusement, indoor 	P* 	P* 
Commercial amusement, outdoor 	S 	— 
Commercial lodging 	P* 	P 
Commercial retail 	P* 	P* 
Condominium- 	— 	P 
Credit access business 	S 	
Dry cleaning/laundry pick-up station or laundry self-service shop 	P* 	P* 
Governmental services 	P 	P 
Heavy retail 	P* 	— 
Heavy vehicle or watercraft sales or rental 	P 	— 
Helistop 	S 	— 
Hospital 	S 	— 
Kennel 	S 	— 
Light auto service/fueling or charging station 	P 	— 
Live/work unit 	— 	P 
Medical office/clinic/lab 	P 	P* 
Mixed use 	S 	P* 
Mortuary or funeral home 	P 	— 
Multi-family dwelling 	— 	P* 
Nursery or greenhouse, retail 	P 	— 
Nursing home or convalescent home 	S 	— 
Office 	P 	P 
Park or playground (public ownership) 	P 	— 
Parking facility 	S* 	P* 
Passenger motor vehicle sales or rental 	S 	— 
Pawn shop 	S 	— 
Personal fitness or music instruction 	P 	P 
Personal services 	P* 	P* 
Place of private assembly 	S 	P 
Place of public assembly 	S 	P 
Post office 	P 	P 
Private club 	P 	P 
Professional services, instruction or counseling 	P 	P 
Public park 	P 	P 
Restaurant, drive-in/through 	S 	— 
Restaurant, no drive-in/through 	P 	P 
Town house 	— 	P 
Town house, cluster 	— 	P 
Vehicle service 	S 	— 
Vehicle wash 	S 	— 
Vending kiosk/Automated Teller Machine (ATM) 	S 	P* 
Veterinarian, small animal 	P 	P 
 
(Ord. No. 86-341, § A(6), 9-8-86; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13; Ord. No. O2014-724, §§ I, II, 3-10-14; Ord. No. O2018-777, 9-10-18)  
15-500. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 15-500, which pertained to specialized commercial district (SC-2) and derived from Ord. No. 86-341, § A(6), adopted Sept. 8, 1986; and Ord. No. 91-398, § 4, adopted May 13, 1991.  
15-600. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 15-600, which pertained to local retail district (LR-1)) and derived from Ord. No. 86-341, § A(6), adopted Sept. 8, 1986.  
ARTICLE 16. - PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS: COMMERCIAL, MIXED USE, PUBLIC AND MARINE DISTRICTS[6] 
Property development regulations for the Commercial (C), Urban (U) and Public (PO-1) districts are listed in the following chart. 
PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS: 
COMMERCIAL, URBAN AND PUBLIC 
Standard 	Commercial (C) 	Urban (U) 	Public 
Ownership 
(PO-1) 
Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions: 	
 Area 	½ acre 	1 acre 	N/A 
 Width 	100 feet 	N/A 
 Depth 	100 feet 	N/A 
 Frontage 	100 feet 	N/A 
Minimum Yard Setbacks 1 : 	
 Front (includes all street-fronting yards in U) 	25 feet 	0 feet 2 	N/A 
 Side 	15 feet 	N/A 	N/A 
 Side (corner) 	25 feet 	N/A 	N/A 
 Rear 	20 feet 	N/A 	N/A 
Maximum Yard Setback: 			
 Front (includes all street-fronting yards in U) 	N/A 	0 feet 2 	N/A 
Minimum Height: 	
 Height 	N/A 	30 feet 	N/A 
Maximum Height 3 : 	
 Height 	150 feet 3 	N/A 
Maximum Percent of Lot Area Covered by Building 4 : 	
 Maximum Percent 	80% 	90% 	N/A 
Minimum Open Space 4 	20% 	10% 	N/A 
 
Notes: 
1.  For a through lot (front and rear property lines are adjacent to public streets), the front setback shall be applied to both the front and rear property lines. 
2.  In the U district, for each yard that fronts on a public street or other public right-of-way reserved for non-vehicular circulation, at least seventy-five (75) percent of the façade of a principal building shall be at the property line, with zero feet of setback, as illustrated in Figure 16.A. Where portions of a principal building are set back, the yard area between the building façade and the property line may be used only for landscaped open space and/or streetscape enhancements (e.g., water feature, public art installation) or to accommodate a public plaza or pocket park or an outdoor seating area associated with a restaurant, bar or hotel. Additionally, the seventy-five (75) percent minimum requirement may be decreased if the additional yard area between the building façade and the property line is also used for the amenities cited above. 
 
(3)  In the C and U districts, where a property is at an edge of the district and abuts property outside the district that is in entirely residential use or in a residential zoning district, the minimum yard setback toward the abutting property shall be twenty (20) feet. Additionally, any portion of the principal building that exceeds forty (40) feet in height shall be set back an additional amount, computed as one foot from the 20-foot building line at ground level for each one foot of additional building height above forty (40) feet. This ratio establishes a height-setback plane as illustrated in Figure 16.B. 
 
4.  In order to determine the "maximum percent of lot area covered by building" and the minimum percent of lot designated as "open space," the following criteria shall be utilized: 
(a)  "Lot area covered by building" shall include, in addition to the actual building structure in question, all parking lots or garages, alleys, streets and paved areas of vehicular ingress and egress and atrium areas. 
(b)  "Open space" shall include green space, patios, unpaved picnic areas, walkways and sidewalks. 
Development in the marine districts shall require review and approval of plans by: (1) Corp of Engineers, (2) general land office, (3) the City of Nassau Bay, (4) applicable homeowner's associations, (5) Coast Guard and (6) other cognizant government bodies. Prior to any development in the marine districts, a site plan shall be submitted to the city for an architectural review in accordance with article 16.5. 
The owner or developer of the property shall be responsible for the repair or removal of damaged or derelict structures if these structures are determined to be a navigational or safety hazard by the city. 
Property development regulations for all marine districts, M-R, M-RM, M-C, and M-P, are listed in the following chart. These explicit regulations and generic factors such as blockage of sight lines and size of structures are intended to minimize the impact on adjoining properties. Graphic descriptions of the regulations as they pertain to each district can be found in Appendices J and K. 
MARINE ZONE PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT 
REGULATIONS 
	M-R 
(feet) 	M-RM 
(feet) 	M-C 
(feet) 
Minimum setbacks: 			
 Sideyard 	25 	25 	50 
Height limits: 			
 Minimum pier height (fixed pier, above mean low water line) 	4 	4 	4 
 Maximum height above the pier of any structure on pier or abutting a pier 	9 	9 	9 
Maximum pier width 	12 	12 	12 
Maximum distance of any structure in the water from the abutting land area lot line 	25 	50 	100 
 
(Ord. No. 84-314, 2-13-84; Ord. No. 86-341, § A(7), 9-8-86; Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 2000-529, § 3, 3.1, 12-11-2000; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, changed the title of Art. 16 from "Property Development Regulations: Commercial, Public and Local Retail and Marine Districts" to "Property Development Regulations: Commercial, Mixed Use, Public and Marine Districts." 
 
ARTICLE 16.5. - SITE PLAN, SITE AND BUILDING DESIGN, AND LANDSCAPE PLAN APPROVAL PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, REMODELING, DEMOLITION, ETC., IN COMMERCIAL ZONES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 86-343, enacted Sept. 8, 1986, provided for amendment of the zoning ordinance and specifically provided for incorporation in the City Code, but did not specify the manner thereof; hence, designation of Arts. 1, 2 and 4 of the ordinance as App. A, Art. 16.5, 16.5-100, 16.5-200 and 16.5-300, was at the discretion of the editor. Article 5, "Unconstitutionality" (severability), and Article 6, "Effective Date" (effective immediately upon passage), were omitted from codification. The ordinance did not contain an Article 3. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, changed the title of Art. 16.5 from "Site Plan Approval Prior to Commencement of Construction, Remodeling, Demolition, Etc., in Commercial Zones" to "Site Plan, Site and Building Design, and Landscape Plan Approval Prior to Commencement of Construction, Remodeling, Demolition, etc., in Commercial Zones." 
 
16.5-100. - Site plan approval required. 
This article requires approval of a site plan, in accordance with the requirements and procedures in section 5-1400, prior to commencement of any construction, remodeling, expansion or demolition in all commercial zones. Conformance with the design standards and landscaping, screening and tree preservation standards in this article is also required. Construction according to land uses permitted therein must meet the standards as contained in the City of Nassau Bay Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 86-343, Art. I, 9-8-86; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, changed the title of § 16.5-100 from "Enactment of ordinance" to "Site plan approval required." 
Cross reference— Building code adopted, § 4-1; building code amendments, § 4-2.  
16.5-200. - Design standards for nonresidential and mixed-use developments. 
(A)  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to establish reasonable design standards and related guidance to address community desire for visually appealing nonresidential development that enhances the overall quality and character of the city, while balancing the legitimate development and commercial needs of property owners. For the Urban (U) district, the standards are especially intended to promote and maintain an urban development character as described in the district purpose statement in section 15-400. 
(B)  Applicability. The design standards established in this subsection apply to any new nonresidential or mixed-use building in the zoning districts specified in this subsection, and to any nonresidential or mixed-use redevelopment in these districts that follows the removal of all pre-existing buildings on the site. 
(1)  The requirements of this subsection regarding building materials, canopies and awnings, colors, and visual interest and anti-monotony shall also apply to the enlarged portion of an existing non-residential, multifamily residential or mixed-use building when the enlargement exceeds one thousand (1,000) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent in area, whichever is less, of the exterior dimensions of the building. 
(2)  The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to the reconstructed portion of an existing building that was partially damaged or destroyed if the reconstruction involves less than fifty (50) percent of the pre-existing area of the exterior dimensions of the building. 
(3)  Unless indicated otherwise in this subsection, design standards related to architectural features, materials and articulation of a building façade shall apply to all exterior elevations of structures that are visible from ground-level view within any public street right-of-way inside or outside the zoning district. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require compliance with the requirements of this subsection for finish or remodeling work to the interior of an existing building if such work does not result in an enlargement of the exterior dimensions of the building, unless such enlargement exceeds the minimum thresholds in item (B)(1), above. 
(5)  The standards do not apply to multi-family development except when such multi-family use is a component of a mixed-use development in one of the specified districts. 
(C)  Design Standards. The specific standards are provided in Table 16.5-200.A, Design Standards for Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development, below. 
Table 16.5-200.A 

DESIGN STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL 
AND MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT 

Applicable 
District(s) 	Standards 	Illustrations 
C, U 	Building Materials 
The following standards are intended to ensure the use of building materials that convey an appearance of quality and durability: 
Permitted Principal Materials 
For exterior building elevations, excluding doors and windows, these include: 
• Brick or similar masonry materials. 	 
	• Limestone and other natural stone. 	
	• Any concrete product (architectural pre-cast concrete; concrete masonry unit, CMU; etc.) that has an integrated color and is textured or patterned to look like brick, stone, marble, granite or tile. 	
	• Other materials where it is demonstrated that they have comparable durability, impact resistance, texture and quality as those listed above; and/or they are part of a building that is designed to achieve a green building certification such as Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) or Energy Star. 	
	• Building integrated photovoltaics (BIPv). 	
	Permitted Accent Materials 
The following materials are permitted, but only as accents rather than a predominant exterior material. Accent materials shall comprise no more than 25 percent of any building façade (15 percent maximum in the U district), excluding doors and windows. 	
	• Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS). 	
	 [EIFS may be installed only above the floor level of the second story, or no less than 12 feet above the grade for one-story buildings. EIFS shall not be installed in any pedestrian contact areas.] 	
	• Stucco. 
 [Both EIFS and stucco shall incorporate detailing to look like traditional wall cornices, soffits, window trim and similar features.] 	
	• Tile. 	
	• Architectural metal, including aluminum composite panel (ACP) treatments. 	
	• Wood or composite wood. 	
	• Crushed rock or crushed tumbled glass. 	
	• Stainless steel. 	
	• Chrome. 	
	Prohibited Materials 
For exterior building elevations, excluding doors and windows, these include: 	
	• Pre-fabricated metal wall panels. 	
	• Smooth concrete or concrete block. 	
	• Sidings made of vinyl, wood, plywood, cedar shingle, composite, metal or fiber cement. 	
	• Plastic. 	
	• Mirrored glass in ground floor windows. 	
	Privacy Glass 
Frosted glass or other treatment is permitted for bathrooms and in other doors and windows where privacy is needed. 
Roofing 
Steel, standing seam metal and/or architectural metal may be used on a sloped roof. 
Service Doors 
Galvanized steel and painted steel are permitted only for use on doors and roll-up doors that provide access to loading areas and/or face toward alleys or vehicular access easements. 
Awnings and Canopies 
Awnings and canopies shall be made of durable, easily maintained or replaced materials, which may include canvas, fabric, steel or architectural metal, including aluminum composite panel (ACP) treatments. 
Parking Structures 
The exterior facades of parking structures shall utilize the permitted building materials and accent materials specified in this subsection for exterior building elevations. Steel, standing seam metal and/or architectural metal may be used on any sloped roof of a parking structure. 	 
C, U 	Canopies and Awnings 
Use of canopies and awnings on building and parking structure façades adjacent to and above public sidewalks and other public spaces is encouraged to provide shade and weather protection and to add visual interest to structures, provided the placement and design of such canopies and awnings is consistent with the building architecture, and they are maintained in sound condition at all times. 
Projection 
Canopies and awnings shall project no more than six feet from the façade of a building or parking structure. 
Lighting 
Canopies and awnings shall not be backlit or internally lit. 	 
U 	Clear Building Entries 
The primary building entry shall be easily identifiable for visitors. The building architecture should reinforce the visual importance of the entry, and the entry design should be pedestrian-scale and transparent. 	 
C, U 	Colors 
Use of overly iridescent or fluorescent colors on any building façade or roof is prohibited, as determined by the planning commission, taking into consideration the existing range and use of color in architecture, signs and other physical improvements within the district and its vicinity. 	 
U* 	Curb Cut Limits for Vehicular Access 
Such limits are intended to minimize vehicle-pedestrian conflict points at mid-block locations along public sidewalks, enhance the pedestrian environment within the district, and preserve the extent of curb space for on-street parking. 
• A maximum of one curb cut shall be permitted for every 100 feet of public street frontage. 	 
	• All driveways shall be limited to two lanes, and in no case shall a driveway or associated curb cut exceed 30 feet in width. 	
	• The planning commission may increase the maximum number or decrease the minimum spacing of curb cuts per segment of street frontage, as specified in this subsection, where warranted based on site-specific or emergency access considerations. 	
	Pedestrian Safety 
Wherever an access driveway, alley, vehicular access easement or other vehicular circulation path crosses a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path, a crosswalk treatment shall be installed consisting of a material that contrasts with the adjacent pavement in both texture and color (e.g., brick pavers, patterned concrete, etc.). 	
	• Access points for off-street parking areas and parking structures, where vehicles cross a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path, shall be well lit to ensure visibility of pedestrians and bicyclists. 	
U 	Framing of and Relationship to Public Spaces 
Individual buildings or groups of buildings on a development site or adjacent sites shall be arranged and designed, whenever possible, to form pedestrian-friendly outdoor plaza areas, courtyards and open spaces that are focal points for surrounding and nearby development and which encourage street activity, public gathering, outdoor dining, recreation, etc. Landscaping, street furniture, water features, public art, active play areas for children and/or other amenities should be incorporated to enhance the appeal of such spaces for pedestrians and users of the space. Such spaces should be adjacent to and easily accessible from a public street or waterfront area whenever possible. 
Private-Public Design Compatibility 
Where a development fronts on a public plaza, pocket park or other public space, the building architecture and other on-site elements shall be designed for compatibility with the existing or planned adjacent public space. 
Lighting 
Where a development fronts on public street rights-of-way and/or public plazas/spaces, exterior lighting shall be located and directed to provide adequate pedestrian-level illumination of public sidewalks and other immediately adjacent public ways and/or seating areas. 	 
C 	Freestanding Canopies 
The design of freestanding or semi-freestanding canopies, such as those used as shelters for pump islands at auto service stations, and for port-cocheres, shall be consistent with the architectural style, predominant and accent materials, color, and lighting of the principal building on the development site. 	 
U 	Grid Street Pattern 
Where applicable (depending on the district size and shape and the nature and extent of proposed development or redevelopment), blocks shall be arranged in an approximate grid-like fashion to ensure connectivity and alternate circulation routes within the district. Variation from the grid pattern should occur only to avoid constraints or accommodate other desirable design elements. 	 
U 	Ground-Level Uses 
Development projects shall locate off-street parking and/or garage parking within the interior of blocks and away from public street frontages whenever practical so that such ground-level parking does not directly abut a public sidewalk. Instead, the ground level of structures that front on public sidewalks or toward waterfront areas should be occupied by active retail, service, office, residential or other uses permitted in the district. "Wrap-around" design of active uses around parking garages is strongly encouraged. 
Parking Structures 
Where active uses along the ground-level street frontages of a parking structure are not practical, the parking structure and its vehicle entrances shall be designed to minimize views into the garage interior from adjacent streets through installation of decorative grilles or screens, additional landscaping, or other effective screening method. 	 
U, C 	Lighting of Buildings and Sites 
Lighting of building exteriors and parking areas shall be designed to match the architectural character of the site and its vicinity in terms of fixtures and illumination. 
• Parking areas shall be lighted during all darkened hours at a minimum of one foot-candle and maximum of five foot-candles at ground level. Reflection in adjacent properties shall be avoided. 	 
U 	Maximum Block Length 
Where applicable (depending on the district size and shape and the nature and extent of proposed development or redevelopment), the length of a block, on any side, generally shall not exceed 400 feet. (Note that this is a variation from the maximum block lengths established for subdivisions in City Code Appendix B, Subdivisions; Article IV, Subdivision Design Requirements; Section 4, Blocks and Lots.) This distance is measured between streets that frame and define a block; however, a public access way or easement shall also be considered to define a block when, in the same manner as a vehicular through street, such access way or easement creates a break between private development sites that provides continuous non-vehicular circulation between streets on either side of the development sites. 	 
U 	Off-Street Parking Limits 
Off-Street Parking Dispersion 
Off-street surface parking is permitted in the district, but concentrations of such parking shall be avoided to promote the desired Urban character and prevent disruption of non-vehicular circulation within the area. 
Maximum Parking Area Dimension 
No edge of an off-street surface parking area shall exceed 150 feet in length, and the entire parking area shall not exceed 21,780 square feet (½ acre). 	 
U 	Orientation of Residential Garages 
All garage doors for garages associated with individual residential units in the district shall be oriented away from, and not be visible from, any public street right-of-way inside or outside the zoning district. 	 
U, C 	Parking Structures 
Such structures shall be designed for architectural consistency with the primary building served or other nearby buildings in terms of facade design, articulation, finish materials and/or shielding of unfinished structural elements and mechanical equipment. 
Special Design Elements 
Parking structures shall include architectural and/or landscape elements which enhance the garage appearance and help to screen parked vehicles and interior lighting from external view (e.g., decorative screens, trellises with or without associated vegetation, façade and roofline variation, etc.). 	 
U, C 	Screening of Mechanical/Service Equipment 
All service and utility areas (transformers, electrical meters, etc.) positioned outside of any building shall be screened from public street rights-of-way and adjacent tracts, and shall not be visible from any nearby water bodies. In all cases, any required non-vegetative screening shall be compatible in appearance with the architectural design and building materials of the primary building served. 
• Rooftop Placement. All air conditioning equipment planned for exterior use shall be located on the roof of the building. Other utility equipment designed for exterior use shall be located on the roof of the building when possible. 	 
	Rooftop Mechanical Equipment 
Such equipment shall be completely screened from ground-level and water-level public view through design and materials consistent with the overall building design and colors, including potential use of sloped roofs or other architectural elements (e.g., parapet walls) that conceal flat roof areas where mechanical equipment is mounted. 	
	• Where a green roof system is installed and maintained on a rooftop, dense vegetative screening may be used to satisfy the screening requirement for mechanical equipment. 	
	Ground-Level or Building-Mounted Mechanical Equipment 
Such exterior equipment (e.g., mechanical components, electrical drops, utility meter banks, heating/cooling controls, etc.) shall be completely screened from public view by an opaque wall or fence which is not lower than the height of the equipment, and which uses design, materials and/or painting consistent with the overall building design and colors. The required screening may also be accomplished through installation of dense, year-round vegetation as shown on the site landscaping plan. All such screening plans shall be approved by the Nassau Bay Building Inspector. 	
U, C* 	Screening of Solid Waste Facilities 
All trash receptacles shall be screened from public street rights-of-way and adjacent tracts, and shall not be visible from any nearby water bodies. In all cases, screening shall be compatible in appearance with the architectural design and building materials of the primary building served. 
• Trash reception shall be placed within a four-sided enclosure, two feet taller than the height of the receptacle and a minimum of eight feet in height. 	 
	• In the U district, trash receptacles shall be located behind principal buildings relative to public street frontage whenever practical, and such solid waste facilities shall also be accessible from alleys or vehicular access easements where available and practical. 	
	• In the U district, no other outside storage besides solid waste facilities is permitted. 	
U 	Sidewalks 
Sidewalks with a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided along each side of a site that abuts a public street or a waterfront area. Such sidewalks shall be designed and constructed according to City standards. 
•  Public Access Easement 
Where a sidewalk or portion of the sidewalk required by this subsection is situated outside the City street right-of-way, the property owner shall establish a public access easement so that such sidewalk area is continuously available for public use. 	 
	Arcade Treatment 
Arcades may be constructed along building façades to provide shelter and shade, but shall be located entirely outside the public right-of-way. The arcade design shall also incorporate adequate pedestrian-level lighting under the arcade for visibility and security. 	
U* 	Transparency of Nonresidential Uses at Street Level 
Building façades associated with nonresidential uses that face public street rights-of-way, public plazas/spaces or waterfront areas shall have windows at the ground level, for product display or other active building uses, which, together with door openings, comprise at least 60 percent of the ground-level façade. 
• Such ground-level windows and doors shall be non-mirrored, allowing views into and out of the interior of the building, to the extent practical given code requirements governing the selection of window glass. Frosted glass or other treatment is permitted doors and windows where privacy is needed. 	 
C, U 	Underground Utilities and Wires 
All utilities on development and redevelopment sites shall be underground, including secondary power unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. 	 
C, U 	Unified Design of Multiple Buildings 
Developments with multiple structures on a single property shall reflect a coordinated design and include unifying elements such as common building forms, materials, textures, architectural detailing and colors. 	 
C, U 	Visual Interest and Anti-Monotony 
Building Articulation 
Building façades that face public street rights-of-way, waterfront areas and other public areas shall be articulated to reduce the apparent mass of the structure and to add visual appeal. This may be accomplished by stepping back a portion of the facade periodically relative to the building line, along with other design variations in the façade. 
Roofline Articulation 
For flat roofs or facades with a horizontal eave, fascia or parapet, the roofline shall be varied vertically so that no unmodulated segment of roof exceeds 50 feet in horizontal dimension. This standard can also be satisfied by incorporating design elements such as functional or faux dormers, gables, towers, chimneys, etc. 
Avoidance of Blank Walls 
Any exterior building elevation that faces a public street right-of-way, public plaza/space, waterfront area, public parking area or area of residential use shall have no more than 16 feet of uninterrupted blank wall space in a horizontal or vertical direction. This standard can be satisfied by incorporating window openings, porches or balconies, articulation of the building facade, decorative cornices, material and color variations, score lines, etc. 	See Figure 16.5-200, below, for graphics illustrating building articulation and other techniques for adding architectural interest. 
	Landscape Treatment for Large Walls 
Where buildings are more than 60 feet in length or 35 feet in height, trees shall be arranged to break up the appearance of building mass so that the building is perceived to be divided into lengths of no greater than 50 feet when viewed from ground-level or water-level public vantage points. 	
 
Figure 16.5-200. 
EXAMPLES OF BUILDING DESIGN AND ARTICULATION STANDARDS 
 
(Ord. No. 86-343, Art. 2, 9-8-86; Ord. No. 91-398, § 3, 5-13-91; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, changed the title of § 16.5-200 from "Site plan, arcitectural review and approval procedures" to "Design standards for nonresidential and mixed-use developments."  
16.5-300. - Landscape development requirements. 
(A)  Purpose. The requirements and standards set out in this article are intended to: 
(1)  Protect and preserve the appearance and character of the community; 
(2)  Increase the compatibility of adjacent uses; 
(3)  Mitigate the effects of noise, dust, debris, artificial light intrusions and other externalities created by the use of land; and 
(4)  Conserve water by promoting the planting of native and low-water, drought-resistant vegetation. 
(B)  Landscaping plan. A landscaping plan shall be required for all development which requires a site plan approval. All landscaping plans shall be subject to planning commission review and approval. The landscaping plan shall include all the elements that are set out in section B-600 in Appendix B, Application Submittal, unless the administrative official finds that one or more elements do not apply to the type of development approval sought, or the conditions of the site being developed, or both. The administrative official is authorized to require additional information on the landscaping plan as needed to verify conformance with the requirements of this article. 
(C)  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Minimum size of plants at installation. Plant material that is installed to comply with the requirements of this article shall be of the following minimum sizes at installation: 
Table 16.5-300.A 
MINIMUM SIZE OF PLANTS AT INSTALLATION 

Type of Plant Material 	Minimum Size at
Installation
Large Tree 	4 inch diameter at breast height (DBH) 
Small Tree 	2.5 inch diameter at breast height (DBH) 
Shrub 	5 gallon container 
Palm 	10 feet clear trunk height 
 
(2)  Quality of new plantings. 
(a)  All landscape material shall be in compliance with the standards of the American Nursery and Landscape Association. 
(b)  No species of proposed landscape material shall appear on the Invasive and Noxious Weeds list for the State of Texas promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture, nor on the Texas Noxious Weed List promulgated by the Texas Department of Agriculture. 
(c)  Single trunk tree species with co-dominant trunks (multiple trunks of equal size) shall not be used. 
(d)  Single trunk trees shall have one trunk to the top, and all branches shall be less than half of the diameter of the adjacent trunk. 
(e)  All plant material shall have a habit of growth that is normal for the species and shall be of sound health, vigorous growth, and free from insect pests, diseases and injuries. 
(f)  Sod shall be solid, and seeding of turf grasses is not allowed. 
(3)  Species diversity. To avoid large monocultures of trees and shrubs, species used to meet the requirements of this article shall be diversified as follows (calculations shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number): 
(a)  When more than ten (10) trees total are required on a parcel proposed for development, no more than twenty (20) percent of each category of required landscaping (large trees, small trees and shrubs) on a site shall be of any one species; and no more than forty (40) percent of each category shall be of any one genera. 
(4)  Calculation of planting requirements. The planting requirements of this article are set out in terms of the minimum number of large trees, small trees and shrubs per unit of land area (e.g., "per lot," "per square foot," or "per acre"). 
(a)  Credits. Credit is provided for preservation of existing trees as set out in subsection 16.5-300(E), Credit for existing trees. 
(b)  Substitution for large trees. Palm trees or small trees may be substituted for large trees at a three-to-one ratio (three (3) palms or small trees per large tree substituted), according to the following standards: 
1.  Palm tree requirements. Unless a provision of this article specifically allows otherwise, palm trees shall be installed in clusters with varying heights between ten- and fourteen-foot clear trunk height to provide visual interest. 
2.  Limitation on small trees. Small trees may be used instead of palms or large trees only if palms or large trees would conflict with existing overhead power lines or existing buildings. 
3.  Limitation on palm trees. Not more than eighty (80) percent of the trees used to comply with this article may be palm trees. 
(5)  Ground cover. In accordance with subsection 11-1000(j) [11-900(j)], Landscaping and planting, of this article [appendix A], all pervious areas shall be planted or covered with trees, shrubs, groundcovers (which may include sod), mulch or garden plants to prevent erosion and wind-blown dust. 
(a)  Limitation on sod. In nonresidential and mixed-use development, not more than thirty (30) percent of the area covered with groundcovers may be planted with sod. Athletic fields shall not be counted in this calculation. 
(b)  Mulch. Mulch may be inorganic (e.g., stone, gravel, tumbled glass or shredded rubber) or organic (e.g., pine bark, shredded hardwoods); however, materials that float shall be contained by edging or topography. 
(6)  Landscape surface and common open space. 
(a)  The standards of this subsection apply to required landscaped surfaces and common open spaces which are not also designated as: 
1.  Private residential lots; 
2.  Parking lot landscape areas; 
3.  Dry basin stormwater detention facilities; 
4.  Areas of open water (including wet basin stormwater detention or retention facilities); 
5.  River, stream or creek channels or drainage canals; or 
6.  Play fields and other active recreation areas that must be clear of trees. 
(b)  Minimum planting requirements. The minimum number of plants of each type of plant material shall be planted, as indicated below, for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of required landscape surface area or common open space. In calculating the requirements for a parcel proposed for development, standard rounding shall be used to ensure a whole number of plants for each type of plant material. 
1.  Large trees: 0.3 per one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
2.  Small trees: 0.8 per one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
3.  Shrubs: Fifteen (15) per one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(7)  Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping is required in every parking lot associated with a nonresidential or mixed-use development. Parking lot landscaping shall be installed in landscape islands and in corners of parking lots that cannot be used for parking spaces due to geometric constraints. Such corners shall be delineated by the extension of the back line of the parking spaces that define the corner. See Figure 16.5-300.A, Parking Lot Planting Areas. 
Figure 16.5-300.A 
PARKING LOT PLANTING AREAS 
 
(a)  Planting areas. Planting areas shall be arranged within parking lots as follows: 
1.  A planting area ("endcap landscape island") shall be installed at each end of a parking row that intersects with an aisle, except on the outside of corners (which are "corner landscape islands"). See Figure 16.5-300.A. 
2.  A planting area ("corner landscape island") shall be installed at each corner of the parking lot. See Figure 16.5-300.A. 
3.  A planting area ("landscape area between parking modules") shall be provided between parking modules for each two (2) parking modules that are arranged parallel to each other. For the purpose of this calculation, fractions shall be dropped. No more than three (3) parking modules shall abut each other unless at least one of them is bordered on one side by a "landscape area between parking modules." See Figure 16.5-300.A. 
4.  Additional planting areas ("interior landscape islands") shall be provided as necessary to meet the tree planting requirements of subsection (c), below. Any such island that will accommodate a large tree shall be of adequate size and dimensions to meet the requirements of subsection (b), below. To ensure adequate room for tree canopy spread, interior landscape islands shall not be configured "back to back." Instead they must be separated by at least forty (40) feet at their nearest edges. See Figure 16.5-300.A. 
(b)  Planting area per large tree. Each required large tree shall be installed in a permeable area that is: 
1.  Not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet; and 
2.  Not less than nine (9) feet in any horizontal direction. 
(c)  Planting requirements. 
1.  Trees shall be installed so that there is at least one large tree per ten (10) surface parking spaces and one small tree per five (5) surface parking spaces (loading and vehicle stacking spaces do not count as surface parking spaces). Such trees shall be distributed around the parking lot so that each planting area includes at least one tree, and so that all parking spaces are located within fifty (50) feet of the center of a large tree trunk. 
2.  Landscape islands and planting areas between parking modules shall be planted with xeric groundcovers or grasses (not drought-intolerant turfgrass varieties), or, if used as part of a biological stormwater treatment system, with groundcovers that are appropriate to that function. 
(d)  Protection of planting areas. Planting areas shall be protected by wheel stops and six-inch curbs. Curb lines may be interrupted to allow for stormwater flows into biological treatment areas pursuant to an approved drainage plan, provided that the curb openings do not interfere with the curb's protective function. 
(8)  Screening requirements. Screening shall be provided between non-residential property and any abutting residential property. When screening is required, the non-residential developer will install a masonry wall, fence or landscaping along the interior property line. The walls or fences must be constructed to materials which are compatible with the exterior materials of the non-residential building as approved by the planning commission. For the selection of a landscaping buffer as an alternative, the landscaping concept must be approved by the city council after a public hearing by the planning commission. A ten-foot wide landscape buffer or six-foot fence shall be required for compliance with this section. 
(D)  Tree preservation or removal. 
(1)  Preservation of existing tree stands. Development shall be designed so that significant stands of trees are preserved and located in designated open spaces whenever practicable. For the purposes of this requirement, a "significant stand" is a stand of trees with interconnected canopies that cover a total of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of ground area, or a single tree with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of at least twelve (12) inches. Sites that include significant numbers of trees shall not be clear cut in preparation for development. Instead, trees shall be removed only if, based on the site plan review and final approval, they are found to be: 
(a)  On any list of prohibited species adopted by the city; 
(b)  Unhealthy or structurally unsound; 
(c)  Within ten (10) feet of an approved building footprint; 
(d)  Within five (5) feet of the paved area of an approved street or parking area; 
(e)  Within eight (8) feet of an approved outdoor recreation area that by its nature requires the removal of the trees (e.g., ballfields); 
(f)  Within an approved stormwater retention/detention area and are not adapted to such conditions; or 
(g)  Within six (6) feet of a utility easement and would interfere with the use of the easement as determined by the city engineer. 
(2)  Removal of trees for development. A tree removal permit may be issued for the removal of trees that qualify under subsection (1), above, if it is demonstrated that: 
(a)  No reasonable alternative site design at the same development intensity could be approved that: 
1.  Would preserve the protected trees; or, 
2.  If large-scale preservation is not possible, would preserve the largest of the protected trees; or 
3.  If protection of the largest trees is not possible, would preserve a greater number of protected trees than the proposed development design. 
(b)  Relocation of the trees to another location on-site or within the city is not practically or economically feasible; 
(c)  The trees are replaced or mitigated according to the following standards: 
1.  They are replaced with the number of new trees for which credit would be given if the protected trees were preserved (see subsection (E), Credit for existing trees, below); and 
2.  At least sixty (60) percent of all replacement trees will be native and/or low-water and drought-tolerant species. 
(3)  Relationship to landscaping requirements. Replacement trees shall count toward the landscaping requirements of the areas in which they are planted. However, if this subsection requires more trees than other provisions of this article, then this subsection controls. 
(4)  Protection of existing tree stands or trees preserved by landscaping plan. Protected trees shall not be removed, damaged (e.g., through topping or other improper pruning) or destroyed unless a tree removal permit is issued by the city. Trees that are not protected as provided in subsection (1), above, by their presence in designated open space, or by a landscaping plan, may be removed, subject to the limitations of subsections (1), and (2), above, upon issuance of a building permit. 
(5)  Removal without replacement. A protected tree may be removed without replacement only in the following circumstances: 
(a)  The city manager orders such removal due to a pending emergency; or 
(b)  The tree is cleared after it has fallen or been structurally damaged by a storm event; or 
(c)  A qualified professional certifies to the city that one or more of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The protected tree is damaged by natural causes beyond the point of recovery; 
2.  The protected tree is diseased beyond the point of recovery; 
3.  The protected tree must be removed as a safety measure because it is in danger of falling; 
4.  The protected tree threatens to damage property; or 
(d)  The protected tree is dead. 
(E)  Credit for existing trees. Sites shall be designed so as to preserve protected trees. Where there is significant existing vegetation on the site, the administrative official may require an inventory of plant material. Existing, healthy trees shall not be removed unless the city determines that no other option is available. Existing trees qualify for credit against the requirements of this article as provided in this subsection. 
(1)  Tree survey (when required). A tree survey performed by a certified arborist, registered landscape architect or an urban forester is required for parcels proposed for development when: 
(a)  The administrative official determines that the development plan will impact: 
1.  A material number of mature trees; or 
2.  Mature trees of significance to the community due to their large canopy size, prominent location or association with community history (in general or particular historic sites); or 
(b)  The applicant seeks credit for existing trees pursuant to this subsection; or 
(c)  The trees are greater than eight (8) inches DBH and not on any list of prohibited species adopted by the city. 
(2)  Quality of existing trees. Existing trees that are protected according to subsection (F), Tree protection during construction and development, below, count toward the planting requirements of this article, provided that: 
(a)  They are: 
1.  On any list of approved species adopted by the city; or 
2.  Established for at least five (5) years and not on any list of prohibited species adopted by the city; and 
(b)  They are not: 
1.  Overmature; 
2.  Diseased; 
3.  Poor in form; or 
4.  Leaning significantly. 
(3)  Credit for preservation of trees. It is the policy of the city to promote the preservation of its healthy mature tree canopy. Healthy, mature trees that are preserved on-site shall count as more than one tree for the purposes of landscaping requirements, as set out in Table 16.5-300.B, Credit for Preservation of Trees. 
Table 16.5-300.B 
CREDIT FOR PRESERVATION OF TREES 

Diameter at Breast Height 	Tree Height 	Years Established 	Credit 
At least 3.5 inches, but less than 5 inches 	At least 10 feet, but less than 15 feet 	Any 	1 tree 
At least 5 inches, but less than 9 inches 	At least 15 feet, but less than 24 feet 	5 	2 trees 
At least 9 inches, but less than 12 inches 	At least 24 feet, but less than 32 feet 	10 	3 trees 
At least 12 inches, but less than 16 inches 	At least 32 feet, but less than 40 feet 	15 	4 trees 
16 inches or more 	40 feet or more 	20 years or more 	5 trees 
 
(4)  Transplanting existing trees. Credit shall be given for trees that are transplanted from one part of the parcel proposed for development to another if: 
(a)  The trees are transplanted according to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard for Transplanting of Trees (ANSI A300 Part 6 Transplanting). 
(b)  Surety is provided that will ensure replacement of the transplanted tree with the number of new trees for which credit was given according to Table 16.5-300.B. The surety shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from the date the tree is installed in its new location. The surety shall be in the form of a cash deposit, letter of credit or bond in the amount of one hundred fifty (150) percent of a current cost estimate for installation of the number of new trees for which credit was given. If other than a cash deposit, the surety instrument must be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. 
(5)  Application of tree preservation credit. The tree preservation credit is applied toward the requirements for the area in which the tree is planted. If there are no requirements for that area, the credit applies to parking lot landscaping requirements. 
(F)  Tree protection during construction and development. Existing trees that are to be counted toward landscaping requirements shall be protected according to the requirements of this subsection. 
(1)  Identification of protected root zone. The protected root zone is the larger of: 
(a)  The area under the dripline of the tree; or 
(b)  A radius that extends from the center of the trunk eighteen (18) inches per each one inch of diameter at breast height (DBH) of the protected tree. See Figure 16.5-300.B, Protected Root Zone. 
Figure 16.5-300.B 
PROTECTED ROOT ZONE 
 
(2)  Restrictions within protected root zone. 
(a)  The protected root zone of all protected trees shall be barricaded during construction to prevent damage to the trees and their roots by construction equipment or soil compaction. The barricades shall be posted "Off Limits/Fuera de los Límites." See Figure 16.5-300.B. A contiguous fenced area may enclose multiple protected root zones. 
(b)  No cutting or filling, nor storage of building materials or debris, nor disposal of wastes, shall take place within the protected root zone of any protected tree. 
(c)  No impervious paving shall be placed within the protected root zone of any protected tree. 
(3)  Tree care during construction. Protected trees shall be cared for regularly during construction as follows: 
(a)  Regular watering if rainfall is inadequate; 
(b)  Pruning of branches that are dead, diseased, hazardous or detrimental to natural form; and 
(c)  Fertilizing if nutrient stress is apparent. 
(G)  Planting locations. In addition to the other requirements of this article, the following shall apply to the installation of plantings: 
(1)  Distance from utilities. 
(a)  No street or canopy trees shall be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility lines. 
(b)  No trees shall be planted over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility line, or as required by the owner of the utility or the requirements of the specific easement. 
(2)  Sight distance triangles. Trees shall not be installed in locations where there is a substantial likelihood that the mature form of the tree would have to be materially compromised to maintain sight distance triangles. 
(H)  Irrigation. All landscape areas shall be watered by an automatic sprinkler system. Drip irrigation is required for any landscape improvements which the city permits in a street right-of-way. 
(I)  Continuing care and maintenance. Uses that require landscaping plans shall provide for the care and maintenance of landscaping and trees preserved or installed in accordance with the landscaping plan. 
(1)  Maintenance responsibility. The owner of the lot or parcel or the manager or agent (which may be a mandatory property owners' association if such is provided in the association's governing documents), shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas, including abutting landscaped portions of public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Maintenance standards. 
(a)  All landscaped areas shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
(b)  Maintenance and care of landscaping on nonresidential and mixed-use properties (except agricultural properties) shall be according to the most current American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, which address the management of trees, shrubs and other woody plants. 
(3)  Replacement. Replacement of required landscaping that is dead or otherwise no longer meets the standards of this article shall occur within six (6) months of notification by the city. Replacement material shall be of similar character and quality as the dead or removed landscaping. Failure to replace within the required six (6) months shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection shall require any application from any public utility provider, or any city permit to such provider, prior to removing a tree whenever it has determined the tree poses a hazard, or interferes with restoration or continuation of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 86-343, Art. 4, 9-8-86; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
ARTICLE 16.6. - SITE PLAN APPROVAL PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, REMODELING, DEMOLITION, ETC., IN MARINE ZONES 
 
16.6-100. - Enactment of ordinance. 
This ordinance [Article 16.6] amends the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, by requiring approval of a site plan prior to commencement of any construction, remodeling, expansion or demolition, and requiring architectural review and approval in all marine zones. Construction according to the water uses permitted therein must meet the standards contained in the City of Nassau Bay Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94)  
16.6-200. - Site plan, architectural review and approval procedures. 
All new construction, subsequent construction, remodeling with exterior exposure, expansion and demolition of structures in the marine zones must be reviewed and approved by the planning commission prior to commencement of any building or construction on-site activity. This approval can be secured in a planning commission public hearing, or if council has exercised its final review power as thereafter reserved, in a regular city council meeting. All submittals to the planning commission should be in eight (8) copies. Hearing requests and all submittals must be made two (2) weeks prior to hearings. The procedures are set forth as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary sketches. The builder/developer or his designee shall review the Nassau Bay ordinances and then prepare an easily readable sketch of the undeveloped marine area showing significant existing physical features, including channels, sandbars, vegetation, etc. Another preliminary sketch shall depict site size (area), structure size (square footage), structure height (feet), setbacks, relation of proposed structure to the abutting land area, and preliminary utility layout. 
For the site plan review, the building/developer or his designee shall submit documentation indicating approval of the proposed construction from other appropriate government agencies including the general land office and Corps of Engineers, who have jurisdiction over construction in marine zones. 
(2)  Preliminary plans. These plans are to include, but are not limited to, the following: This submittal shall incorporate the interaction generated in Step One and present a refinement of the surface (plot plan) and utility service and include exterior design elevations, materials, and colors. The builder/developer shall submit a rendering of exterior building or structure appearance as a supplement to this submittal. These plans shall be presented in the format typically produced by a registered, professional architect. Steps One and Two may be combined in one presentation. 
(3)  Final submittals. The final submittal shall consist of a site plan as described in the site plan checklist, which is included in Ordinance No. 86-343 as "Exhibit A" and incorporated herein by reference. Processing time by the planning commission may be slightly longer than in Step One and Step Two and may include referral to a qualified outside consultant. Steps One, Two and Three may be combined in one presentation. All components of building design must adhere to the City of Nassau Bay Building Code. 
The planning commission's approval of preliminary plans shall not constitute the Nassau Bay Building Inspector's acceptance of the final construction drawings or approval to begin construction. The final construction plans, including site plan, floor plans, utility plans, elevations, sign plans, and exterior materials shall be submitted to and approved by the Nassau Bay Building Inspector prior to any construction. Approval of segments of the plans is only an intermediate step in the planning commission's approval process, and planning commission's approval of final plans will be contingent upon compliance with the approved Nassau Bay site plan review. 
The building inspector shall ensure that all agreements leading to final approvals by the planning commission and city council on items in this ordinance are incorporated prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(4)  Requirements for Nassau Bay marine site plan and site review: 
(a)  Introduction. These requirements are intended to help land developers in planning their marine projects. The requirements will provide direction to the builder/developer by defining certain items and areas which are common to the project as a whole and items over which the City of Nassau Bay will exert strict control. 
(b)  Site plan review. All marine development in Nassau Bay will be subject to a site plan review and approval as a precondition for new marine construction, subsequent construction, exterior remodeling, expansion, and demolition of structures in the marine zones. 
1.  The objectives of a marine site plan review are: 
a.  The health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
b.  Satisfaction of Nassau Bay's zoning ordinance's, purposes and standards. 
c.  Protection and preservation of natural features and adjacent properties. 
d.  Siting of structures for a good overall design. 
e.  Efficient, functional development. 
f.  Adherence to architectural guidelines. 
2.  Site plan [contents]. A site plan is a development plan, drawn to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a water area as required by the regulations involved, including such details as the following: 
a.  The existing and proposed conditions of the water area and major features, both natural and man-made; 
b.  The location of all existing and proposed structures, lot lines, utility services, signs, lighting, architecture, choice of building material and colors; and 
c.  Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring review and approval of site plans by the planning commission. 
3.  Site plan review procedure. The planning commission will review all marine development plans within the City of Nassau Bay in a public hearing and make a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval. The city council shall retain final approval power as is required in zoning decisions by statute and by the city zoning ordinance. Such final approval shall be presumed granted by council unless said site plan review is scheduled on council's agenda for the meeting next following the planning commission meeting wherein said commission approval was recommended. 
(Ord. No. 94-435, 9-12-94)  
ARTICLE 16.7. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT 
 
16.7-100. - Enactment of ordinance. 
This ordinance [Article 16.7] amends the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, by adding the new land use district of Planned Unit Development (PUD) to those listed in article 4 of the zoning ordinance, and may require the procedures of a zoning change, and requiring a PUD master plan review and approval by the planning commission and by city council in public hearings. Construction in a PUD must meet the standards contained in the effective City of Nassau Bay Building Code. 
The city's land uses are typically identified by fixed zoning categories as described in appendix A of the City Code. Any project that meets the requirements of a specific zoning category does not need further zoning-related action by the planning commission or by city council before a permit may be issued. The exception to the fixed zoning category is a land use authorized by special use permits which modifies the requirements of a fixed zoning category. 
The PUD zoning category is different. It exists as an overlay on the fixed categories and may legislatively suspend the requirements of the fixed categories without the need to amend the ordinance provisions for the fixed zones. The area limits of a PUD are described in the PUD master plan and may include one or several fixed categories. By its very nature, a PUD is not intended to be a category that one may seek as a matter of right. A PUD will exist only at the discretion of the city, once the land uses have been negotiated and determined by the developer, planning commission and city council. Elements of the negotiated terms will be documented in the PUD master plan. There may be additional accompanying requirements, such as, but not limited to, setbacks, density, height, or landscaping, if deemed desirable by the city and if it is in the public's best interest as determined by the city. 
Refusal to consider a PUD for any tract or tracts shall not be a denial of a right of the applicant, for no one has a right to a PUD treatment. Such refusal means that the existing fixed zoning categories remain in full force and effect and must be met unless the ordinance is amended to permit the use or treatment sought. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § II, 12-9-02)  
16.7-200. - Definition. 
Each PUD district is a unique and flexible land use district that may include multiple land uses horizontally and vertically. The controlling document for a PUD is the PUD master plan. Implementation of the PUD master plan may be phased. Any major change to the PUD master plan needs to be reviewed and approved by the planning commission and by city council in public hearings. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § III, 12-9-02)  
16.7-300. - Intent. 
Proper private development and redevelopment of any part of the city require a flexible approach to be available both to the city and to the landowner. The PUD is intended to encourage mixed uses, allow a more flexible response to the market, encourage innovative subdivision or site plan design, and promote superior development which is compatible with adjacent land uses. The City of Nassau Bay may identify areas in the city's comprehensive planning document that could benefit by flexible development. The city encourages landowners to apply for a zoning change in these areas to a PUD. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § IV, 12-9-02)  
16.7-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 16.7-310, which pertained to amendment to zoning ordinance required for approval of PUD and derived from Ord. No. 2002-557, § V, adopted Dec. 9, 2002.  
16.7-320. - Designation of a PUD district. 
(a)  The designation of a PUD district is an amendment to the zoning ordinance and shall meet all the requirements of an application for rezoning. 
(b)  The PUD master plan, which is submitted by the developer and approved by the city council and supporting documents shall form part of the ordinances and be attached as exhibits thereto. Detailed requirements for a PUD master plan are defined in section B-700 of the Appendix B—Application submittal. 
(c)  The city council may approve a PUD master plan as submitted, amend and approve the plan as amended, or disapprove the plan. 
(d)  Prior to formal consideration of a plan for a PUD, the planning commission and city council shall hold public hearings at which parties or interested citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard in the same manner as required for a rezoning application. 
(e)  Three (3) copies of the approved PUD master plan, together with supporting documents, shall be submitted to the building official for use prior to issuing building permits. 
(Ord. No. O2016-751, § 1, 12-12-16) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 16.7-320 by Ord. No. O2016-751, § 1, adopted December 12, 2016, Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted August 12, 2013, repealed the former section 16.7-320 in its entirety, which pertained to designation of a PUD district and derived from Ord. No. 2002-557, § VI, adopted December 9, 2002.  
16.7-400. - Goals and objectives. 
Before approving a PUD, the city council shall determine that it meets the following goals and objectives: 
(a)  The development in the proposed PUD is equal to or superior to development that would occur under the standard ordinance requirements. The overall quality of development within a PUD, compared to the quality of development under the standard ordinance requirements, together with its integration of the PUD with adjacent land uses, shall be the prime determinants of whether or not a PUD is approved. 
(b)  A PUD shall be in harmony with the general purposes, goals, objectives, and standards of the city's comprehensive planning document. 
(c)  A PUD shall not have an undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking, utilities, or any other matters affecting the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(d)  A PUD shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services including streets, parking, drainage, water, wastewater facilities, and other necessary utilities. 
(e)  The developer shall participate in the negotiated cost of upgrading any part of any infrastructure if existing conditions are inadequate. 
(f)  A PUD shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as not to dominate, by architecture, scale and massing of structures, the immediate neighboring properties or interfere with their development or use in accordance with any existing zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § VII, 12-9-02)  
16.7-500. - Permitted uses. 
A PUD may be utilized for any type of land use, provided all uses are designed to be compatible with adjacent uses and the city's comprehensive planning document. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § VIII, 12-9-02)  
16.7-510. - Flexible site planning. 
When considering a PUD, the unique nature of each proposal for a PUD may require, under proper circumstances, the departure from certain city codes and ordinances. The adoption of an ordinance approving a PUD shall constitute authority for such flexible planning to the extent that the PUD, as approved, departs from city codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § IX, 12-9-02)  
16.7-520. - Phased development. 
If a developer considers the construction of a PUD in phases, the PUD master plan shall present the totality of the project as envisioned for all phases. Each phase shall be properly identified as to location and scope. A phased PUD master plan shall be approved "in concept only" by the planning commission and by city council at the time of the original submittal. If the concept of any subsequent phase should change, the revised PUD master plan shall be resubmitted for review and approval by the planning commission and by city council. 
(a)  If development of the PUD is to occur in phases, then a schedule shall be submitted as part of the PUD master plan. The schedule shall indicate the timing, land uses, and density of each phase. 
(b)  All lands to be dedicated for public park land, public use, or school site purposes shall be dedicated in the first phase of development, or a schedule outlining when such dedications are to be made, shall form part of the PUD master plan. 
(c)  Fiscal assurances for all park, roadway, and utility construction shall be provided, to the satisfaction of the city manager, prior to the approval of the PUD master plan. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § X 12-9-02)  
16.7-600. - General provisions. 
(a)  Development within a PUD must comply with all other applicable ordinances not specifically waived by the PUD. 
(b)  Where a PUD creates any common property, a property owners' association and maintenance fund shall be established for the PUD to assure the continued maintenance of common property within the development. The association shall be legally incorporated prior to the approval of the first plat within the PUD or the issuance of the first building permit, whichever first occurs. 
(c)  A PUD shall not waive any basic health or safety standards. 
(d)  Where parking is waived for a PUD due to a specific targeted market (i.e., senior citizens housing), an overlay to the PUD master plan shall be provided to show how full parking could be accommodated if conditions change in the future, and a method established to accommodate such changes. Parking shall be sufficient for each approved phase of the PUD master plan and shall consider the needs of each land use category included in the project. 
(e)  All utility lines and drainage facilities shall meet all city standards, and a maintenance fund shall be established to assure the continued maintenance of all private utility lines and drainage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § XI, 12-9-02)  
16.7-700. - Standards and criteria. 
(a)  Size. There is no minimum or maximum size for a PUD; however, a PUD must consist of a parcel or group of parcels which form a single contiguous land unit. For this purpose, an ownership separated solely by the width of public or utility rights-of-way will be considered contiguous. 
(b)  Height. The height limitation for structures within a PUD shall be designated to assure compatibility with adjacent developments and other portions of the PUD. If the height of a structure is intended to increase the density in the PUD, adequate considerations need to be given to solve for infrastructure problems such as sufficient water and sewer capacity, traffic congestion, and parking. 
(c)  Area. An individual lot for each structure is not required; however, individual lots may be provided at the developer's option. There is no minimum area requirement for lots, and lot boundaries may coincide with structure boundaries, provided that all utilities can be provided, and proper buffering between different land use categories are incorporated in the PUD master plan. Buffering may be required both horizontally and vertically. 
(d)  Access. 
(1)  Streets within a PUD may be public and/or private. The city may require dedication of rights-of-way and construction of public streets through or into the PUD. 
(2)  While street width design criteria may be waived, private roads shall be built to the same construction standards as public streets. 
(3)  Where access to individual lots within a PUD is via a common parking lot, a maintenance agreement and a maintenance fund shall be provided to assure the continued maintenance of access drives and parking. 
(4)  All pavement widths and curve radii, for both public and private streets, shall be designed to assure adequate access by fire and emergency vehicles. 
(5)  Separation of local traffic from PUD generated traffic is encouraged as much as possible to promote traffic flow. Retail and service land uses in a PUD shall be readily accessible from existing residential areas of the city. 
(e)  Minimum lot sizes. 
(1)  Minimum lot sizes as required by the subdivision and zoning ordinances may be waived provided: 
The overall base density of the PUD shall be consistent with the capabilities of the city's infrastructure, the comprehensive planning document, available parking, and acceptable vehicular traffic; 
(2)  The PUD provides for adequate buffers, architecture and the restriction of building massing to assure compatibility with adjacent development and other buildings within the PUD; and 
(3)  The PUD preserves significant natural features on the site. 
(f)  Maximum density. The maximum density of a PUD shall be determined by the comprehensive plan, physical limits of the city's infrastructure, acceptable increase in vehicular traffic, percentage of open space, and/or compatibility with adjoining developments and community standards. 
(Ord. No. 2002-557, § XII, 12-9-02)  
16.7-800. - Procedures. 
(a)  Applications shall be submitted in accordance with article 6 of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Pre-application conferences. Prior to filing an application for PUD approval, the prospective applicant shall request a pre-application conference with the city manager. At the conference, the general outline of the PUD proposal, evidenced schematically by sketch plans, shall be presented by the applicant. 
The applicant may also request pre-application reviews or workshops with the planning commission to allow the applicant and city to iterate on the parameters contained within the proposed PUD, prior to the formal application. Such reviews and workshops with the planning commission shall be open to the public in accordance with section 7-300 of this appendix and notice of the meetings shall be given in accordance with subsection 7-200(c). There is no limit to the number of pre-application reviews or workshops with the planning commission prior to the formal application. 
In addition to these standard notices of these meetings, the city shall endeavor to place notices of these meetings in any one or all of the following: (1) the city website, (2) public service television channel, (3) city newsletter, (4) city marquee sign. These notices shall provide a description of the proposed PUD and its planned location. 
(c)  Application for PUD approval by the planning commission shall be in accordance with section 7-200 of this appendix and by the city council in accordance with article 8 of this appendix. 
(d)  Fee payment for PUD applications. Fee payment shall be as scheduled by the effective city ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. O2016-751, § 2, 12-12-16) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 16.7-800 by Ord. No. O2016-751, § 2, adopted December 12, 2016, Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted August 12, 2013, repealed the former section 16.7-800 in its entirety, which pertained to procedures and derived from Ord. No. 2002-557, § XIII, adopted December 9, 2002.  
16.7-810. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, deleted § 16.7-810, which pertained to PUD master plan and derived from Ord. No. 2002-557, § XIV, adopted Dec. 9, 2002.  
16.7-820. - Changes to a PUD master plan. 
(a)  Minor changes. After an approval by city council, minor alterations (as determined by the city staff) to the development PUD master plan required by engineering or other circumstances that do not substantially change the concept of the PUD, may be approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Major changes. Major changes (as determined by the city staff) in fact or in concept shall be resubmitted following the same procedure required as in the original PUD application. Such changes include modifications prior to, during construction, or after construction. 
(c)  Notification of determination. The city staff will inform the mayor and chairman of the planning commission within two (2) business days of its determination of the category of the proposed changes. The mayor and chairman of the planning commission (or their designees) will respond if they disagree with the categorization within three (3) business days. 
(Ord. No. O2016-751, § 3, 12-12-16) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 16.7-820 by Ord. No. O2016-751, § 3, adopted December 12, 2016, Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted August 12, 2013, deleted the former section 16.7-820 in its entirety, which pertained to changes to a PUD master plan and derived from Ord. No. 2002-557, § XV, adopted December 9, 2002.  
16.7-830. - Platting. 
Platting will be determined by the proposed PUD master plan. The PUD master plan must be approved prior to or simultaneously with the approval of any plat. All land in a PUD must be platted in accordance with the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. O2016-751, § 4, 12-12-16) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 16.7-830 by Ord. No. O2016-751, § 4, adopted December 12, 2016, Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted August 12, 2013, deleted the former section 16.7-830 in its entirety, which pertained to platting and derived from Ord. No. 2002-557, § XVI, adopted December 9, 2002.  
16.7-840. - Recording a PUD. 
The PUD agreement and PUD master plan shall be recorded in the official deed records of the county. The recording costs shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O2016-751, § 5, 12-12-16) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of section 16.7-840 by Ord. No. O2016-751, § 5, adopted December 12, 2016, Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted August 12, 2013, deleted the former section 16.7-840 in its entirety, which pertained to recording a PUD and derived from Ord. No. 2002-557, § XVII, adopted December 9, 2002.  
ARTICLE 17. - PERMITS 
 
17-100. - [Prerequisites to issuance; record; conformance to plan.] 
No permit for the erection, alteration, reconstruction, conversion or use of any building shall be issued by the building official unless there shall first be filed in his office by the applicant therefor, a plan in triplicate, drawn to scale, correctly showing the location and actual dimensions of such building, with measurements from all lots lines to all foundation lines of building, together with a true statement, in writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which such building is intended, and the location and dimensions of all accessory buildings. No permit shall be issued by said building official unless such plan shall show in every detail, that such building is to be erected and used in conformity with all the provisions of this ordinance. A record of such applications and plans shall be kept in the office of the building official. 
Failure of any applicant or of his agents or employees to erect, alter, move, or maintain any buildings in conformance with such plans on which such permit is issued, when such failure constitutes a violation of any provisions of this ordinance, shall render such permit void. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to revoke any such permit by giving written notice to the applicant or his agents or employees, and all work upon such building shall be immediately discontinued on the serving of such notice until such buildings shall be changed so as to comply with such plans and permits.  
ARTICLE 18. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
 
18-100. - [Requirements.] 
No building hereafter erected, converted or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use and no land may be used, nor shall any basic change of use in land or structure be made until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building official of the City of Nassau Bay, stating that the building or proposed use of land or building complies with the provisions of this ordinance and other building laws of the City of Nassau Bay. 
18-101. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and will be issued within ten (10) days after the completion of the erection, alteration or conversion of such building or land provided such construction or change has been made in complete conformity to the provisions of this ordinance. All existing nonconforming uses shall obtain certificates of occupancy within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this ordinance. A certificate of occupancy shall be considered evidence of the legal existence of a nonconforming use as contrasted to an illegal use in violation of this ordinance. 
18-102. A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of building or land, complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of this ordinance. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the land or building affected. 
18-103. Following the issuance of a building permit it shall be a violation of this ordinance for the owner of the property upon which the work under the permit is to be done to transfer title thereto, or otherwise sell or dispose of to any purchaser, without prior delivery to the purchaser of a valid certificate of occupancy pertaining to all work for which a building permit was issued; or, if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed, without providing notice to the purchaser in writing that a valid certificate of occupancy has not been issued. A separate violation of this ordinance is committed for each day from the day of the sale of this property under these circumstances until the date of issuance of the pertinent certificate of occupancy.  
ARTICLE 19. - COMPLETION OF BUILDING UNDER CONSTRUCTION 
 
19-100. - [Under existing permits.] 
Nothing herein shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building actually and lawfully under construction on the date of passage of this ordinance and a substantial part of which has been completed within one year from the date of the passage of this ordinance.  
ARTICLE 20. - PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER EXISTING ORDINANCES 
 
20-100. - [Effect of enactment.] 
By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have become legalized, unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is now a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses, or illegal uses, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time this zoning ordinance was adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such adoption; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or proceeded with in all respects as if such ordinance had not been adopted.  
ARTICLE 21. - UNCONSTITUTIONALITY 
If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance, or the application of same to any person, property, or set of circumstances is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void or invalid, the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or the application to other persons, property, or set of circumstances shall not be effected thereby; it being the intent of the city council in adopting this ordinance that no portion thereof or provision or regulation contained herein, shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality of any other portion hereof, and all provisions of this ordinance are declared to be servable for that purpose.  
ARTICLE 22. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
22-100. - [When effective.] 
Upon careful analysis, public review, planning commission recommendation, and city council adoption, this ordinance becomes effective immediately upon its passage. The effect of this amendment is to replace the prior official zoning map dated October 9, 2006, with the new official zoning map, dated August 12, 2013, attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 95-449, § 2, 6-12-95; Ord. No. 2003-564, § 2, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 2006-609, § 2, 10-9-06; Ord. No. O2013-713, § 2, 8-12-13)  
APPENDIX A. - DEFINITIONS 
 
A-100. - Use definitions. 
Access: The principal means of ingress and egress to abutting property from a publicly dedicated right-of-way. 
Accessory building or structure: A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is clearly incidental and related to that of the principal building, and which is located on the same lot as the principal building. 
Accessory use: A use that is customarily incidental to the principal use, and so necessary that it cannot be prevented by the code. Accessory uses shall be located on the same premises as the principal use. 
Acre: An acre shall contain forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet of land or of water. 
Administrative official. The city manager and/or any staff member(s) of the city authorized by the city council to enforce, to interpret, or to administer the regulations, zoning ordinances, or orders. 
Alley: A right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon, and is not intended or used for general traffic circulation. 
Alcoholic beverage sales, package: An establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. 
Alterations, building: Any change in the structure which will increase the number of dwelling units, the floor area, or the height of a structure. 
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms which is rented, leased, let, or hired out, to be occupied as the home or residence of one individual, family, or household. 
Apartment house: Any building, a portion thereof, which is designed, built rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied; or which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two (2) families living independently of each other, and doing their cooking in the said building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
Architect: An individual, duly registered and licensed as an architect in the State of Texas. 
Assisted living facility: An establishment that: 
(1)  Furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four (4) or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment; 
(2)  Provides: 
(a)  Personal care services; or 
(b)  Administration of medication by a person licensed or otherwise authorized in this state to administer the medication; and 
(3)  May provide assistance with or supervision of the administration of medication. 
See Tex. Health and Safety Code § 247.002. 
Atmospheric pollution: The discharging from stacks, open storage, chimneys, exhausts, vents, ducts, openings, open fires, or flames such air contaminants as visible emissions, sulphur dioxide, particulate matter, hydrocarbons, fumes, gases, or similar material. 
Automotive repair shop: A building or structure used for painting, retouching and/or major repairs, of motor vehicles. 
Automotive service station: A building, other structure, or a tract of land, used exclusively for retail sales of gasoline or other motor fuels; and for any accessory uses such as the sale of lubricants, accessories, supplies, or the repair of motor vehicles. No vehicles shall be stored, or mechanical repairs done outside the building. A public parking lot or public parking garage is not a permitted accessory use. 
Bar: An establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premises consumption, but not a restaurant (as the principal use). 
Bedroom: A sleeping room, the minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
Block: The smallest parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets, streams, railroad right-of-way, parks or other public space, or a combination thereof. 
Board of adjustment: Has the power to hear and determine appeals from the refusal of building permits, appeals resulting from administrative decisions by city building inspector, and to permit exception to or variations from the zoning regulations in classes of cases or situations in accordance with the principles, conditions and procedures specified in the zoning ordinance. 
Buffer: A parcel of land free of any structures, buildings, roadways, or other constructed items, and consisting of green cover. 
Buildable area: The portion of a lot remaining after the required yards have been provided. Buildings may be placed in any part of the buildable area, but limitations on the per cent of the lot which may be covered by buildings may require open space within the buildable area. 
Building: Any structure built for the support, the enclosure, the shelter, or the protection of chattels, persons, animals, or the like. The word "building" includes the word structure, and shall include any thing constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground, or is attached to anything having a permanent location on the ground; and shall include, but is not limited to, such structures as homes, hotels, motels, apartments, stores, service stations, radio towers, cooling towers, tanks, silos and billboards. 
Building detached: A building surrounded by yards or other open space and on the same lot as a building. 
Building, front line of: The line of that face of the building nearest to the front line of the lot. 
Building line, rear: The line of that face of the building nearest to the rear line of the lot. 
Building line, side: The line of that face of the building nearest to the side lines of the lot. 
Building height: The vertical distance from grade to the highest finished roof surface in the case of flat roofs, or to a point at the average height or roofs having a pitch of more than one (1) foot in four and one-half (4½) feet. Height as applied to a story means the vertical distance from top to top of two (2) successive finished floor levels. 
Building official: The city manager, or his authorized representative, charged with the administration and the enforcement of the zoning ordinance and building code of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Building setback line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the base of the building structure and the adjacent lot line. 
Building site: A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit devoted to a certain use, or occupied by a building or group of buildings that are united by a common interest or use; with the customary accessories and open spaces. 
Business or trade school: A vocational/technical school, language school, training center, beauty school, culinary school and comparable advanced or continuing education facilities. The phrase does not include university or college campuses, music schools, fitness centers, sports instruction, swimming instruction or martial arts instruction. 
Carport: A roofed area open on one, two (2), three (3), or four (4) sides, unattached to the main building, for the storage of one or more vehicles. 
Certificate of occupancy: An official, written approval by the building official setting forth that a building or structure legally complies with the Nassau Bay Zoning Ordinance and Building Code, and that the same may be used for purposes stated herein. 
Child care facility, day care ("DCCCF"): A day care center, which is a state-licensed child-care facility that provides care at a location other than the residence of the director, owner or operator of the child-care facility for seven (7) or more children under fourteen (14) years of age for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, but at least two (2) hours a day, three (3) or more days a week. See Tex. Human Resources Code § 42.002 and § 42.041. 
City council: The legislative and governing body of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Clinic: A facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis, including diagnostic services, treatment, training, administration and services to outpatients, employees or visitors. The term clinic includes immediate care facilities, where urgent care treatment is the dominant form of care provided at the facility, but does not include hospital, freestanding emergency medical care facility, or state-designated trauma center. 
Commercial amusement, indoor: Uses that provide commercial amusement indoors (except adult uses), including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Bowling alleys and pool rooms; 
(2)  Movie theaters and live performance theaters; 
(3)  Museums and aquariums; 
(4)  Indoor skating rinks (ice or roller); 
(5)  Indoor velodromes; 
(6)  Shooting ranges (indoor), which means a building open to the general public wherein the shooting of firearms is allowed for the practice of marksmanship. This phrase does not include facilities maintained or operated by a police department or United States military branch that is not available to the general public. 
(7)  Video arcades; 
(8)  Local area network computer gaming centers; and 
(9)  Internet cafes. 
Commercial amusement, outdoor: Uses that provide commercial amusement outdoors, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Amphitheaters or other outdoor concert facilities; 
(2)  Amusement parks or theme parks; 
(3)  Fairgrounds; 
(4)  Batting cages; and 
(5)  Miniature golf establishments. 
Commercial district, general: A land area designated for limited commercial facilities of a convenience nature, with a total area of not less than one-half (½) acre and not more than three (3) acres. 
Commercial lodging: A place that offers overnight accommodations for short-term rental, including hotels and motels, and which may have dining rooms, restaurants, cafes or other accessory uses to serve guest needs. 
(1)  Hotel means commercial lodging in which ingress to and egress from all guest rooms occurs internally within the hotel building, and that may also offer convention facilities or meeting rooms. 
(2)  Motel means commercial lodging in which ingress to and egress from guest rooms usually occurs through individual entrances from outside the building, and which is of a design oriented to the short-term occupancy needs of patrons traveling by automobile. 
Commercial retail: Commercial and retail uses that do not include regular outside storage or sales. The phrase "commercial retail" includes uses that are comparable to the following: 
(1)  Furniture and home furnishings stores; 
(2)  Electronics and appliance stores; 
(3)  Paint and wallpaper stores; 
(4)  Hardware stores; 
(5)  Food and beverage stores; 
(6)  Health and personal care stores; 
(7)  Clothing and clothing accessory stores; 
(8)  Sporting goods, hobby, book, music and stores; 
(9)  Art sales/galleries; 
(10)  General merchandise stores; and 
(11)  Miscellaneous store retailers. 
Common property line: A line dividing one lot from another. 
Comprehensive land use plan: The official public document developed by the planning commission and city council of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, as a policy guide to present and future land use decisions. 
Condominium: A unit individually owned in a multi-unit structure, whether for residential or nonresidential use (e.g., office condominium), usually with common areas and/or facilities that the owners are mutually responsible for maintaining, typically through fees assessed on individual owners and administered through an owners association or designated property manager. 
Contiguous: Lands are contiguous if they abut each other or are separated by street ways, easements, pipelines, power lines, conduits, and/or right-of-ways under ownership of the petitioner, of a governmental agency or subdivision, or of a public or private utility. 
Country club: An area containing a club house available to a specific recorded membership. Such a club may include as adjunct facilities a dining room, private club, swimming pool, cabanas, tennis court, golf course and similar service and recreational facilities for the members; but shall not include living quarters. A specific use permit is required for service of alcoholic beverages. 
Credit access business: A credit services organization that obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining an extension of consumer credit in the form of a deferred presentation transaction or a motor vehicle title loan (Reference: Texas Finance Code § 393.601). 
Cul-de-sac: A minor street with only one outlet terminating at one end with a circular turn around. 
Deferred presentation transaction: A transaction in which: 
(A)  A cash advance in whole or part is made in exchange for a personal check or authorization to debit a deposit account. 
(B)  The amount of the check or authorized debit equals the amount of the advance plus a fee; and 
(C)  The person making the advance agrees that the check will not be cashed or deposited or the authorized debt will not be made until a designated future date. (Reference: Texas Finance Code § 341.001) 
Density: The relationship between numbers of dwelling units and land area. 
Developer: Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this ordinance. 
District: Any certain area of Nassau Bay, Texas, to which these regulations apply, and within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Dock, private: A structure built on or over the water, designed or used to provide anchorage for and access to one or more boats for private use. No cooking, sleeping, or business activity shall be permitted. 
Dry cleaning/laundry pick-up station or laundry self-service shop: An establishment only for drop-off and pick-up of garments or other materials for dry cleaning or custom cleaning that is performed off premises; or a customer self-service laundry ("laundromat" or "wash-a-teria"). 
Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement: Any strip of land created by a subdivision or granted by the owner for public or private utilities, drainage, sanitation, or other specific uses having limitations. The title to the land shall remain in the name of the proper owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the servitude. 
Emission: The act of passing into the atmosphere an air contaminant or a gas stream which contains, or may contain, an air contaminant or the material. 
Engineer, Registered: A professional engineer registered by the State of Texas. 
Fence: A structural or natural physical barrier used to divide and/or enclose a defined area. 
Final site development plan: A finished drawing showing all requirements of this ordinance, and in most cases, a further refinement of the site development plan submitted initially. 
Floor, first finished: The first level of a structure, inhabited by or for the use of a private individual and/or the general public. 
Firewall: A wall of noncombustible construction which subdivides a building or separates buildings to restrict the spread of fire, and which starts at the foundation and extends continuously through all stories to and above the roof, except where the roof is of fireproof or fire resistive construction, and where the wall is carried up tightly against the underside to the roof slab, pursuant to the Nassau Bay Building Code. 
Floodplain: As defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and depicted on the flood insurance rate map and flood-boundary and floodway map dated November 18, 1982, and as they may subsequently be revised, all pursuant to enforcement of the National Flood Insurance Program 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128. 
Floodway: The area of the floodplain reasonably required to carry and discharge floodwaters as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and as depicted on the flood insurance rate map and flood-boundary and floodway map dated November 18, 1982, and as they may subsequently be revised, all pursuant to enforcement of the National Flood Insurance Program 42 U.S.C. 4001-4128. 
Frontage: All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets; or if the street is a dead end, all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
Garage, private: An accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. 
Governmental services: The building of municipal government and related facilities such as, without limitation, libraries, recreational centers, public safety facilities, or city offices. 
Grade: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. 
Gross land area: The total area, including all public and private areas within the legal boundaries of a parcel of land or project. 
Ground-floor level: The ground-floor level of a building is the first livable area. Unfinished basements and storage areas for automobiles and other vehicles do not constitute a ground-floor level. 
Heavy retail: Retail and/or service activities that have regular outside service or outside storage areas, exceptionally large floor areas, or partially enclosed structures, as listed below: 
(1)  Permanent retail operations that are located outside of enclosed buildings, except nurseries; 
(2)  Home centers; 
(3)  Lumber and other building materials; 
(4)  Lawn, garden equipment and related supplies stores; 
(5)  Warehouse clubs and super stores; and 
(6)  Equipment rental where the equipment is stored outside. 
Heavy vehicle or watercraft sales or rental: A business engaged in the sales or rental of heavy trucks and/or boats. 
Helistop: An area used for the take-off and landing of helicopters for the purpose of picking up and discharging of passengers or cargo. The use of the helistop is restricted to specific users or purposes (e.g., tenants of a corporate park; a hospital trauma center; etc.), and the term does not include "heliports," which are facilities for general helicopter aviation use that are not limited to a specific user or purpose. 
Hospital: A "general hospital" or a "special hospital" as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 241.003, and includes all subclassifications thereof, or a "freestanding emergency medical care facility" as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 254.001. 
(1)  General hospital means an establishment that: 
(a)  Offers services, facilities and beds for use for more than twenty-four (24) hours for two (2) or more unrelated individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or pregnancy; and 
(b)  Regularly maintains, at a minimum, clinical laboratory services, diagnostic X-ray services, treatment facilities including surgery or obstetrical care or both, and other definitive medical or surgical treatment of similar extent. 
(2)  Special hospital means an establishment that: 
(a)  Offers services, facilities and beds for use for more than twenty-four (24) hours for two (2) or more unrelated individuals who are regularly admitted, treated and discharged and who require services more intensive than room, board, personal services and general nursing care; 
(b)  Has clinical laboratory facilities, diagnostic X-ray facilities, treatment facilities or other definitive medical treatment; 
(c)  Has a medical staff in regular attendance; and 
(d)  Maintains records of the clinical work performed for each patient. 
(3)  Freestanding emergency medical care facility means a facility, structurally separate and distinct from a hospital, that receives an individual and provides emergency care. 
Hotel: Any building containing principally sleeping rooms in which transient guests are lodged with or without meals, with no provisions made for cooking in any individual rooms or suite, and which may have dining rooms, restaurants, cafes, or accessory uses. 
Kennel: Any premises where any combination of dogs, cats or other household pets, totaling four (4) or more animals, six (6) months of age or older, are kept, boarded or bred for the intention of profit or rescue. 
Landscape architect: An individual duly registered and licensed as a landscape architect in the State of Texas. 
Light auto service/fueling or charging station: 
(1)  Gasoline service stations (including those that are associated with grocery stores and warehouse clubs) or fuel stations (e.g., hydrogen, compressed natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas) for alternative fuel vehicles; 
(2)  Electric vehicle charging stations; 
(3)  Gasoline, fuel station or charging station convenience marts (a gasoline service station, fuel station, and/or charging station with a convenience store); 
(4)  Quick-service oil, tune-up, brake and muffler shops in which: 
(a)  Repairs are made in fully enclosed bays; 
(b)  Repairs are of a type that is typically completed in less than two (2) hours (e.g., oil changes, brake service, tire rotation and balancing, glass repair, battery replacement, tire replacement, fluid checks and replacement, muffler service, spark plug replacement, and comparable services); and 
(c)  Vehicles are generally not stored on-site, and on the occasion when overnight storage is necessary, vehicles are stored indoors; or 
(5)  Any combination of (1), (2), (3) or (4), above. 
Live-work unit: A dwelling unit that provides space that is designed for a commercial or office use that is also allowed in the zoning district. Access between the dwelling unit and the commercial or office space is provided within the unit. 
Lot: Either: 
(1)  A lot of record, as part of a land subdivision recorded in the tax assessor's office, Nassau Bay, or 
(2)  A tract of land under a unity of title document or a tract of land either subdivided or consisting of two (2) or more lots of record located in a single block, or 
(3)  A tract of land, located within a single block, which at the time of filing for a building permit is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used entirely under a single ownership. 
Lot area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot corner: Either a lot bounded entirely by streets, or a lot which adjoins the point of intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
Lot coverage: The portion of the area of a lot expressed as a percentage, occupied by all buildings or structures which are roofed or otherwise covered, and that extends more than three (3) feet above the ground level. 
Lot depth: The horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line of the lot. 
Lot, frontage: The shortest property line adjacent to a public street; it is also the front property line. 
Lot, interior: Any lot that is neither a corner lot, nor a through lot. 
Lot, line: The boundary of a lot. 
Lot, through: Any lot that has both the front and rear property line adjacent to a public street. 
Lot, width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear property lines. 
Medical lab: A facility offering diagnostic or pathological testing and analysis of blood, blood fluids, pathological specimens, DNA sampling and analysis, and any other diagnostic test generally recognized in the healthcare industry. 
Medical office: Office space used by physicians, pediatricians, radiologists, dentists, chiropractors, physical therapists, acupuncturists and other health care professionals for the examination and/or treatment of patients on an outpatient basis, with no overnight stays by patients. 
Mixed use: A mix of two (2) or more categories of uses (e.g., office and commercial retail) on the same parcel proposed for development. Mixed use includes: 
(1)  Horizontally mixed use. Horizontally mixed use, or "multiple use," means that the uses are separated horizontally, and may be in separate buildings. 
(2)  Vertically mixed use. Vertically mixed use means that the uses are separated vertically in a single building. 
Motel: A building or group of buildings which contain sleeping accommodations for transient occupancy, and has individual entrances from outside the building to serve each sleeping unit. Motels may have one or more dining rooms, restaurants, or cafes, but no provision shall be made for cooking in the individual room or suite of rooms. 
Multi-family dwelling: A dwelling unit located within a building that contains three (3) or more dwelling units that are accessed from interior elevators or hallways, or from individual exterior entrances, and are separated by interior walls and/or floors. 
(1)  The term "multi-family dwelling" includes dwelling units that are located inside of mixed-use buildings. 
(2)  The term "multi-family dwelling" does not include boarding houses, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, bed and breakfast establishments, single-family attached dwellings, or commercial lodging. 
Nightclub: A commercial establishment that combines the consumption of alcoholic beverages (sold at the facility or brought in by patrons) on the premises with dancing and/or musical entertainment. 
Nonconforming building or structure: A structure or building existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance which does not conform to the property development regulations including area, height, lot coverage, yard setbacks, lot location, or other like requirements of the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use: A land use existing at the time of this ordinance passage which does not conform to the provisions, requirements, and regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nursery or greenhouse, retail: An enterprise that conducts the retail sale of plants, whether grown on the premises or not. The terms also include, as an accessory use, the sale of a limited selection of items (e.g., soil, planters, pruners, mulch, rock, etc., but not power equipment) that are directly related to the care and maintenance of landscapes. 
Nursing home or convalescent home: An establishment that: 
(1)  Furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four (4) or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment; and 
(2)  Provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician licensed by the Texas Medical Board, or other services that meet some need beyond the basic provision of food, shelter and laundry. 
Office: Uses in which professional, business, information processing or financial services are provided. The term includes such uses as: 
(1)  Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping; 
(2)  Administration of businesses (e.g., corporate headquarters); 
(3)  Advertising and graphic design; 
(4)  Architectural, engineering, urban planning and surveying services; 
(5)  Attorneys and court reporters; 
(6)  Banks, mortgage companies and financial services; 
(7)  Call centers; 
(8)  Computer programming; 
(9)  Counseling services; 
(10)  Data processing and word processing services; 
(11)  Detective agencies; 
(12)  Government offices; 
(13)  Insurance; 
(14)  Interior design; 
(15)  Real estate sales and leasing; 
(16)  Research and development that does not include on-site manufacturing; 
(17)  Retail catalog, internet and telephone order processing, but not warehousing; and 
(18)  Virtual office services. 
Open space: An exterior open area clear from the ground upward, devoid of residential and commercial buildings, accessory structures and impervious areas, except for those structures used exclusively for recreational purposes or as walkways or sidewalks. 
Park or playground (public ownership): An open recreation facility, field, golf course, or park owned and operated by a public agency or school district and available to the general public. 
Parking area: The total area devoted to the parking and maneuvering of automobiles (refer to Appendix H). 
Parking facility: Parking lots or structures that are not provided as required parking for a particular use, and where a fee for use is typically charged. The phrase "parking facility" also includes facilities that provide both parking for a particular use and regular fee parking for people not connected to the use. The phrase includes small structures intended to shield attendants from the weather. 
Parking lot: An open area which is used for the parking of automobiles. 
Parking lot or structure (commercial): An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles which may include in the case of a parking structure only, a facility for servicing automobiles provided such facility is primarily an internal function for the exclusive use of automobiles occupying the structure and creates no special problems of ingress and egress; the sale of petroleum products is not allowed. 
Parking space: A surfaced area enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a driveway connecting the parking space to a street or alley, permitting ingress and egress of an automobile (refer to Appendix H). 
Particulate matter: Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at standard conditions when released into the atmosphere. 
Party wall: A wall which divides two (2) adjoining properties, and on which each of the owners of the adjoining properties has rights of enjoyment. 
Passenger motor vehicle sales or rental: A business that is engaged in the sale or rental of passenger vehicles, light trucks and/or motorcycles. 
Patio, open porch, court: An open, unoccupied space which may be partially enclosed by wall, fence, or building and not considered part of the residential living structure. 
Pawn shop: An establishment that is engaged in the business of: 
(1)  Lending money on the security of pledged goods; or 
(2)  Purchasing goods on condition that the goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period. See Tex. Finance Code § 371.003. 
Personal fitness or music instruction: Uses that involve instruction or facilities for physical fitness, dance or music instruction. Such uses include membership gymnasiums (with or without personal training instruction), and instruction in music, yoga, dance, boxing, aerobic exercise or martial arts. The phrase "personal fitness or music instruction" does not include the phrase "personal services," nor the phrase "professional services, instruction or counseling." 
Personal services: A use that provides non-medical services that generally (but not necessarily) are used on a recurring basis, and generally require one-to-one interaction between the proprietor or employee and the customer in order to provide the service. Examples of personal services include beauty and barber shops, body piercing studios, nail salons, tanning facilities, tattoo parlors, and tailoring. The phrase does not include the phrase "personal fitness or music instruction," nor the phrase "professional services, instruction or counseling." 
(1)  Body piercing studio means a facility in which the creation of an opening in an individual's body, other than in an individual's earlobe, to insert jewelry or another decoration ("body piercing") is performed. See Tex. Health and Safety Code § 146.001. 
(2)  Tanning facility means a business that provides for the use of any equipment, including a sunlamp, tanning booth and tanning bed, that emits electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths in the air between two hundred (200) and four hundred (400) nanometers, and is used for the tanning of human skin. See Tex. Health and Safety Code § 145.002. 
(3)  Tattoo studio means an establishment or facility in which the practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human body by scarring or inserting a pigment under the skin using needles, scalpels or other related equipment is performed. The phrase "tattoo studio" also includes an establishment in which the application of permanent cosmetics is performed. See Tex. Health and Safety Code § 146.001. 
Place of private assembly: A structure, or part of a structure, that can be temporarily rented for private gatherings (e.g., receptions, private parties, reunions, meetings, etc.). 
Place of public assembly: An indoor place where people assemble for civic or cultural purposes. This use includes places of worship, meeting facilities and conference centers. 
Planning commission: An advisory body to the city council to effect the orderly and desired growth, development and beautification of the city planning and zoning functions. 
Plat: A map depicting the divisions or subdivisions of land into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts, or other portions thereof, whatever the same may be designated, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and those of any applicable law and/or any local ordinance. 
Plat, final: A plat approved and certified by the city council and planning and zoning commission as a legal document to be used in the planning and construction of a building and/or buildings. 
Plat, preliminary: A copy of the plan in sufficient form to readily compare the plat with the master plan and construction plans. 
Post office: A branch of the United States Postal Service. 
Private club: A building in which members of a community or association may gather for social, educational or cultural activities. 
Professional services, instruction or counseling: Services that principally involve communication between the proprietor or employee and the client, and which may involve services to more than one client at a time by a single proprietor or employee, including marriage counseling, tutoring and financial planning. The phrase does not include the phrase "personal fitness or music instruction," nor the phrase "personal services." 
Property line, rear: A property line opposite and most distant from the front property line. For a triangular lot, the rear property line shall mean a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to the front property line, or parallel to the chord of a curved front property line, and at the maximum distance from it. 
Property owners association: A nonprofit organization, recognized as such under the laws of Texas, operated under recorded land agreements through which each owner of portion of a subdivision, be it a lot, home property or any other interest, is automatically subject to a charge for a prorated share of expenses either directly or indirectly for maintaining common properties, recreational areas, common areas, or other similar areas. 
Public and private utility services: A room or portion or a building, or an area adjacent to a building, enclosed from public access and view which use is incidental to, and is required in, direct support of the primary building use. 
Public park: Any publicly owned park, playground, beach parkway, or other recreational area and open space. 
Radio, television or microwave towers: Structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, and including noncommercial antennae installations for home reception of radio or television. 
Recreation facility or club: An area used for recreation and social activities either public or private. 
Restaurant: An establishment that sells prepared food and beverages to customers for consumption on-site or off-site. The term "restaurant" includes: 
(1)  Restaurant, drive-in or drive-through means a restaurant located either within a retail center, or situated on its own freestanding pad, which: 
(a)  Contains a drive-in or drive-through facility; 
(b)  Primarily serves food that is prepared and packaged within five (5) minutes; and 
(c)  Customarily serves food in disposable containers. 
(2)  Restaurant, no drive-in or drive-through means an establishment that serves prepared meals to customers for consumption on-site or off-site, but does not include drive-in or drive-through facilities (however, the use may include designated parking spaces for "curbside pickup" of food ordered in advance if the curbside pickup is a clearly subordinate function to the restaurant's operations), and includes: 
(a)  Full-service restaurants; 
(b)  Limited-service eating facilities; and 
(c)  Special foodservices. 
Rezoning: The legal process through by which changes are made to the boundary or boundaries of a zoning district(s) or where a new boundary or boundaries are established for zoning districts. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land dedicated or deeded to the perpetual use of the public. 
School, public or denominational: A school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency, having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary and secondary schools; but not including trade or commercial schools or nursery schools, kindergartens or day care centers. 
Setback: A line running a certain distance back from and parallel to the base building line or front property line, whichever provides the greater separation, wherein no building, structure, or portion thereof shall be permitted. 
Single-family dwelling (attached): A dwelling unit which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall, and which is designed for occupancy by one family, and is located on a platted separate lot, delineated by front, side and rear lot lines, and is served by separate utility connections and meters as a single-family dwelling. 
Single-family dwelling (detached): A dwelling unit, excluding mobile homes, designed and constructed for occupancy, and occupied by not more than one family, and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract. 
Site development plan: A graphic and informative representation of a specific design solution for a development phase or the entirety, meeting the requirements of this ordinance. 
Specific use permit: A permit required for a use that would not generally be appropriate but which is possible by permit of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. Such uses shall include the service of alcoholic beverages, dancing, and other uses as determined by the city council. 
Story: That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the floor immediately above (refer to ground floor level). 
Street: A strip of land privately or publicly owned which affords principal means of access to abutting property. 
Structure: That which is built or constructed. 
Swimming pool: Any confined body of water, located either above or below the existing finished grade of the site, exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in surface area and two (2) feet in depth. 
Swimming pool, residential: A swimming pool and attendant equipment maintained by an individual for the sole use of his household guest, and located in a lot as an accessory use. 
Telephone exchange: Switching and relay and transmitting equipment, except for public business facilities, storage or repair facilities, radio or television transmission. 
Temporary construction office: A trailer, structure, or shelter for temporary office use authorized by permit, used in connection with a development or building project, for temporary on-site administrative and supervisory functions, and shall be removed upon completion of the project. 
Town house: A single-family dwelling attached to one or more other single-family dwellings by not more than two (2) party walls. 
Town house, cluster: Two (2) or more town houses connected by party walls in a single building. 
Utility line local: The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised or other utility company for the distribution or collection within Nassau Bay of gas, water, sewage, surface drainage water, electric power, telephone service, or fluid used for thermal control of buildings. 
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest, or comprehensive land use and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not owing to actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in exceptional hardship. 
Vehicle service: Uses that perform service on automobiles, boats, motorcycles and/or recreational vehicles. The phrase does not include auto body (e.g., collision repair), paint or upholstery services. 
Vehicle wash: Any area or business using self-service, in-bay automatic, or conveyor equipment for cleaning and washing motor vehicles, whether as a part of another business operation (e.g., as an accessory use to light automobile service/fueling station or vehicle sales, rental and service), or as a stand-alone operation, of any type, on a commercial basis. The phrase "vehicle wash" includes fleet and municipal in-bay automatic and conveyor vehicle wash facilities. 
Vending kiosk/ATM: A machine that is located in a fixed position outdoors (either attached to a building or in a freestanding structure), which does not require employees or attendants to conduct transactions, and which is used for: 
(1)  Automated banking or other financial transactions (e.g., "ATM," change machines, etc.); or 
(2)  Vending or dispensing products (e.g., water, ice, DVD purchases or rentals, postal supplies, soft drinks, newspapers, snacks, ice cream, coffee or other foods or consumer items). 
Veterinarian, small animal: Veterinary clinics and hospitals that provide care for small domestic animals. The phrase "veterinarian, small animal" does not include large animal and livestock veterinarians. 
Yard: A required open space, clear from ground upward of any structure except for fences, walls and hedges. 
Yard, front: A yard extending across the front of a lot. 
Yard, interior: A yard between any structure and the side line of the lot. 
Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot. 
(Ord. No. 83-301, 5-9-83; Ord. No. 86-341, § A(8), 9-8-86; Ord. No. 2000-529, 12-11-2000; Ord. No. 2009-655, § II, 11-9-09; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
A-200. - General definitions. 
Aluminum composite panel (ACP). A smooth material comprised of composite metal for external cladding of buildings on vertical, sloped or horizontal surfaces. ACPs may be applied over masonry, structural steel, stud backup, or within curtain wall designs. ACPs may be produced in numerous colors or in patterns that imitate other materials such as marble or wood. 
Arcade. An arched or covered passageway attached to a building façade. 
Articulation. Architectural design method in which particular elements and parts of a building are made more distinct through variation in flat surfaces and straight lines (e.g., building facades, rooflines, etc.). 
Blockface. The properties abutting on one side of a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets or other physical features, such as a watercourse or unsubdivided land, that defines the end of the block. 
Building integrated photovoltaics (BIPv). Use of photovoltaic materials to replace conventional building materials in parts of a building envelope such as the facades, roof or skylights. Photovoltaic materials generate electrical power by converting solar radiation into direct current electricity. A BIPv system serves the dual function of building skin and power generator, and is often used to add architectural interest to a building. 
Cornice. A horizontal molded projection that crowns or completes the top of a building or wall. 
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): A standard method of expressing (in inches) the diameter of the trunk of a standing tree, including bark, measured 4.5 feet above ground level on the uphill side of the tree. 
Dormer. An extension built out from a sloping roof to accommodate a vertical window. 
Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS). A method of building cladding that provides an insulating, protective and decorative finish system for exterior walls that can be installed on any type of construction, and in a variety of shapes, colors and textures to replicate other architectural styles or finish materials. 
Gable. A triangular area of an exterior wall under the inverted "v" formed at the end of a pitched roof. 
Green roof system. The complete or partial covering of a building roof with vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane, which may also include additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigations systems. Such rooftop systems are typically used to absorb and/or retain rainwater, provide insulation, create urban habitat for wildlife, and help to lower urban air temperatures. 
Parking area: Those areas accessible to the public by vehicular and non-vehicular means and which are designated for temporary parking of motor vehicles and/or bicycles (where required or so designated), usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
Parking space: A surfaced area enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile (or one or more bicycles in the case of spaces dedicated to bicycle parking), together with a driveway connecting the parking space to a street or alley, permitting ingress and egress of vehicular and non-vehicular traffic. 
Score line. A notch or incision on a building façade, often in a different color and/or texture, to add variety and visual interest to exterior walls. 
Standing seam metal. A side-by-side formation of panels, typically made of steel, aluminum, copper or other architectural metal, in which the panels are joined together at the sides and secured in place by concealed fasteners, with the overlapping panel lock forming a seam as a connecting point between the panels. This enables the connected panels to be used for building and roofing applications. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
APPENDIX B. - APPLICATION SUBMITTAL 
 
B-100. - Information required by application type. 
(A)  Generally. The purpose of this appendix is to itemize the information required for particular types of development applications addressed by Appendix A, Zoning. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
B-200. - Rezoning. 
Each application for rezoning involving changes in district boundaries shall include the following: 
(A)  Privately-initiated rezonings. For rezoning requests initiated by the owner of the property or their authorized agent: 
(1)  A completed application in accordance with Section 5-200, Applications, including contact information for the property owner or documentation of any agent authorized by the property owner to act on his/her behalf. 
(2)  Address of the subject property, if applicable. 
(3)  An accurate metes and bounds legal description of the property, along with an exhibit of the property (in digital form, if available). If only a portion of a lot or parcel is to be reclassified, the legal description, by metes and bounds, shall cover only that portion of the property to be reclassified. In either case, the property description shall be accompanied by a computation of the total acreage of the property to be reclassified to the nearest tenth of an acre. 
(4)  If the property is part of a subdivision, the location of the subject property as referenced on a filed subdivision plat (block and lot numbers) or the latest available tax roll (parcel identification numbers). 
(5)  If available, a map indicating the location, dimensions and uses of any existing structures, along with other property features or improvements (e.g., right-of-way lines, easements, curb cuts, fences, etc.). 
(6)  A description of any applicable deed restrictions that could affect the allowable uses of the subject property. 
(7)  A statement of the reasons for seeking the rezoning, and confirmation of the existing and proposed new zoning classifications, including whether multiple new classifications are proposed for separate parcels or different portions of one or more properties. 
(B)  City-initiated rezonings. For rezoning requests initiated by a city decision-making body or the administrative official, in lieu of an application or fee payment as for privately-initiated rezonings: 
(1)  The information required by items (2), (3) and (7) in subsection (A), above. 
(2)  Information necessary for the mailed and published notices required by Section 5-600. 
(3)  Multiple and non-contiguous properties. When a city-initiated rezoning involves multiple properties, some of which are not adjacent and contiguous, the city may provide a unified description and notice of the proposed action where all affected properties have the same zoning classifications, existing and proposed, and the rationale and circumstances are generally the same. Otherwise, the city shall provide a distinct description and notice where geographically separated properties would be changed to different types of zoning classifications and/or where the reasons for or the context or potential impacts of the rezoning are likely to differ by location. 
(4)  City authority. The consent of the property owner(s) is not required for a city-initiated rezoning involving privately owned property. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
B-300. - Specific use permit. 
Each application for a specific use permit to allow a use subject to special regulations in the zoning districts shall include the following: 
(A)  A site development plan showing the proposed layout of the subject site and the relationship of the specific use permit therein. 
(B)  The submission of city-provided forms stating compliance with all requirements of the appropriate district or special regulations contained in the zoning ordinance. 
(C)  A specific address and location within that address. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
B-400. - Variance. 
Each application for a variance from the terms of this ordinance shall include the following: 
(A)  The submission of the number of copies of the site development plan specified by the administrative official on the application form. 
(B)  All information required by Section B-200. 
(C)  The submission of city-provided forms stating all information required by the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
B-500. - Site development plan. 
Each application for site plan review and approval, and associated building design review where applicable, shall include the following: 
(A)  Preliminary plans. 
(1)  An easily readable sketch of the undeveloped land showing significant existing physical features, including trees, vegetation, watercourses, rock outcrops, etc. In the case of a marine zone application, the sketch of the undeveloped marine area shall include channels, sandbars, vegetation, etc. 
(2)  A sketch depicting site size (acreage), building size (square footage) and location, and parking lot(s) configuration including auto capacity (parking ratio), which sketch will also include driveway size and location, building and parking setbacks, landscaping area, utility layout, service area and notation of the percentage of the site devoted to open space. In the case of a marine zone application, the sketch shall depict site size (area), structure size (square footage), structure height (feet), setbacks, relation of proposed structure to the abutting land area, and utility layout. 
(3)  In cases where design review is required (including marine zone applications), preliminary plans for exterior design elevations, materials and colors, along with a rendering of the planned exterior building or structure appearance. These plans shall be presented in the format typically produced by a registered, professional architect. 
(4)  In the case of a marine zone application, documentation indicating approval of the proposed construction from other appropriate government agencies including the Texas General Land Office and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, who have jurisdiction over construction in marine zones. 
(B)  Final plans. 
(1)  A site development plan, drawn to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land (or a water area in the case of a marine zone application) as required by the regulations involved, including such details as the following: 
(a)  The existing and proposed conditions of the lot and major landscape features, both natural and manmade, including, but not limited to, topography, floodways, vegetation, drainageways, floodplains, watercourses and bodies and reserved open space. In the case of a marine zone application, the plan shall depict the existing and proposed conditions of the water area and major features, both natural and manmade. 
(b)  The location of all existing and proposed buildings, lot lines, streets, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping plan, structure and signs, lighting, screening devices, architecture, choice of building material and colors. In the case of a marine zone application, the plan shall depict the location of all existing and proposed structures, lot lines, utility services, signs, lighting, architecture, choice of building material and colors. 
(c)  Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring review and approval of site plans by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
B-600. - Landscaping plans. 
Each application for site plan review and approval requires an associated landscaping plan, which shall include the following: 
(A)  A plan view drawing prepared at a standard scale that ensures clarity of the proposal, which shall indicate: 
(1)  Existing and proposed topography of the site, shown at one-foot contours; 
(2)  Location and base flood elevation of floodplains; 
(3)  Dimensions, surface area and type of planting area (e.g., landscape surface area, parking lot landscaping, etc.) for each planting area; 
(4)  The location and quantity of trees and shrubs to be installed, which shall be drawn at three-fourths (¾) of mature size and annotated with genus, species, common name, drought tolerance, and size at planting; 
(5)  The location, quality, size (measured as diameter at breast height, or DBH), and protected root zone of trees that are to be preserved on the site; 
(6)  The location and extent of areas of groundcover; the groundcovers, turf, seed or inorganic materials to be installed or planted; and the type of underlayment proposed to be used (if any); 
(7)  Dimensions of all landscape elements and any related features, including fences, walls, border edge treatments, berms, water features, bicycle racks, trash enclosures, street furniture, public art, and recreational facilities, as applicable (the administrative official may require details or specifications for landscape features or structures to be attached to the landscaping plan to facilitate subsequent inspection); 
(8)  Dimensions and surfacing of all easements, pedestrian walkways and pedestrian-oriented areas (existing and proposed); 
(9)  Location and dimensions of maintenance easements for drainage facilities (if any); 
(10)  Location of existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities (if any); 
(11)  Dimensions and slopes of stormwater detention areas (if any); 
(12)  Special landscape features for stormwater detention and treatment, such as bioswales and rain gardens; and 
(13)  Dimensions and locations of sight distance triangles. 
(B)  Schematic drawings of typical plant installation methods, indicating whether and how the soil will be augmented to support the growth and health of the plant material. 
(C)  Indication of the source(s) of irrigation water and the types of irrigation to be used (such information may be provided on a separate sheet). 
(D)  A schematic irrigation plan that shows: 
(1)  The proposed lap/backflow preventer and irrigation controller location; 
(2)  The location of the manual gate valve that will control the entire irrigation system; 
(3)  The type of irrigation proposed for each landscape area or irrigation zone (turf, shrub beds, etc.); 
(4)  The proposed setback distance of all proposed irrigation heads from back of curb or edge of pavement; and 
(5)  All proposed sleeve locations. 
(E)  Tabular data on the landscaping plan that shows the area of each required planting area, the number of each type of plant required in each area, each plant type used, the number of plants of each type to be installed, and the genus and species of plants used to meet the requirements of this article. 
(F)  The administrative official may require information regarding specific design techniques that will be used to prevent water infiltration or damage at the street section. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
B-700. - Planned unit development. 
Each application for Planned Unit Development (PUD) review and approval shall include the same information as an application for rezoning under Section B-200, above, and shall also include the following: 
(A)  PUD master plan. The PUD master plan shall include both plans and written documents for the entire PUD area and shall specifically include the following as a minimum: 
(1)  The location and gross acreage of each density area including the dwelling intensity of any residential areas or the lot sizes and locations of any other uses within the PUD. 
(2)  The location of areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for public open space, playgrounds, school sites, or public buildings. 
(3)  The location of floodplains and all public streets. 
(4)  The conceptual location and acreage of private streets and common open space. 
(5)  The location and development criteria of all landscaped buffer areas within one hundred (100) feet inside the perimeter of the parcel. 
(6)  The development controls which will be applied to assure compatibility of the proposed development with adjacent existing development and zoning districts. 
(7)  The assurance of maintenance and continued protection of the PUD, including any of the common open space. This includes, but is not necessarily limited to, restrictive covenants, homeowners' association agreements, maintenance agreements, deeds, and agreements establishing easements and rights-of-way. 
(8)  The public dedications and physical improvements which will be undertaken to assure compatibility with adjacent land uses and the assurance that the development will not require excessive expenditures by the city for road or utility improvements. 
(9)  A plan for the location of all public utilities. 
(10)  A drainage plan. 
(11)  A plan showing the land uses and density of adjacent development within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of the PUD. 
(12)  A landscape plan showing the type, location, and size of existing and proposed plant materials. 
(13)  Elevations, dimensions, and locations of proposed signage. 
(14)  Elevations, perspectives, and material and color information of proposed buildings. 
(15)  Impact studies including the effects on the existing city infrastructure (e.g., water, sanitary sewer, storm sewers) and vehicular traffic. 
(B)  Scale and format. All plans shall be submitted at a suitable scale to adequately illustrate all required information and shall not result in a sheet size exceeding twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The plans should also be provided in an electronic format approved by the administrative official. 
(C)  Detailed site plan. Detailed site plans, showing details in excess of those required on the PUD master plan, shall be required as part of a PUD approval. Such site plans shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  They shall be in compliance with the approved PUD master plan. 
(2)  They shall contain all the detailed information required for site plan approval pursuant to Section 16.6-200 in Appendix A, Zoning, and Section B-500 in this appendix. 
(D)  Conceptual development plan. If the city council, at its discretion, authorizes the substitution of a conceptual development plan for multistaged developments in place of a PUD master plan, the conceptual development plan shall: 
(1)  Satisfy the submittal requirements in subsections (A) through (C), above, for the initial phase(s) of the development. 
(2)  Clearly define the uses, total permitted development, and primary transportation system. 
(3)  Clearly define the methods by which land uses proposed along the boundary of the proposed PUD will interface with existing adjacent development. 
(4)  Set forth the manner in which the details outlined in this section shall be provided to the city for approval as part of an ongoing approval process. 
(5)  Set forth all necessary terms of reference by which ongoing approvals will be evaluated. 
(E)  Subdivision application. In the case of a PUD application which involves platting and requires subdivision approval, the applicant must also meet the submittal requirements of Appendix B, Subdivisions, in the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
B-800. - Administrative appeal. 
Each application for an administrative appeal shall include the following: 
(A)  Citation of the specific provisions of this ordinance for which interpretation is sought. 
(B)  A description of a hypothetical situation or scenario to which the application of these regulations is in question. 
(C)  A statement of the nature of the interpretation sought. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13)  
APPENDIX C. - R-1, RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED 
 
*Note: Dimensions shown are minimums for the respective lot lines. Minimum lot area must be maintained. (8,400 sq. ft.) 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, renumbered Apps. B—E as Apps. C—F.  
APPENDIX D. - R-2, RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED 
  
 
*Note: Dimensions shown are minimums for the respective lot lines. Minimum lot area must be maintained. (7,700 sq. ft.) 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following App. C.  
APPENDIX E. - RM-1, RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY 
Single-family residential dwellings detached shall conform to the requirements of district R-2. Single-family residential dwellings attached as follows: 
 
*Note: If lot configuration is other than rectangular the width is defined at the building line. The lot area minimum of 2,500 sq. ft. must be maintained. 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following App. C.  
APPENDIX F. - RM-2, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
Single-family residential dwellings detached must conform to R-2 
Single-family residential dwellings attached must conform to RM-1 
Multi-family dwellings, as follows: 
 
 
(Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— See the editor's note following App. C.  
APPENDIX G. - R-3, RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED Minimum Lot Size 
 
 
Notes: 
1.  Dimensions shown are minimums for the respective lot lines. Minimum lot area must be maintained (4,000 sq. ft.). 
2.  Maximum lot coverage shall be 60%. 
3.  There shall be no common zero lot line between adjacent lots. 
(Ord. No. 83-300, 5-9-83; Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, 8-12-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O2013-712, Exh. B, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, renumbered App. I as App. G.  
LIST OF SPECIFIC USE PERMITS 
Special Use Permit—1 Harbour Martinique located in an R-1 District (approved with adoption of zoning ordinance) 
A Community Unit Development permitting residential uses as prescribed in Article 7-600 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas, but excluding apartment use and subject to the approval of integrated building plans for the entire Community Unit Development, is hereby approved by the City Council for an area of 10.3036 acres, adjoining Upper Bay Road and known and platted as Harbour Martinique. 
The entire area of 10.3036 acres may be used to determine the number of family units permitted; however, the number of units may not exceed a density which is greater than that which would be determined by dividing 10.3036 acres of 8400 square feet (area of an R-1 lot). 
The entire area affected by this Special Use Permit is subject to flooding based upon past experience. Control of density of population is considered essential to the protection of the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of Nassau Bay. Protection of the residents of the City who will live in the Community Unit Development from fire and other natural disasters such as hurricanes and rising water compels the reasonable exercise of the City's police powers in regulating the density of population. Private interest must be balanced with public interest. In granting this Special Use Permit the City Council feels that the desired private usage is recognized while the public interest in minimization of population density orientation problems is also recognized. Further, the entire City is qualified for the national flood insurance program which requires the adoption of land use and control measures in flood-prone areas in order for the citizenry to continue to qualify for hurricane and rising water insurance coverage. Therefore, the general welfare of the entire City is protected by this regulation. 
PASSED AND APPROVED ON THIS THE 14th DAY OF JUNE, 1971. 
CITY OF NASSAU BAY, TEXAS 
By /s/ A. Gene Smith 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Wanda D. Dixon 
City Secretary 
(SEAL) 
Special Use Permit-Bal Harbour Cove-Granted. 
Tennis Corporation of America is hereby granted a community unit development permitting certain residential uses as defined in Article 7-600 of the zoning ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas (Ord. No. 71-50) and more particularly described and restricted as follows: The entire area subject to this Special Use Permit consists of Blocks 1, 2, 3, and 4, Reserves A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V and W (located between Lots 26 and 27, Block 3, as distinguished from Reserve "W-Club Site" which is expressly not included herein), as delineated on a plat of said Bal Harbour Cove Subdivision filed with the County Clerk of Harris County, Texas, on the 26th day of July, 1975, #EZ14617, which plat is incorporated herein by reference. The entire area encompassed by the above mentioned description, except Reserve B including but not limited to areas specifically and contractually (pre-annexation) set aside for canal use, (1) shall be and is hereby zoned R-3, (2) shall conform to R-3 requirements in every respect and (3) shall contain only townhouse units as defined in said Ordinance. Said entire area (except Reserve B) shall contain no more than 164 townhouses. 
Reserve B shall be and is hereby zoned multi-story hotel and office district as defined in said ordinance but shall conform to multi-family residence zoning requirements in every respect except the height of buildings, which are hereby limited to one (1) story for parking and five (5) living stories. The entire area of Reserve B shall contain only condominium units as defined in said ordinance and shall contain no more than 230 condominium units. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the construction of any more than 394 total living units in the entire area made subject to this special use permit. 
This special use permit is further restricted by the requirement that such uses are subject to the approval by the city planning commission of the integrated building plans and nothing herein is intended to abrogate, change or alter the approval of any plans previously approved, and Tennis Corporation of America is hereby placed upon notice that the city is relying upon such plans and the terms and covenants of a pre-annexation contract between the city and Tennis Corporation of America in arriving at this decision to grant a special use permit. (Ord. No. 75-149, § 2, 5-12-75) 
Special Use Permit-Bal Harbour Cove-Amended. 
Reference is here made to Ordinance No. 75-149 wherein blocks 1, 2, 3, and 4 and reserves A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, and W (which reserve "W" is located between Lots 26 and 27, Block 3, as distinguished from Reserve "W-Club Site") were zoned R-3 with a specific use permit for a community unit development and wherein Reserve X was zoned commercial and reserve B was zoned multi-story hotel and office district. 
Nothing herein is intended to alter, repeal or modify the requirements or zoning of said Ordinance No. 75-149 as it applies to Blocks 2 and 3 and Reserves A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, and W (which reserve "W" is located between Lots 26 and 27, Block 3, as distinguished from Reserve "W-Club Site"). A copy of Ordinance No. 75-149 is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference [See above]. The zoning classifications, categories and requirements of Ordinance No. 75-149 as they relate to Reserves A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, and W (which reserve W is located between Lots 26 and 27 of Block 3 as distinguished from Reserve "W-Club Site") shall survive repeal of Ordinance No. 75-149 and shall be merged into this ordinance. Subject to that limitation, Ordinance No. 75-149 is repealed in its entirety. It is the intent of council to amend and modify the approved zoning use of Blocks 1 and 4 and Reserves B and X. 
Specific Use Permit-Bal Harbour Cove. 
Tennis Corporation of America has been granted (under the surviving portions of Ordinance No. 75-149 described above) a community unit development which is partially modified hereby permitting certain residential uses as defined in Article 7-600 of the zoning ordinance of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas (Ordinance No. 71-50) and more particularly described and restricted as follows: 
The entire area subject to this specific use permit consists of Blocks 1, 2, 3, and 4 and Reserves A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W (which reserve W is located between Lots 26 and 27 of Block 3 as distinguished from Reserve "W-Club Site"), and X. The entire area encompassed by the above-mentioned description, including but not limited to areas specifically and contractually (pre-annexation) set aside for canal use, either has been zoned R-3 by the surviving portions of Ordinance No. 75-149 or is hereby zoned R-3 by this ordinance. 
The community unit development specific use permit is restricted as follows: 
(1) Blocks 2 and 3 and Reserves A, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W (which reserve W is located between Lots 26 and 27 of Block 3 as distinguished from Reserve "W-Club Site") shall conform to R-3 requirements in every respect and shall contain only townhouse units as defined in Ordinance No. 71-50. 
(2) Blocks 1 and 4 and Reserves B and X may contain a variable-type housing concept not meeting the exact definition of townhouse as defined in Ordinance No. 71-50 and more specifically defined in an exhibit attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. The maximum number of single-family living units allowable for the total area encompassing Blocks 1 and 4 and Reserves B and X is 150. The variable-type housing concept authorized above shall meet all construction standards for R-3 Attached One-Family Residences except the height of said variable-type housing concept shall not exceed 35 feet above the first floor living elevation with a maximum overall height not to exceed 50 feet above street level and to include no more than 3 habitable stories and having two-hour fire-rated walls at all joint property lines in all planes. 
(3) Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the construction of any more than 284 total living (single-family) units in the entire area made subject to this specific use permit for a community unit development. 
(4) This specific use permit for a community unit development is further restricted by the requirement that any and all variable-type housing concepts are subject to the approval and restrictions of the planning commission for the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
(5) Tennis Corporation of America is hereby placed upon notice that the city is relying upon the terms and covenants of a pre-annexation contract between the city and Tennis Corporation of America in granting this specific use permit for a community unit development. 
(Ord. No. 76-184, 12-13-76)  
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 83-298, adopted April 11, 1983, repealed Ord. No. 74-137, adopted Aug. 26, 1974, from which the provisions of former App. B, "Subdivisions," were derived. The editor has included the provisions of Ord. No. 83-298 as a new App. B. 
Charter reference— Plat approval or disapproval, § 10.04. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as "The Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Nassau Bay, State of Texas." 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. I, § 1, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 2. - Adoption of legislative grant power. 
Article 974a, Vernon's Revised Civil Statutes, and any amendments thereto, are hereby adopted, and the provisions of this ordinance are adopted in exercise of power granted to municipalities by such statute as well as all other powers granted to cities through appropriate provisions of the laws and Constitution of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. I, § 2, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 3. - Purpose. 
This ordinance is to provide for the harmonious development of the City of Nassau Bay and for access to and extensions of public utility facilities, for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air, and for distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. I, § 3, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 4. - Scope and jurisdiction. 
Hereafter, before any plan, plat or replat of a subdivision or addition of land inside the City of Nassau Bay, hereinafter referred to as the city, shall be recorded with the county clerk, it shall be first approved by the city planning commission in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. The filing of any plan, plat or replat without complying with the requirements of this ordinance, or the transfer of land by filing of any instrument in the nature of a conveyance without having first complied with the requirements of this ordinance, shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. I, § 4, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 5. - City participation in cost. 
(a)  The city will not participate in the cost of developing any subdivision. 
(b)  The city expects the subdivider to install, at his own expense, all water lines, streets, sewer lines, storm sewer lines and drainage facilities and structures within the subdivision in accordance with the city's standards governing the same as set forth herein, including all engineering costs covering design, layout and construction. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. I, § 5, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Definition of terms used in city zoning ordinance, Appendix A to Appendix A of this Code. 
 
Sec. 1. - Definitions terms and phrases. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this article, or as given in Article 3-200 and Appendix A of the City Ordinance No. 80-255 (Zoning Regulation). When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the singular number include the plural number; and words used in the plural number include the singular number. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined according to customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
Acceptable outfall is a point, as determined by the city's engineer, where storm water can be released to a channel without causing erosion, or resulting sedimentation to the receiving channel or its floodplain. When necessary, the outlet shall include structural and vegetative matter to assure nonerosive velocities. 
City. The word "city" shall refer to the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
City of Nassau Bay standards, as used herein, shall mean the standards for streets and alleys, storm sewer lines and appurtenant structures, which are set forth herein, and such additional standards as may have been or may be adopted by the city council, and which may be amended from time to time, and are hereby referred to. 
City's engineer is a registered professional engineer employed or designated by the City of Nassau Bay to provide professional engineering services for and in behalf of the city. 
Comprehensive plan is the officially adopted plan for the physical development of the City of Nassau Bay and includes any unit, or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
Easement is the area for and a right granted thereon for the purpose of limited public or semipublic use across, over or under property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Planning commission is the city planning and zoning commission of the City of Nassau Bay, Texas. 
Plat is a complete and exact subdivision plan submitted for preliminary or final approval to the planning commission in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and which, if given final approval, will be submitted to the county clerk of Harris County, for recording. A replat or resubdivision of land or lots, which is part of a previously recorded subdivision, shall be considered a plat as defined herein. 
Public street is any area, parcel or strip of land which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent property or land and provides general community circulation whether designed as a street, highway, freeway, thoroughfare, avenue, land, boulevard, road, place, drive, or however otherwise designated; or which is dedicated or granted for public purposes. 
(1)  Minor street: A street which is used primarily for access and circulation to abutting residential properties and is intended to serve traffic within a limited area. 
(2)  Collector, secondary or major streets: Public streets so designated in the comprehensive plan which provide for expeditious movement of vehicular traffic in the community. 
(3)  Cul-de-sac: A short public street which has but one opening or access to another public street and is terminated by a permanent vehicular turnaround. 
(4)  Dead end: That portion of a public street that initially has only one opening or access to another public street and which will be extended at a later date. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing definitions, however, the following shall not be considered public streets within the purview of this ordinance, namely: 
(a)  Any driveway designed or used principally to provide vehicular access to the outbuildings appurtenant to any principal building, or to provide vehicular access to delivery platforms or entrances of a building appropriate for the delivery thereto of goods or merchandise, and located wholly on private property. 
(b)  An area appurtenant to a store or a group of stores, a theatre, a church, or any similar establishment, designed or used primarily for a vehicular parking lot or vehicular parking facilities by customers, patrons or employees of the establishment or group of establishments in question. 
(c)  An entrance or roadway designed or used to provide either vehicular entrance to or communication or passage between the several units of a single industrial or commercial establishment or of a group of such establishments which are under common control and management; provided, such industrial or commercial entranceway or roadway shall be considered a public street under the terms of this ordinance if it has entrance upon two (2) or more public streets unless there are at each of such entrances gates, chains or watchmen by which all persons are prevented from using the same except those employed by or having business to conduct at such industrial or commercial establishments in question; and, 
(d)  An entrance or driveway designed or used to provide principal or primary vehicular access to an apartment building or a group of apartment buildings designed for multifamily occupancy and under one ownership. Such entrance or driveway shall not be used to provide public street access to adjacent areas. If such driveway exceeds fifty (50) feet in length, it must have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet. If such driveway exceeds three hundred (300) feet, a fire hydrant must be provided at three-hundred-foot intervals. 
Residential use shall be construed to mean a dwelling, detached and attached, where one or more persons reside as defined in Article 13 and Appendix A of City Ordinance No. 80-255. 
Right-of-way (ROW) shall mean those areas dedicated to the city for areas of vehicular traffic which include space for both the paved portion and utility easements. 
Roadway—Paved portion shall mean the paved portion of a public street or alley. 
Shall and may. As used herein, the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. II, §§ 1—13, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE III. - PLAT SUBMITTAL, PROCEDURE, CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL AND RECORDING 
 
Sec. 1. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Submittal. All persons desiring to subdivide land within the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance shall first prepare and submit to the planning commission, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to any meeting at which the plat is to be considered, the following information. (Prior to such submittal, it is urged that informal discussions be held between the developer and the planning commission to ensure compliance with the basic requirements and to arrive at a coordinated plat layout): 
(1)  Ten (10) black line or blue line copies of a preliminary plat covering all of the contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider intended to be developed at any time, even though it is intended by the developer to file final plats and install improvements for parts of said tract by sections or units. The preliminary plat shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  Ten (10) black line or blue line prints of the preliminary plats for the furnishing of water, the installation of sanitary sewer facilities, and provisions for storm sewers and general drainage facilities. 
(3)  A certificate or letter from a title guaranty company, or from an attorney duly licensed to practice law in Texas, certifying to at least the following concerning title to the land: A statement of records examined and date of examination; description of the property in question by metes and bounds; name of the fee owner as of the date of examination and the date, file number, and volume and page of the recording of the deed involved; the name of any lien-holder together with the date of filing and volume and page of such lien; and a general description of any easements or fee strips granted, along with the file number, date of filing, and volume and page of recording. 
(4)  A check payable to the city in the amount specified, as follows: A base fee of ten dollars ($10.00), plus ten cents ($0.10) per lot, plus fifty cents ($0.50) per acre for any land within the boundaries of the plat not divided into normal single-family residential lots but intended for other uses. 
(5)  In cases where public streets, alleys or easements are proposed to be platted across private easements as fee strips, a copy of the instrument establishing such private easement or fee strip shall be submitted. Where a private easement has no defined location, an effort shall be made to reach agreement on a defined easement. (Agreement must be reached before submission of final plat). 
(6)  A preliminary submittal shall be required for all replats of existing subdivisions containing major changes in the physical layout as determined by the planning commission. However, the planning commission may, at its discretion, waive the various requirements of accompanying submittal information where the facts warrant. 
(b)  Preliminary plat specifications. The scale of preliminary plats shall be not less than one inch equals fifty (50) feet. The following shall be shown on the preliminary plat: 
(1)  The fractional scale and bar scale. 
(2)  Topographic contours of the proposed grade of not more than two-foot intervals with an accuracy of plus or minus one foot by a registered engineer or land surveyor. Contours may be shown on a separate plat. 
(3)  The date of the survey, which cannot be earlier than eighteen (18) months prior to the filing date of the preliminary plat. 
(4)  The elevation datum must be based upon the official benchmark map of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(5)  Title or name of the subdivision. 
(6)  Names and addresses of owners and/or subdividers. 
(7)  Names and addresses of persons or firms preparing plat. 
(8)  True North arrow. 
(9)  Key map showing location of subdivision in relation to existing streets and highways or original survey lines. 
(10)  The boundary of the subdivision and accurate dimensions. The accuracy must be one in ten thousand (10,000) both linear and angular of the boundary. 
(11)  All existing utilities, natural water or drainage courses, streets, lots, easements and fee strips as to size and location within the subdivision. 
(12)  Within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of the subdivision, all existing utilities, streets and lots, as to size and location and property lines, survey lines, and the names of property owners. 
(13)  All proposed topographic contours, blocks, lots, alleys, streets, easements, purposes thereof, drainage or watercourses, recreation and special use areas, reserves and their proposed use, proposed land uses, screening devices, setback lines, proposed dedication of areas for public use other than streets and easements, and the approximate dimensions of all proposed items shall be shown. 
(14)  Street names and lot and block numbers. 
(15)  Proposed sectioning, if any; i.e., R-1, R-2, Commercial. 
(16)  Area in subdivision, total number of lots and total area of reserves. 
(17)  Proposed location of sediment traps to be constructed for temporary or permanent purposes in streams and other drainage ways. 
(18)  Boundaries and locations of any floodplains, as designated by any governmental body or state agency acting in accordance with state law or local ordinance or regulations, shall be shaded in. 
(19)  Erosion and sediment control plan. 
(c)  Approval of preliminary plat: 
(1)  Upon receipt of the preliminary plat and other information, the planning commission shall render a decision thereon within sixty (60) days from the filing date. Such decision may consist of approval, disapproval or conditional approval. Conditional approval shall be considered to be approval of a plat subject to conformity with prescribed conditions, but shall be deemed to be disapproval of such plats until such conditions are complied with. All objections made to the preliminary plat, or conditions imposed, shall be furnished the subdivider in writing. 
(2)  When a preliminary plat has been approved, the subdivider may thereafter file a final plat of sections of the proposed subdivision upon which approval of the preliminary plat has been obtained. Upon the filing of a final plat covering a portion of such subdivision, the remainder of the preliminary plat shall be deemed as considered approved or conditionally approved as in subsection (c)(1) above; provided, however, that such approval or conditional approval of the remainder of the preliminary plat shall be limited to a three-year period from the date of final approval of a section or sections thereof; provided further, however, that the planning commission may, upon application and at its discretion, extend such period of validity not to exceed two (2) years. When a preliminary plat has been approved and thereafter the subdivider fails to file a final plat of the subdivision or a section thereof within a period of two (2) years, the preliminary plat shall be void except, however, the planning commission may, upon application and at its discretion, extend such period of validity not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. III, § 1, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 2. - Final plat. 
(a)  Staking plat on ground. Before submittal to the planning commission, all final plats must be in full accordance with the required certification made upon the plat by a registered engineer or land surveyor ascertaining that the plat represents a survey made by him and that all necessary monuments are accurately and correctly shown. The engineer or surveyor shall place such monuments as required by the city and they shall be set at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract to be subdivided, and at such intermediate points as shall be required by the city. Such monuments shall be of iron pipe not less than three-quarters (¾) of an inch in diameter and three (3) feet in length, driven securely into solid earth with the grades of same being at grade with established sidewalk, or if walk is not established, flush with the natural grade of the earth's surface. 
(b)  Submittal. After the foregoing procedure has been complied with and a preliminary plat has been approved by the planning commission, the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the planning commission, not less than fourteen (14) days prior to any meeting at which the plat is to be considered, the following information: 
(1)  The original and ten (10) copies of a final plat meeting all applicable requirements of Article IV, and certified by a professional engineer or surveyor registered by the State of Texas. The plat shall be drawn on tracing linen, plastic, or their equivalent, with waterproof black tracing ink or reproduced by photographic process on linen, plastic, or their equivalent, to scale from an accurate survey made on the ground, and in all respects shall be neat. The final plat shall not show zoning information, construction features, cross-sections, public utility lines, or other structures not involved in the title covenant. 
(2)  The owner shall submit an affidavit that he has made no conveyance of any interest and that no additional liens are existing on the land within the plat since the date of the original title opinion or certificate. 
(3)  Tax certificates shall accompany the plat indicating that all taxes have been paid. 
(4)  A check payable to the city in the amount specified as follows: A base fee of ten dollars ($10.00), plus five cents ($0.05) per lot, plus twenty-five cents ($0.25) per acre for any land within the boundaries of the plat not divided into normal single-family residential lots, but reserved or intended for other uses. 
(5)  The owner, developer or dedicator of any subdivision plat wherein public streets, alleys or easements are shown crossing private easements or fee strips shall by letter to the planning commission assume responsibility for seeing that any adjustments and protection of existing pipelines or other facilities shall be planned and provided for to the satisfaction of the holder of the private easements or fee strips and the planning commission prior to the approval of the plat by the planning commission and filing of the plat for record. 
(c)  Requirements prior to approval recording. Before approval of the plat by the planning commission, and before recording of the plat shall be permitted by the planning commission, compliance with the following requirements shall be made: 
(1)  Complete and detailed construction plans and written specifications (indicating the method of construction and the materials to be used, and specifying all construction equal to or better than hereinafter required, and certified to by a professional engineer registered by the State of Texas) shall be submitted for: 
a.  The water distribution system showing the size and location of all existing and proposed water mains, service lines, valves, fire hydrants, and all other water distribution appurtenances within the proposed subdivision, also the location and method of connecting the proposed water lines, water mains and water services to the city's existing system; 
b.  The sanitary sewer system showing by plan and profile the size, location, and the gradient of all existing and proposed sanitary trunk lines, laterals, manholes, and service within the proposed subdivision and the location and method of connecting the proposed sewer system into the city's existing sanitary sewer system. 
c.  The storm water drainage system showing by plans and profile the means and methods of draining the proposed subdivision, showing in detail all existing and proposed drainage structures and the means and method of connecting the proposed drainage system into the city's existing drainage system. 
d.  All proposed bridges or culverts within the proposed subdivision, showing in detail, by plan and/or profile, the structural members, connectors, railings, approaches, reinforcing steel and deck. 
e.  All existing and proposed streets and alleys within the proposed subdivision, showing by plans and profiles the width of the rights-of-way, the widths of the proposed roadways, the gradient of all curb lines, the location and size of all drainage inlets and the type of pavement. 
All of the above-required plans and specifications must be approved by the city building official, or an engineer designated by the city manager, and such approval indicated in writing along with his signature before the planning commission shall approve the plat and permit the plat to be recorded. 
(2)  The owner or developer of the proposed subdivision shall file a performance bond, approved by the city manager and the city attorney as to form and surety or sureties on such bond, guaranteeing the completion of such improvements as are required to be constructed by the owner or developer under city policies in effect and as required by this ordinance. All bonds shall be kept in the custody of the city secretary. Bonds shall be released to the principal and/or surety only after all the subdivision requirements have been fulfilled or the money sum of the bond, or the amount of the work required yet to be finished, has been paid to the city. The city building official shall certify to the city secretary that all the required work has been accepted and completed. In the event that a money settlement is paid the city in lieu of performing the required work, the city attorney shall certify to the city secretary that such sum is adequate compensation and that in his opinion the bond should be released. 
(3)  The developer of any plat shall obtain from the holder of any private easement or fee strip within the plat crossed by proposed streets, alleys or other public easements an instrument granting to the public use of said public streets, alleys or easements over and across said private easements or fee strips for construction, operation and maintenance of those public facilities normally using the type of public streets, alleys and easements indicated. A signed copy of this instrument shall be delivered to the planning commission, and the original shall be filed for record along with the plat. 
(4)  The planning commission may, in the best interests of the city, waive any of the various requirements of the final plat specifications. 
(d)  Final plat specifications: 
(1)  General. Accurate dimensions, both linear and angular, of all items on the plat shall be indicated and shown on the final plat at a scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet. The boundary of the site shall close within one in ten thousand (1:10,000). Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot; angular dimensions may be shown by bearing. 
(2)  The name of the subdivision, name and address of owners and/or subdividers, name and address of engineer or manager preparing the plat shall be required. A legal description of plat and date of preparation or revision shall be required. 
(3)  True North arrow, fraction scale, bar scale and key map shall be indicated. 
(4)  Topographic contours of not more than two-foot intervals with an accuracy of plus or minus one foot by a registered engineer or land surveyor shall be required. Contours may be shown on a separate plat. 
(5)  The date of the survey shall be indicated, which cannot be earlier than eighteen (18) months prior to the filing date of the preliminary plat. 
(6)  The elevation datum must be based upon the official benchmark map of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(7)  All certification statements, dedication restrictions and other inscriptions as required by this ordinance shall be submitted. 
(8)  All lots, blocks, streets, alleys, pipelines, fee strips, watercourses, easements, reserves and total area, number of lots and number of blocks shall be indicated. 
(9)  Setback lines are required. 
(10)  Street names, lot numbers, block numbers and alphabetical identification of reserves shall be indicated: 
a.  Blocks are to be numbered consecutively within the overall plat or sections of an overall plat as recorded. 
b.  All lots are to be numbered consecutively within each block in accordance with the city's existing numbering system. Lot numbering may be cumulative throughout the subdivision if the numbering continues from block to block in a uniform manner that has been approved on an overall preliminary plat. 
c.  Reserves (land to be used for other than residential purposes) are to be labeled A, B, C, etc., rather than numbered as blocks and lots. 
(11)  Dimensions: 
a.  Streets and alleys: 
1.  Complete curve data shown on each side of streets and alleys, specifically: 
P. C. 	— 	point (beginning) of curve. 
R 	— 	radius of curve. 
	— 	angle intercept between radii at P. C. and P. T. (or P. R. C.). 
L 	— 	length of curve. 
L. C. 	— 	long chord (from P. C. to P. T.). 
P. R. C. 	— 	point of reverse curve. 
P. T. 	— 	point of tangency (end of curve). 
 
These are standard abbreviations for the curve functions. 
2.  Length and bearings of all tangents. 
3.  Dimensions from all angle points and points of curve to an adjacent side lot line. 
4.  Actual width of all streets and alleys, measured at right angles or radially when curved. 
b.  Lots: Complete bearings and dimensions for front, rear and side lot lines. The following note for side lot lines may be used in lieu of bearings: 
"All side lot lines are either perpendicular or radial to street frontage unless otherwise noted." 
c.  Watercourses and easements: Distances are to be provided along the side lot lines from the front lot line to the point where the side line crosses the drainage easement line or the high bank of a stream. A traverse line shall be provided along the edge of all large watercourses in a convenient location, preferably along a utility easement if paralleling the drainage easement of stream. 
d.  Pipelines: Pipelines having no defined easement location or width shall be tied by dimensions to all adjacent lot and tract corners. If no agreement can be reached on a defined easement, then building setback lines shall be shown at a distance of ten (10) feet from the center of the pipeline and parallel to the pipeline. 
(12)  Boundaries. Ownership or outline of the tract or tracts the plat is proposed to subdivide shall be shown with very heavy, solid lines. The boundaries of the plat shall be described with complete and overall dimensions and bearings and be tied to an original corner of the original survey of which the subdivision is a part. 
(13)  Extensional data. The location, width and name of existing streets and subdivisions or property ownerships and the location and dimensions of existing lots, easements, pipelines, fee strips, survey lines, building lines, watercourses and other important information shall be shown on all sides of the subdivision for a distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet. The lines of such indication beyond the plat boundary shall be dashed. 
(e)  Approval of final plat: 
(1)  Upon receipt of the final plat and other required information, the planning commission shall render a decision thereon within sixty (60) days from the filing date. Such decision may consist of approval, disapproval or conditional approval. Reasons for disapproval or conditional approval shall be stated to the developer-subdivider in writing. When a plat is conditionally approved, the subdivider may subsequently refine the final plat meeting the objections or imposed conditions, and the planning commission shall within fourteen (14) days thereafter sign said final plat, provided it meets the objections or imposed conditions. 
(2)  On approval of the plat, said plat being otherwise fully and properly endorsed, the planning commission chairman and the city secretary shall sign in the spaces provided. However, in no case shall the city secretary allow said plat to be recorded until the planning commission has approved all plans and specifications for the subdivision as herein required. 
(3)  Final approval will expire one year after the action granting approval of any plat unless the plat has been filed for record. 
(4)  After final approval has been obtained and prior to recording the plat, two (2) prints of the corrected plat shall be furnished the city secretary at the developer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. III, § 2, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 3. - Recording of final plat. 
(a)  After final approval and proper endorsement have been obtained and all requirements of this ordinance have otherwise been complied with, the plat, and all other instruments that may be required to be recorded, may be recorded with the county clerk. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat of a subdivision or to any required instrument after approval has been given by the planning commission and endorsed on the plat in writing, unless such change, modification or revision is first submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of the time the subdivision plat has been recorded, the original drawing or a reproducible copy of the recorded plat shall be furnished the city secretary at the developer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. III, § 3, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 4. - Fee adjustment. 
The fee defined herein shall not be refunded should the preliminary or final plat be disapproved. These fees may be adjusted by the city manager to conform with the administrative cost of implementing this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. III, § 4, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 1. - General principles of acceptability. 
(a)  The subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan and any separately adopted parts thereof. 
(b)  The subdivision layout shall make reasonable provisions for development of adjacent land. 
(c)  The name of the subdivision shall be provided. Duplication of subdivision names shall be prohibited. 
(d)  A legal description of the location of subdivision shall be submitted. This description shall be sufficient for the requirements of title examination. 
(e)  The name of the owner is required. If the owner is a company or corporation, the name of the responsible individual, such as president or vice-president, must be given. 
(f)  For the preliminary plat, the name of the person or firm preparing the plat must be shown. For the final plat, the name of the registered engineer or surveyor certifying the plat must be shown. 
(g)  Provisions of Article 11-1000 of Ordinance No. 80-255 are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. IV, § 1, 4-11-83) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A.  
Sec. 2. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  General design standards. The street pattern of a neighborhood should provide adequate circulation within the subdivision and yet discourage excessive through traffic on minor or local streets. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and locations of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. If any portion of a collector or major street, as shown in a major street plan and/or the comprehensive plan, traverses any part of the land being subdivided, that portion of the major or collector street as planned at the proposed right-of-way width shall be incorporated in the subdivision plan and shall be dedicated to the appropriate government. The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood development and shall conform to connecting streets in land adjacent to the new subdivision. Provision shall be made within the subdivision to provide street access to adjacent undeveloped acreage in such a way as to assure adequate circulation for future development. Dead-end streets and those which do not conform to adjacent established streets are to be avoided whenever possible. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, reverse frontage lots may be required. When reverse frontage lots are required, access shall be denied to the major street, and screen planting or a screening device, as defined herein, shall be required along the rear property line abutting such existing or proposed major street. Paved alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial developments, except where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. The street system layout shall be so designed insofar as practicable to preserve natural features such as trees, waterways, scenic views and other such features. The street system layout shall provide for the acceptable disposal of storm water and provision shall be made by the developer to handle storm water to comply with provisions elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(b)  Right-of-way (ROW) requirements. All commercial streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of seventy (70) feet. All residential streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet. Fifty-foot width exceptions may be granted by the planning commission where only single-family residential lots abut such streets. Where proposed streets are extensions of existing or planned streets designated in the comprehensive plan, or revisions thereto, having a right-of-way width greater than sixty (60) feet, the proposed streets shall be the same width as the existing or planned streets. Alleys, where provided, shall not be less than thirty-six (36) feet wide. Intersecting alleys shall have corner cut-offs of at least twenty (20) feet on a side. Alleys with only one point of access shall have a turnaround with a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet at their closed ends. 
(c)  Curves. Secondary streets shall have a minimum center line radius of six thousand (6,000) feet or more for reverse curves. Minimum tangent between points of curvature shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(d)  Offsets. Street offsets must be offset a minimum distance of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet on center line. Offset distance shall be indicated on the final plat. 
(e)  Intersections: 
(1)  All streets and alleys are to intersect at a ninety-degree angle with variations of ten (10) degrees subject to approval by the planning commission upon evidence of good cause. 
(2)  Acute-angle intersections approved by the planning commission are to have thirty-foot radii at acute corners. 
(3)  Street or alley intersections with, or extending to meet, an existing street or alley will be tied to the existing street or alley on center line with dimensions and bearings to show relationship. 
(f)  Cul-de-sac streets: 
(1)  Turnarounds are to have a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet for single-family use and sixty (60) feet for other uses. 
(2)  Maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be: 
a.  One thousand (1,000) feet for single-family developments. 
b.  Eight hundred (800) feet for commercial developments. 
(3)  Temporary turnarounds are permitted between construction phases, only with the prior approval of the planning commission. 
(g)  Partial or half-streets. Partial or half-streets are expressly prohibited. 
(h)  Provisional reserves. A provisional one-foot reserve may be used along the side or end of streets that abut undeveloped acreage tracts. When used, the following note shall be shown on the face of the final plat: 
"A one-foot strip is reserved as a buffer separation along and between the side or end of all streets in this subdivision plat where such streets abut adjacent tracts. At such time as the adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat, the one-foot reserves at such locations that abut land in adjoining tracts that has been dedicated to the public for street right-of-way purposes and is shown for such purpose on a recorded plat shall thereupon become vested in the public for street right-of-way purposes." 
(i)  Street names. The names of proposed streets shall conform to the names of existing streets of which they may be or become extensions, or shall not duplicate or conflict with the recognized name of any other street located in the area subject to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. IV, § 2, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 3. - Easements and utilities. 
(a)  Drainage. Where conditions require, there shall be provided a storm water drainage easement adequate for the purpose, as determined by the planning commission and the city's engineer in accordance with the comprehensive plan (as amended) or other ordinances or regulations of the city. Where such easement is adjacent to lots, tracts or reserves, the easement shall be noted on the final plat as follows: 
"This easement shall be kept clear of fences, buildings, plantings and other obstructions to the operation and maintenance of the drainage facility, and no abutting property shall be permitted to drain into this public easement unless the City Flood Plain Administrator has pre-approved in writing the structure, planting or potential obstruction and/or unless said Flood Plain Administrator has pre-approved in writing any grade change or surface change of the abutting property that results in the drainage of any portion of the abutting property into the public easement." 
(b)  Utilities: 
(1)  All utility easements must be at least fifteen (15) feet wide, unless they adjoin and abut upon a dedicated street, in which event, the minimum width shall be seven and one-half (7½) feet on each side of the paved portion of such street. The developer or subdivider shall install and dedicate an irrevocable utility easement running with the land. 
(2)  In alleys having a right-of-way width of greater than thirty-six (36) feet, the location and width of necessary utility easements shall be determined by the public and private utility companies and shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. Each easement shall be shown on the plan and appropriately dedicated. In alleys of less than thirty-six (36) feet right-of-way the location and width of utility easements shall be determined by the planning commission. 
(3)  Utilities shall be located underground in accordance with customary practices within the city. 
(4)  There also shall be shown on the plat and dedicated for utilities unobstructed aerial easements and guy wire easements as shall be required by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. IV, § 3, 4-11-83; Ord. No. 2010-669, § 1, 7-12-10)  
Sec. 4. - Blocks and lots. 
(a)  Block length: 
(1)  Maximum block length for single-family residential development shall be fifteen hundred (1,500) feet, measured along the center of the block, when the lots are the minimum required area of eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet. If the lots are larger than the eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet minimum, the block length shall be reasonable but shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) feet. 
(2)  Maximum block length along a major thoroughfare, body of water or similar barrier shall be two thousand (2,000) feet, except under special conditions and upon approval by the planning commission. 
(b)  Lots: 
(1)  General. The lot design should provide for lots of adequate width, depth and shape to provide open area, to eliminate overcrowding, and to be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. Lots should have the side lot lines at right angles to the streets on which the lot faces or radial to curved street lines. 
(2)  Rear and side driveway access. Rear and side driveway access to major thoroughfares or freeways shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots are prohibited except when they back on major thoroughfares or freeways. 
(4)  Minimum sizes for residential lots. The area regulation for residential lots shall be in accordance with Article 14 of the City Ordinance No. 80-255 (zoning regulations). 
(5)  Lots. Lots for residential uses shall be platted in accordance with the flood control requirements of Article 12-100 of the City Ordinance No. 80-255 (zoning regulations). 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. IV, § 4, 4-11-83) 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A.  
ARTICLE V. - REQUIRED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 1. - General requirements. 
(a)  Before beginning any construction of the improvements authorized in this article on proposed roadways, public utilities or drainage facilities, or structures pertaining to any subdivision coming under the provisions of this ordinance and within the city limits, complete plans and specifications for such improvements shall have first been completely approved by the city's engineer or building official or the designated engineer as meeting the city's standards in connection with the approval of a final plat of the proposed subdivision by the planning commission. All improvements shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Improvements shall be installed, or a bond guaranteeing same shall be posted, within all of the area of any subdivision or portion thereof given final approval and filed or to be filed for record. The city's engineer, building official or the designated engineer shall from time to time inspect the construction of all utility facilities and streets in the subdivision during the course of construction to see that they comply with the standards governing the same. In this regard, free access to the subdivision shall be accorded the city's engineer, building official or the designated engineer by the subdivider, his agents and employees. Inspection by the city's engineer, building official or the designated engineer, or a failure of the city's engineer, building official or designated engineer to inspect construction, as required herein, shall not in any way impair or diminish the obligation of the subdivider to install improvements in the subdivision in accordance with plans and specifications therefor as approved by the city's engineer, building official or the designated engineer and planning commission and in accordance with the city's standards. 
(b)  After all required improvements have been completed by the owner or subdivider of the subdivision, one set of as-built drawings of all underground utilities and street improvements that have been constructed shall be filed with the city secretary within thirty (30) days after completion of all required improvements. 
(c)  In the event exigencies of construction necessitate changes in plans and specifications, approval of the changes must be made by the city's engineer, building official or the designated engineer prior to making any revisions in the construction. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. V, § 1, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 2. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  All residential streets and alleys shall be constructed of concrete. Roadways, alleys and paved easements shall be constructed in accordance with paving specifications of the City of Nassau Bay. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The minimum gradient on gutters shall be twenty-five hundredths (0.25) per cent. The developer or subdivider shall not permit any low spots in the gutters where water would stand and not drain away. If these spots are created in the gutters, the developer or subdivider will repair, at his expense, the gutter area so the water will drain away. The drainage will be checked by the city as soon as possible after construction. The minimum drop around a curb return shall be two-tenths (0.20) feet. 
(d)  Where a curb and gutter section intersects a drainage ditch, the grade of the gutter shall be above the design water surface of the ditch. 
(e)  Drainage inlets shall be placed at all lot points on the gutter gradient. 
(f)  The developer or subdivider shall connect the proposed streets to the city's existing streets with approved connections at no cost to the city. 
(g)  All streets shall be marked at each street intersection with a street name sign as approved by the planning commission. Culverts, bridges or other structures to span existing or proposed ditches shall be built by the subdivider. 
(h)  All streets shall be paved by the subdivider to the plat boundary, even though the proposed street terminates at undeveloped property and the extension of the proposed street is not dedicated to the public. 
(i)  Width of paving for the various types of streets and for alleys shall not be less than shown in the City Ordinance No. 80-255. 
(j)  Streets shall conform to the requirements of Article 11-1000 of the City Ordinance No. 80-255. 
(k)  Bulkheads, seawalls and retaining walls shall be designed and constructed in conformance with standards approved by the city building official, and in conformance with the City of Nassau Bay Bulkhead Ordinance Nos. 79-244 and 80-260. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. V, § 2, 4-11-83) 
Cross reference— Bulkheads, § 4-197 et seq.; zoning, App. A.  
Sec. 3. - Water distribution system. 
(a)  The subdivider shall construct within the proposed subdivision a water distribution system to serve the subdivision at every lot within the limits of the subdivision designed and constructed in a manner to provide adequate flow for domestic consumption and for adequate fire protection. Fire hydrants shall be provided at three-hundred-foot intervals along the street. 
(b)  The developer's engineer shall conform to the recommendations of the city engineer, building official or the designated engineer in the design and layout of the water distribution system. The design shall be acceptable, without penalty, to the state fire insurance commission. 
(c)  All materials and installations shall be in accordance with the city's standards for same. 
(d)  Drilling of water wells is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. V, § 3, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 4. - Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  For all subdivisions located inside the city limits the planning commission shall require the installation of a sanitary sewer system. Such system shall be sufficient to serve the subdivision and every lot within the subdivision. If the planning commission finds that, due to ultimate development of the total area where the subdivision is located, larger lines should be installed than are necessary to serve the proposed subdivision, the planning commission may require such oversize lines to be installed as are necessary by the subdivider before approval of the plat is obtained. Costs for these oversized mains and facilities shall be in accordance with Article I, Section 5, of this ordinance. Installation of septic tanks is expressly prohibited by this ordinance. 
(b)  The subdivider's engineering design and layout of the sanitary sewer system shall conform to the recommendations of the city's engineer, building official or the city's designated engineer. 
(c)  Manholes shall be spaced in the sewer lines at every junction and angle point; the spacing shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet. 
(d)  The terminus of all sewer lines must be provided with a "clean-out" or manhole. 
(e)  All material and installations shall be in accordance with the city's standards for same. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. V, § 4, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 5. - Storm drainage system. 
(a)  The subdivider shall construct a drainage system to drain the proposed subdivision and every lot therein. The developer's engineering design and layout of the storm drainage system shall conform to the recommendations of the city's engineer, building official or the city's designated engineer. 
(b)  Concrete culvert pipe materials and installation shall be in accordance with the city's standards for same. 
(c)  Minimum gutter grade shall be twenty-five hundredths (0.25) per cent. 
(d)  Where a culvert runs under a proposed roadway or within two (2) feet thereof, the subdivider shall backfill and compact the earth fill to a uniform density equal to or greater than that of the undisturbed earth adjacent to the trench. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. V, § 5, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 6. - Sediment control. 
The subdivider shall provide effective sediment control measures in the planning and construction of subdivisions. Practical combinations of the following technical principles shall be applied: 
(a)  No more than ten (10) acres of land shall be exposed at any one time during development. 
(b)  When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest practical period of time. 
(c)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical areas exposed during development, if the exposure is to be over sixty (60) days. 
(d)  If silt and sediment cannot be controlled on the site through prudent construction methods, then sediment basins and traps shall be installed and maintained in properly designated places to remove sediment from runoff waters on land undergoing development. 
(e)  Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(f)  The permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development. 
(g)  The development plat shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to create the least erosion potential. 
(h)  The developer or subdivider shall, prior to construction, prepare as an appendix to the preliminary plat a plan for erosion and sediment control. The plan shall follow the USDA Harris County Soil and Water Conservation District current report, Guides for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in Urbanizing Areas of the Harris County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. V, § 6, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 7. - Steep slope development. 
In order to prevent abnormal or excessive grading, the following additional requirements shall pertain to those areas where steep slopes exist: 
(a)  Development may occur within steep slope areas provided that a minimum of thirty (30) per cent of the lot or parcel upon which the principal structure is to be situated is less than fifteen (15) per cent grade and contiguous to a dedicated public road so that direct access by car to the principal structure can be achieved without the necessity of cutting and filling. The extent of cutting and filling that will be permitted on any lot will be based on the soil conditions at the site and as determined by the city's engineer. 
(b)  All roads and streets shall be placed as close to the contour as possible to minimize cutting and filling. 
(c)  The construction of all structures shall be preceded by the installation of storm drainage system(s) and stabilization measures. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. V, § 7, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 1. - Variances. 
The zoning board of adjustment may authorize a variance from the provisions of this ordinance, when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the zoning board of adjustment shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest. In making the findings hereinbelow required, the zoning board of adjustment shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved and existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variances upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the zoning board of adjustment finds: 
(a)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(b)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare, or injurious to other property in the area. 
(c)  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Such findings of the zoning board of adjustment, together with the specified facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the zoning board of adjustment meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, in and of itself, shall not be deemed to constitute hardship to the subdivider. No variance shall be granted as to required improvements nor as to bond requirements. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. VI, § 1, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE VII. - APPEAL 
 
Sec. 1. - Procedure. 
Any subdivider contesting any disapproval and/or the interpretation and/or the application of any rule, standard, regulation, determination, requirement or necessity set forth in this ordinance directly or by delegation of authority shall have the right, after filing a written request with the planning commission, to have a hearing thereon before the planning commission within twenty-one (21) days after the date of filing of such request. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. VII, § 1, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE VIII. - BUILDING PERMITS, CITY ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATION AND UTILITY SERVICE 
 
Sec. 1. - Building permits. 
No employee or official of the city will issue building or repair permits for any structure located on a lot in any subdivision, the plat of which has been prepared after the date of the adoption of this ordinance, unless such plat has been approved and recorded in accordance with the provisions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. VIII, § 1, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 2. - Acceptance. 
The approval of any plan or replat shall not be deemed an acceptance of the proposed dedications and shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such proposed dedications until the proper authorities of the city shall have made actual appropriation of the same by entry, use or improvement. If any such plan, plat or replat is disapproved by the planning commission, such disapproval shall be deemed as refusal by the city of the offered dedication shown thereon. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. VIII, § 2, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 3. - Service. 
Unless and until any such plans, plats or replats and specifications shall have been first approved in the manner and by the authorities provided for herein, it shall be unlawful within the area covered by said plans, plats or replats for any city official or employee thereof to serve or connect said land or any part thereof with any public utility, such as water, sewer, lights, gas, etc., which may be owned, controlled, regulated or distributed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. VIII, § 3, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE IX. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 
 
Sec. 1. - Punishment. 
Violations of any provision or provisions of this ordinance by any subdivider shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction of such violation in the municipal court of the city a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be imposed, and each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. In case a corporation is the violator of any of the provisions of this ordinance, such officer, agent and/or employee in any way responsible for such violation thereof shall be individually and severally liable for the penalties herein prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. IX, § 1, 4-11-83)  
Sec. 2. - Injunctive relief. 
No conviction or convictions under the penal provisions of this ordinance shall ever be considered as any bar to any injunctive or other legal remedy, relief, right or power existing in the city to enforce the application and provisions of this ordinance by virtue of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and Charter of the city. The city planning commission may refuse to approve any future plats of any developer or subdivider or any corporation, whether a subsidiary or parent, wherein the developer or subdivider owns more than fifty (50) per cent interest until any previous delinquencies in specifications for former plats have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. IX, § 2, 4-11-83)  
ARTICLE X. - SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Separability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council of the city that the several provisions of this ordinance are separable, in accordance with the following: 
(a)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge any provisions of this ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this ordinance not specifically included in said judgment. 
(b)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge invalid the application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular property, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property not specifically included in said judgment. 
(Ord. No. 83-298, Art. X, § 1, 4-11-83) 
