CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF NACOGDOCHES, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted, April 17, 2001 
Effective, May 1, 2001 
____________ 
Published in 2001 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
NACOGDOCHES, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Richard D. Johnson 
Mayor/Chair of the Commission 
____________ 
Don Alexander 
Mary Cartwright 
Billy Huddleston, Jr. 
Linda B. McKinney 
City Commission 
____________ 
J. C. Hughes, Jr. 
City Manager 
____________ 
Rob Atherton 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lila Fuller 
City Secretary 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
NACOGDOCHES, TEXAS 
____________ 
Shelley Brophy 
Mayor 
____________ 
Matt Moore 
David Norton 
Roy Boldon 
Garth Hinze 
City Council 
____________ 
Jim Jeffers 
City Manager 
____________ 
Jefferson B. Davis, Esq. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jan Vinson 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1971 Code, as supplemented through December 19, 2000, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1971 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and Jody Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Lila Fuller, City Secretary and Robert Atherton, City Attorney and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Nacogdoches, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Nacogdoches, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Nacogdoches, Texas. 2001. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1252-4-01 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF NACODGOCHES, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN: PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF NACOGDOCHES, TEXAS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Nacogdoches, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 118, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 6, 2001, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
    In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 6, 2001 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective May 1, 2001. 
    PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Commission this 17th day of April, 2001. 
_____
Richard D. Johnson, Chairman 
City Commission 
ATTEST: 
Lila Fuller, City Secretary 
Approved as to form: _____
Rob Atherton, City Attorney 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 1547-7-10  7-20-2010 Included 22 1554-9-10  9-21-2010 Included 22 1559-10-10 10-19-2010 Omitted 22 1560-10-10 10-19-2010 Included 22 1562-12-10 12-21-2010 Included 22 1565-2-11  2- 1-2011 Included 22 1568-2-11  2-15-2011 Included 22 1362-5-04  5- 4-2004 Included 23 1570-4-11  4- 5-2011 Included 23 1573-5-11  5-17-2011 Included 23 1574-6-11  6-21-2011 Included 24 1580-10-11 10-18-2011 Included 24 1207-6-00  6- 6-2000 Included 25 1581-11-11 11- 1-2011 Included 25 1583-12-11 12- 6-2011 Included 25 1585-12-11 12-20-2011 Included 25 1586-1-12  1-17-2012 Included 25 1587-2-12  2- 7-2012 Included 25 1588-2-12  2- 7-2012 Included 25 1592-3-12  3- 6-2012 Included 26 1605-8-12  8-21-2012 Included 26 1608-10-12 10- 2-2012 Included 26 1614-11-12 11-20-2012 Included 26 1617-2-13  2- 5-2013 Included 26 1626-5-13  5- 7-2013 Included 26 1627-5-13  5- 7-2013 Included 26 1629-5-13  5-21-2013 Included 26 1632-6-13  6-18-2013 Included 27 1639-8-13  8- 6-2013 Included 27 1637-6-13  6-18-2013 Included 27 1649-10-13 10- 1-2013 Included 27 1652-12-13 12-17-2013 Included 28 1653-1-14  1- 7-2014 Included 28 1654-1-14  1- 7-2014 Included 28 1655-1-14  1-21-2014 Included 28 1658-3-14  3- 4-2014 Included 29 1661-3-14  3- 4-2014 Included 29 1662-3-14  3- 4-2014 Included 29 1665-5-14  5- 6-2014 Included 30 1673-6-14  6-17-2014 Included 30 1676-7-14  7-15-2014 Included 30 1678-8-14  8-19-2014 Included 30 1679-8-14  8-19-2014 Included 30 1685-11-14 11-18-2014 Included 31 1695-4-15  4-21-2015 Included 32 1689-12-14 12- 2-2014 Included 33 1702-10-15 10- 6-2015 Included 33 1708-6-16  6-21-2016 Included 33 1711-7-16  7-19-2016 Included 33 1712-7-16  7-19-2016 Included 33 1713-8-16  8-16-2016 Included 33 1714-8-16  8-16-2016 Included 33 1720-9-16  9-20-2016 Included 33 1721-10-16 10-18-2016 Included 33 1722-10-16 10-18-2016 Omitted 33 1725-12-16  1-17-2017 Included 34 1727-3-17  3-21-2017 Included 34 1732-6-17  6- 6-2017 Included 34 1738-7-17  8- 8-2017 Included 34 1739-7-17  7-18-2017 Included 34 1745-9-17  9- 5-2017 Included 34 1461-8-07  8- 7-2007 Included 35 1533-11-09 11- 3-2009 Included 35 1743-9-17  9- 5-2017 Included 35 1756-12-17 12- 5-2017 Included 35 1760-1-18  1-16-2018 Included 35 1765-03-18  3- 6-2018 Included 35 1768-04-18  4-17-2018 Included 35 1779-09-18  9-18-2018 Included 35 1783-11-18 11- 6-2018 Included 35  
PART I - THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF NACOGDOCHES, TEXAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter for the City of Nacogdoches, as adopted by referendum on March 21, 1929. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.071 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1. - Corporate name. 
    All the inhabitants of the City of Nacogdoches, in Nacogdoches County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said City are herein established, or may hereafter be established, shall be a body politic, incorporated under, and to be known by the name and style of the "CITY OF NACOGDOCHES", with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided. 
Sec. 2. - Boundaries. 
Editor's note- This section describes the boundaries of the City as they existed when the Charter was adopted. Since subsequent annexation ordinances have rendered such description obsolete, this section has been omitted. The present boundaries of the City are on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
Sec. 2a. - Change of boundaries and annexation of territory. 
    The City Council shall have [the] power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Nacogdoches; and to provide for the alteration and extension of said boundary limits, the detachment of territory, and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without the consent of the territory inhabitants annexed or detached. Upon the introduction of any ordinance annexing additional territory, such ordinance shall be published in the form in which it may be finally passed, in the official newspaper of said City at least one (1) time, and said ordinance shall not thereafter be finally acted upon until at least thirty (30) days have elapsed after the first publication thereof; and upon the final passage of any such ordinance, the corporate limits of the City shall thereafter include the territory so annexed; and when any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the City of Nacogdoches and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata of the taxes levied by the City, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all citizens, and shall be bound by the acts and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. Upon the final adoption of any ordinance detaching territory from the City, the corporate limits of the City shall be reduced by the territory so detached. 
    The Chairman of the City Council of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, is hereby directed to certify to the Secretary of State of Texas an authenticated copy of the hereinabove mentioned amendment in compliance with Article 1173 of Vernon's Civil Statutes of Texas [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1173]. 
    The City Secretary is hereby directed to record upon the records of the City, in a book kept for that purpose, [this] amendment, as adopted. 
(Election of 4-4-1961; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 2009) 
Sec. 3. - Platting of property. 
    Should any property lying within or adjacent to the City limits, as established by this Charter, be hereafter platted into blocks and lots, the owners of said property shall plat and lay the same off to conform to the streets and alleys abutting on same, and shall file with the City Council a correct map thereof, provided, that in no case shall the City of Nacogdoches be required to pay for any of said streets or alleys, at whatever date opened, but when opened by reason of the platting of said property at whatever date platted, they shall become, by such act, the property of the City of Nacogdoches, for use as public highways. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 1. - Body politic. 
    The City of Nacogdoches, made a body politic and corporate by the legal adoption of this Charter, shall have perpetual succession, may use a common seal, may sue, and be sued, may contract and be contracted with, implead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters whatever; may take, hold and purchase lands, within or without the City limits, as may be needed for the corporate purposes of said City and may sell any real estate or personal property owned by it; may perform and render all public services and when deemed expedient, may condemn property for corporate use and may hold, manage and control the same and shall be subject to all the duties and obligations now pertaining to or incumbent upon said City as a corporation, not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, and shall enjoy all the rights, immunities, powers, privileges and franchises now possessed by said City, and herein conferred and granted. 
(Election of 5-6-1995) 
Sec. 2. - Powers of ordinance. 
    The City of Nacogdoches shall have the power to enact and enforce all ordinances necessary to protect health, life and property, and to prevent, and summarily abate and remove all nuisances and to preserve and enforce the good government, order and security of the City and its inhabitants, and to enact and enforce ordinances on any and all subjects, provided, that no ordinance shall be enacted inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, or the General Laws or Constitution of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 3. - Style of ordinances. 
    The style of all ordinances of the City of Nacogdoches shall be: "Be it ordained by the City of Nacogdoches," but the same may be omitted when published in book or pamphlet form purporting to be published by the City of Nacogdoches. 
Sec. 4. - Real estate, etc. owned by the City. 
    All real estate owned in fee simple title, or held by lease, sufferance, easement or otherwise; all public buildings, fire stations, parks, streets and alleys, and all property, whether real or personal, of whatever kind, character or description, now owned or controlled by the City of Nacogdoches, shall vest in, inure to, remain and be the property of said City of Nacogdoches. 
Sec. 5. - Acquisition of property. 
    The City of Nacogdoches shall have the power and authority to acquire by purchase, gift, devise, deed, condemnation or otherwise, any character of property, including any charitable or trust fund. 
Sec. 6. - Public property exempt from executions. 
    Said City shall have the power to provide that no public property, or any other character of property owned or held by said City, shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature. 
Sec. 7. - City funds not subject to garnishment. 
    Said City shall have the power to provide that no funds of the City shall be subject to garnishment and that the City shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings. 
Sec. 8. - Liability for damages. 
    The City of Nacogdoches shall not be held liable on account of any claim for the death of any person or injuries to any person or damage to any property unless the person making such complaint or claiming such damages shall, within six (6) months after the time at which it is claimed such damages were inflicted upon such person or property, file with the City Manager a written statement stating the nature and character of such damage or injuries, the extent of the same, the place where same happened, the circumstances under which same happened and the conditions causing same, with a detailed statement of each item of damages and the amount thereof, and if it be for personal injuries, giving a list of any witnesses known by affiant to have seen the accident. 
(Election of 5-7-1988) 
Sec. 9. - Right of eminent domain. 
    Said City shall have the right of eminent domain and the power to appropriate private property for public purposes whenever the governing authority shall deem it necessary; and to take any private property, within or without the City limits, for any of the following purposes, to-wit; City Halls, Police Stations, Jails, Calaboose, Fire Stations and Fire Alarm Systems, Libraries, Hospitals, Sanitariums, Auditoriums, Market Houses, Reformatories, Abattoirs, Streets, Alleys, Parks, Highways, Playgrounds, Sewer Systems, Storm Sewers, Sewage Disposal Plants, Filtering Beds and Emptying Grounds for Sewer Systems, Drainage, Water and Electric Light and Power Systems, Street Car Systems, Telephone and Telegraph Systems, Gas Plants or Gas Systems, Cemeteries, Crematories, Prison Farms, Pest Houses, and to acquire lands, within or without the City, for any other municipal purpose that may be deemed advisable. That the power therein granted for the purpose of acquiring private property shall include the power of improvement and enlargement of waterworks, including water supply, riparian rights, standpipes, water-sheds, and the construction of supply reservoirs. In all cases wherein the City exercises the power of eminent domain, it shall be controlled, as nearly as practicable, by the laws governing the condemnation of property by railroad corporations in this State; the City taking the position of the railroad corporation in such case. 
Sec. 10. - Ownership of public utilities. 
    Said City shall have the power to buy, own or construct, and to maintain and operate, within or without the City limits, [a] complete water system or systems, gas or electric lighting or power plant or plants, telephone systems, street railways, sewer systems, sewage plants, fertilizing plants, abattoirs, municipal railway terminals, or any other public service utility, and to demand and receive compensation for services furnished by the City for private purposes or otherwise, and to have the power to regulate, by ordinance, the collection of compensation for such services. That said City shall have the power to acquire by lease, purchase or condemnation, the property of any person, firm or corporation now or hereafter conducting any such business, for the purpose of operating such public utility or utilities, and for the purpose of distributing such service throughout the City, or any portion thereof. 
Sec. 11. - Funds for acquisition of any public utility; security for same, etc. 
    Should the City determine to acquire any public utility by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, as herein provided, said City shall have the power to obtain funds for the purpose of acquiring said public utility and paying the compensation therefor, by issuing bonds or notes, may secure such notes by fixing a lien upon the property constituting the public utility so acquired, and said security shall apply alone to said property so pledged. 
Sec. 12. - Manufacture or purchase of public utility products. 
    Said City shall have the authority to manufacture its own electricity, gas or anything else that may be needed or used by it or the public, to make contracts with any person, firm or corporation for the purchase of gas, water, electricity or any other commodity or articles used by it or the public, and to sell same to the public as may be determined by the governing authority. 
Sec. 13. - Right to operate and maintain public utility acquired, exclusive. 
    In the event said City shall acquire, by purchase, gift, devise, deed, condemnation or otherwise, any water-works system, electric-light or power system, gas system, street railway system, telephone system or any other public service utility to operate and maintain for the purpose of serving the inhabitants of said City, the right to operate and maintain such public utility, so acquired, shall be exclusive. 
Sec. 14. - Right to regulate charges, etc., of holder of franchise or privilege. 
    Said City shall have the power to determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares and rates of any person, firm or corporation exercising, or that may hereafter exercise any right or franchise or public privilege in said City, and to prescribe the kind of service to be furnished, the equipment to be used, the manner in which service shall be rendered and to change such regulations from time to time; that in order to ascertain all of the facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is or should be reasonable rate of regulation, the governing authority shall have full power to inspect the books and other records of such person, firm or corporation, and compel the attendance of witnesses for such purpose; provided that in adopting such regulations and in fixing or changing such compensation, no stock or bonds authorized or issued by any person, firm or corporation exercising such franchise or privilege shall be considered unless proof be made that the same have been actually issued by such person, firm or corporation for money, or its equivalent, paid and used for the development of the property under investigation. 
Sec. 15. - Street powers. 
    No assessment for improvements of any street may be assessed without prior notice to the owners of all property within the limits of the proposed improvement, which notice must specify with reasonable certainty the location, nature, and estimated cost of the proposed improvement, the proposed basis for division of assessment, and the time when the Council will conduct a public hearing on the proposal. Such notice shall be in writing to each owner and delivery shall be made at least ten days before the hearing. After the hearing, the Council shall determine by resolution whether the proposed assessment for improvements shall be made. If the Council approves the assessment for the improvements, construction of the improvements shall begin no later than six months after the resolution is passed. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Editor's note- The above section incorporated Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1105b as a part of this Charter pursuant to an election held on October 10, 1950. 
Sec. 16. - Construction of sidewalks and curbs. 
    Said City shall have the power to provide for the construction and building of sidewalks and to charge the entire cost of the construction of said sidewalks, including the curb, against the owner of the abutting property and to make a special charge against the owner for such cost, and to provide by special assessments, a lien against such property for such cost. 
Sec. 17. - Sidewalks, improvement; defective may be declared nuisance. 
    Said City shall have the power to provide for the construction, improvement or repair of any such sidewalk, or the construction of any such curb, by penal ordinance, and to declare defective sidewalks to be a public nuisance. 
Sec. 18. - Franchises for use of streets. 
    Said City shall have the power and authority to grant franchises for the use and occupancy of streets, rights-of-way, avenues, alleys and any and all public grounds belonging to or under the control of the City. No telegraph, telephone, electric light or power, street railway, interurban railway, street railway, [sic] gas company, water-works, water systems of [or] any other character of public utility shall be granted any franchise or permitted the use of any street, rights-of-way, avenue, alley, highway or grounds of the City without first making application to and obtaining the consent of the governing authorities thereto, expressed by ordinance, and upon paying such compensation as may be prescribed, and upon such conditions as may be provided for by such ordinance, and before such ordinance proposing to make any grant or franchise or privilege to any applicant to use or occupy any streets, avenue, alley or any other public ground belonging to or under control of the City, shall become effective, publication of said ordinance, as finally proposed to be passed, shall be made in some newspaper published in the City of Nacogdoches, once a week for three (3) weeks; which publication shall be made at the expense of the applicant desiring said grant, and said proposed ordinance shall not be thereafter changed unless again republished as in the first instance nor shall any such ordinance take effect or become a law or contract or vest any rights in the applicant therefor, until after the expiration of thirty days from the last publication of said ordinance, as aforesaid. Pending the time such ordinance may become effective, it is hereby made the duty of the governing authority of the City to order an election if requested so to do by written petition signed by at least ten (10) per cent of the legally qualified voters, as determined by the number of votes cast in the last regular municipal election; at which election the qualified voters of said City shall vote for or against the proposed grant, as set forth in detail by the ordinance conferring the rights and privileges upon the applicant therefor. Such election shall be ordered not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days from the date of filing said petition, and if at said election the majority of the votes cast shall be for the granting of such franchise or privilege, said ordinance and the making of said proposed grant shall thereupon become effective, but if a majority of the votes cast at said election shall be against the granting of such franchise or privilege, such ordinance shall be ineffective and the making of such proposed grant be null and void. 
(Election of 5-6-1995) 
Sec. 19. - Public works improvements. 
    Said City shall have the power to open, extend, straighten and widen any public street, rights-of-way, avenue, or alley and for such purpose to acquire the necessary land, by purchase or condemnation, and to provide that the cost of improving any such streets, avenue or alley by opening, extending, straightening or widening the same shall be paid by the owner of property lying in the territory of such improvement in accordance with state law. 
(Election of 5-6-1995) 
Sec. 20. - Altering streets, obstructions, encroachments, etc. 
    Said City shall have the power to control, regulate and remove all obstructions, encroachments and encumbrances on any public street, rights-of-way, avenue, or alley, and to narrow, alter, widen, straighten, vacate, abandon and close same; to provide for sprinkling and cleaning same, and to regulate and control the moving of buildings and structures of every kind and character upon and along the same. 
(Election of 5-6-1995) 
Sec. 21. - Parks, playgrounds, etc. 
    Said City shall have exclusive control over all City parks and playgrounds, and to control, regulate and remove all obstructions and prevent all encroachments thereupon; and to provide for raising, grading, filling, terracing, landscape gardening, erecting buildings, providing amusements therein, for establishing walks and paving driveways around, in, and through said parks, playgrounds and other public grounds. 
Sec. 22. - Peace and good order. 
[1]  Said City shall have the power to define all nuisances, prohibit the same within the City and outside the City limits for a distance of five thousand (5000) feet; to police all parks, grounds, speedways, streets, rights-of-way, avenues, and alleys owned by said City, within or without the City limits; to prohibit the pollution of all sources of water supply of said City, and to provide for the protection of water sheds. 
[2]  To provide for the inspection of dairies, cows and dairy herds, slaughter pens and slaughter houses and abattoirs, within or without the City limits from which meat, milk, butter or eggs from same are furnished to the inhabitants of said City, and to provide for the inspection of meat markets, grocery stores, drug stores, confectioneries, fruit stands, ice cream factories, laundries, bottling plants, hotels, restaurants and bakeries, the source, storage, and distribution of water, and all other places where food or drinks for human consumption are manufactured, handled, sold or exposed for sale, and to regulate and inspect the character and standard of such articles of food and drink so sold or offered for sale. 
[3]  To provide for the inspection and regulation of the sanitary conditions of all premises and vacant lots within the City limits, for the removal of garbage, night soil, refuse and unsanitary vegetation; to provide for establishing a lien against the property for any excuse [expense] incurred by the City in enforcing this provision and further to provide for the making and enforcing of all proper and reasonable regulations, for the health and sanitation of said City and its inhabitants. 
[4]  To provide for a health department and the establishment of rules and regulations protecting the health of the City; the establishment of quarantine station, pest-houses and hospital and to provide for the adoption of necessary quarantine laws to protect the inhabitants against contagious and infectious diseases. 
[5]  To provide for a sanitary sewer system and for the maintenance thereof; to require property owners to make connection to such sewers with their premises and to provide for fixing a lien against any property owner's premises who fails or refuses to make sanitary sewer connections and to charge the cost against the said owner and make it a personal liability, and to fix penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections. 
[6]  To require property owners, their agents and lessees to remove within a reasonable time, ice, slush, snow and other debris from sidewalks fronting on property owned, occupied or controlled by such owner, agent or lessee and to require such owner, agent or lessee to remove all low hanging limbs from trees adjacent to sidewalks in said City. 
[7]  To prohibit or regulate the driving of herds of horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats and all herds of domestic animals along or upon the streets, avenues or alleys of said City. 
[8]  To establish and regulate public pounds and to regulate, restrain and prohibit the running at large of horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, geese, chickens, pigeons, ducks, and all other domesticated animals and fowls and to authorize the restraining, impounding and sale of the same for the cost of the proceedings and the penalty incurred, and to order their destruction when they cannot be sold and to impose penalties upon the owner thereof for the violation of any ordinances regulating or prohibiting the same, and to tax, regulate, restrain, and prohibit the running at large of dogs, and to authorize their destruction and impose penalties on the owners or keepers thereof. 
[9]  To prohibit the inhumane treatment of animals and provide punishment therefor. 
[10]  To prohibit and restrain the flying of kites, firing firearms, fireworks, rolling of hoops and the use of velocipedes, bicycles and skates, or the use and practice of any amusements on the streets or sidewalks to the annoyance of pedestrians or persons using such streets or sidewalks, and to restrain, regulate and prohibit the ringing of bells, or blowing of horns, bugles and whistles, crying of goods and all other noises, practices and performances tending to the collection of persons in the streets or tending, unnecessarily, to interfere with the peace and quietude of the inhabitants of said City, and to suppress and regulate all necessary noises. 
[11]  To license any lawful business, occupation or calling that is susceptible to the control of the police power, and to license, regulate, control or prohibit the erection of signs or billboards. 
[12]  To license, tax and regulate or suppress and prevent hawkers, peddlers and pawnbrokers. 
[13]  To license, tax and regulate all charges of fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle operated for the carriage of passengers or freight for hire on the public streets of the City. 
[14]  To regulate the operation of railway trains and street cars operated on, along or across the streets, rights-of-way, avenues or alleys of said City; to license and control the operation of automobiles, motorcycles, taxicabs, busses, cabs and carriages and all character of vehicles using the public streets and to regulate the use and occupancy of the streets by any of such vehicles. 
[15]  To regulate and control building trades and to charge fees therefore to the extent not preempted by state law. 
[16]  To provide for the inspection of weights, measures and meters and fix a standard of such weights, measures and meters and require conformity to such standards and provide penalties for failure to use or conform to the same, and to provide for inspection fees. 
[17]  To provide for the issuance of permits for erecting all buildings; for the inspection of the construction of all buildings in respect to proper wiring for electric lights and other electric appliances; piping for gas, flues, chimneys, plumbing and sewer connections, and to enforce proper regulations in regard thereto. 
[18]  To provide for establishing and maintain[ing] a public library. 
[19]  To provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits; to prescribe for the kind and character of structures to be erected therein; to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within said limits and for the condemnation of dangerous or dilapidated structures which are calculated to increase the fire hazard. 
[20]  To enact and enforce all ordinances and resolutions, necessary to regulate the safety of all office buildings, hotels, apartment houses, rooming houses, hospitals, theatres, store buildings and all public buildings. 
[21]  To require the construction of fire escapes in connection with public buildings, and to determine the sufficiency and regulate the safety of all exits and fire escapes provided on public buildings of every kind and character. 
[22]  To restrain and punish vagrants, mendicants, beggars and prostitutes, to regulate, control or prohibit the sale, gift, barter, or exchange of cocaine, opium, morphine and the salts thereof. 
[23]  To prohibit and punish keepers and inmates of bawdy, assignation and disorderly houses, and to prevent and suppress such bawdy, assignation and disorderly houses, and to punish such keepers, inmates and owners, or agents, of such owners of such houses, knowingly permitting such houses to be occupied as such bawdy, assignation or disorderly houses, to determine such inmates and keepers to be vagrants. 
[24]  To provide for establishing and maintaining the Fire Department of the City. 
[25]  To require waterworks corporation, gas companies, street car companies, telephone companies, electric light and power companies or other companies or individuals, exercising franchises, now or hereafter, from the City, to make and furnish extensions of their service to such territory as may be required by ordinance. 
[26]  To establish and maintain the City Police Department, prescribe the qualifications and duties of policemen and regulate their conduct. 
[27]  To provide for the enforcement of all ordinances enacted by it, by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), provided that no ordinance shall provide a greater or less[er] penalty than is prescribed for a like offense by the laws of the state. 
[28]  To provide for the commutation of fines imposed, by labor in a workhouse, on the public streets and public ways of the City; and for the collection of any fine imposed, execution may be enforced, as executions issued in civil cases. 
[29]  To establish, maintain and regulate the City prison, workhouses and other means of punishment for vagrants, City convicts and disorderly persons, and such hospitals, orphanages and charitable institutions as may be deemed expedient by the governing authority. 
(Election of 5-6-1995) 
ARTICLE III. - TAXATION 

Sec. 1. - Taxation. 
[1]  The City shall have the power and is hereby authorized to annually levy and collect ad valorem taxes on all property within the territorial limits of the City (which is subject to municipal taxation) to the extent of the limit prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas for cities having a population in excess of 5,000. 
[2]  The City shall have no right to require the payment of any poll tax or fee as a condition to the right to vote in any municipal election. 
[3]  Reserved. 
[4]  Said City shall have the power, annually, to levy and collect a franchise tax against any public corporation using and occupying the public streets or grounds of the City, separately from the tangible property of such corporation, and to levy and collect, annually upon the property and shares of corporations, companies and corporate institutions, as the same are now or may be assessed by the State laws, and shall have full power to enforce the collection of such taxes. 
[5]  Said City shall have the power to regulate the manner and mode of making out tax lists, inventories and appraisements of property therein, and to prescribe the oath that shall be administered to each person rendering property for taxation and to prescribe how, when and where property shall be rendered and to prescribe the number and form of assessment as may be deemed advisable to secure the assessment of all property within the City limits and to collect taxes thereon and may provide a fine upon all persons failing, neglecting or refusing to render their property for taxation, and to do any and all other things necessary or proper to render effectual the collection of monies by taxation. 
[6]  Said City shall have the power to provide for the rendition of unrendered property for taxation and levy and assess taxes thereon, annually, and to provide for the rendition, levy and assessment of taxes for previous years on property omitted from taxation and to provide interest at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum upon such unrendered or omitted property and to charge and provide for correction and reassessment of property erroneously assessed. 
[7]  All real, personal or mixed property held, owned or situated in the City of Nacogdoches shall be liable for all municipal taxes, due by the owner thereof, including taxes on real estate, franchises, personal and mixed property and all other municipal taxes of whatsoever character. Such municipal taxes are hereby declared to be a lien, charge and encumbrance upon the property so taxed and shall be a prior lien to all other claims, sales, assignments, transfers, gifts, and judicial writs. Said lien shall exist from the first day of January of each year until all such taxes have been paid and against any real estate which, for any cause, has failed to be assessed for one (1) or more years, and such lien shall be good and effective for every year for which assessment has so failed. 
[8]  Personal property of all persons, firms or corporations owing any taxes to City of Nacogdoches is hereby made liable for all of such taxes, whether the same upon personal or real property or upon both. 
[9]  The governing authority of the City prior to October 1 of each year, shall levy the annual tax for such year, but special taxes or assessments allowed by this Charter may be levied, assessed and collected at such times as the governing authority may provide; provided, that should the governing authority fail or neglect to levy the annual tax herein provided for any one (1) year the annual tax levy for the preceding year last made by said governing authority shall and will be considered in force and effective as the tax levy for the year for which no annual tax levy was made. 
[10]  Said City shall have full power to provide for the prompt collection, by suit or otherwise, of taxes assessed, levied and imposed, and is hereby authorized, and to that end shall have full power and authority to sell, or cause to be sold, all kinds of property, real and personal, and shall make such rules and regulations and enact all such ordinances as are deemed necessary for the collection of any taxes provided in this Charter. 
[11]  It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or preceding [proceeding] in which the City shall be a party, for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed in behalf of the City. 
[12]  The City shall have the power to control and manage the finances of the City; to provide its fiscal year and fiscal arrangements. 
[13]  All moneys arising from the collection of taxes by the City shall be divided into two (2) funds, and designated as a "General Fund," and "Interest and Sinking Fund." 
[14]  No irregularities in the time or manner of making or returning the City assessment rolls or the approval of such rolls, shall invalidate any assessment. 
[15]  The governing authority of the City shall create a Board of Equalization whose duties shall be to equalize the values of all property rendered for taxation in the City of Nacogdoches; prescribe the qualifications, compensation and number necessary to constitute said board, and enact all ordinances necessary to regulate and control the equalization of values by such board. 
[16]  The provisions of this Section 1 shall be superseded by contrary or additional provisions and have all powers granted cities in the Property Tax Code of the State of Texas (V.T.C.A., Tax Code) except that nothing therein shall restrict the right of the voters of such City to utilize City-level initiative and referendum to set a tax rate, level of spending or limitation on tax increase for the City. 
(Election of 8-18-1970; election of 5-7-1988; election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 2. - Bonds, certificates of obligation and other evidence of indebtedness. 
    The City shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City and to issue general obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding obligations of the City previously issued. All such obligations shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
    The City shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending, or repairing of public municipal facilities, recreational public municipal facilities, or any revenue-producing municipal facilities not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue obligations to evidence the pledge of revenue or property, either or both, to secure the repayment of such borrowing. With respect to obligations payable solely from the revenue or property pledged, the holders thereof shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such obligations shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
    Where not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, the City may also make or issue tax anticipation notes, revenue anticipation notes, advance refunding bonds, deficiency warrants, certificates of obligation, obligations representing the City's obligation under a lease-purchase contract and combined tax and revenue obligations where, in addition to ad valorem taxes, all or part of the revenues of a facility are pledged to the payment of the obligation. All such obligations shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Election of 5-7-1988) 
Sec. 3. - [Obligations of City] incontestable. 
    All obligations of the City having been issued and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable, and all bonds issued to refund or in exchange for outstanding obligations previously issued shall, and after said refunding or exchange, be incontestable. 
(Election of 5-7-1988) 
Sec. 4. - Budget. 
    The budget shall be prepared on the basis of estimates of departments. These departmental estimates, showing the expenses of the department for the preceding year, and indicating wherein increases or diminutions are recommended for the ensuing year, shall be printed in a City newspaper once at least two (2) weeks before submission to the City Council. Due announcement shall be made of the day on which the budget is to be discussed by the City Council and printed copies of the budget as recommended shall be available to any citizen at the City Hall at least one (1) week before the date set for discussion in the City Council. This discussion shall be in open meeting, and sufficient time shall be given to hearing protests and objections, oral or written, to any items in the budget. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 5. - Expenditures. 
    Expenditures shall be legal only on the basis of appropriations in the budget, and on the authority of warrants issued by the director of accounting, and approved by the Chairman of the Council for the Council. 
    For good cause shown, the City Council may pass resolutions transferring appropriations made from one (1) department to another department, but in no event shall the total appropriations made for all the departments of the City exceed the reasonably anticipated revenues for the City in excess of fixed charges for that year. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 6. - [Accounting procedure.] 
    Accounting procedure shall be devised and maintained for the City, adequate to record in detail all transactions affecting the acquisition, custodianship and disposition of anything of value, including cash receipts, credit transactions and disbursements; and the recorded facts shall be presented periodically to officials and to the public in such summaries and analytical schedules in detailed support thereof as shall be necessary to show the full effect of such transactions for each fiscal year upon the finances of the City and in relation to each department of the City government, including distinct summaries and schedules for each public utility owned and operated. 
Sec. 7. - [Annual audit; certification of statements; balance sheet; publication of summaries.] 
    The City Council shall cause a continuous audit of the books of account, and of all records and transactions of the administration of the affairs of the City; such audit to be made annually, embracing each fiscal year and shall be made by a certified public accountant. The duty of the certified public accountant shall include the certification of all statements required in Section 6 herein; such statements shall include a general balance sheet showing summaries of income and expenditures and also comparisons, in proper classification, with the last previous audit; such summaries shall promptly be made available for public inspection and may be published in some newspaper published in Nacogdoches, one (1) time, within ten (10) days after the completion of such audit. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 8. - Depository. 
    The City Council shall designate a bank as the City Depository, which shall be selected in accordance with current State law. 
(Election of 5-7-1988; election of 5-7-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
ARTICLE IV. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 1. - Councilmembers. 
(a)  The elective officers of the City shall consist of five (5) Councilmembers, one (1) Councilmember to be elected by each of the four (4) wards and one (1) to be elected mayor, all for two-year terms. 
Each candidate shall designate the ward or place for which election is sought, and shall have such candidate's name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for the particular ward or place he seeks; and each voter may vote for but one (1) candidate for the ward in which such voter resides and for one (1) candidate for the at-large place. 
(b)  In the event a candidate for any of said ward or place fails to receive a majority of the votes cast at the election for said office, the Chairman of the City Council shall, immediately following the completion of the official count of the ballots cast at the said election and not later than three (3) days thereafter, issue a call for a second election to be held within thirty-five (35) days after said call, at which election the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for any such ward or place to which no one was elected at said first election by receiving a majority of the votes cast thereon, shall be voted for. The ballot to be used at said second election shall contain the office designated at the first election. The two (2) persons receiving, at the first election, the first and second highest number of votes cast for candidates for such ward or place shall be entitled to have their names printed on said ballot in the order of their standing in the computation of the votes cast at said first election for such ward or place. If any person who was a candidate at the first election and who shall be entitled to become candidate at the second election shall, before said election is called, request that such candidate's name be not placed on the ballot therefor, the candidate for such ward or place standing next in the computation of votes shall succeed to the first candidate's rights with respect thereto. In the event of a tie in the vote for the two (2) leading candidates for any ward or place at said first election, said office shall be filled at a second election, as herein provided for, at which such candidates, so tied in said first election, may again become candidates. 
(Election of 2-3-1973; election of 5-7-1988; election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 2. - Regular election. 
    The regular municipal election of the City of Nacogdoches shall be held on the first Saturday in May of every year. 
(Election of 5-7-1988) 
Sec. 3. - Special election. 
    All elections provided for in this Charter except the regular election held on the first Saturday in May of every year, shall be called Special Elections, and all elections shall be conducted and results canvassed and announced by the election authorities as prescribed by the Election Code of the State of Texas [V.T.C.A., Election Code] relating to cities and towns, and said Election Code shall control in all municipal elections, except as otherwise herein provided. The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its members. 
(Election of 5-7-1988; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 4. - Ordering elections. 
    Notice of such election shall be given in accordance with current State law. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; election of 5-7-2005) 
Sec. 5. - Election returns. 
    The Council shall, on the next regular meeting day of said Council, after each regular and special election, canvass the returns and declare the results of such election. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 6. - Term of office. 
    Each Councilmember shall serve two (2) years and until his successor shall be elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 7. - Chairman of the Council. 
    The Councilmember occupying the Mayor position shall serve as Chairman of the City Council and be given the honorary title of Mayor, effective with the election of May 6, 1995. 
    The Chairman shall be the presiding officer of the City Council. He shall vote as a member of the City Council on all matters coming before the body; sign all bonds, warrants and other official documents; be the official head of the City, and exercise all powers and perform all duties imposed upon him by this Charter and by the ordinances of the City, and resolutions of the City Council. On an annual basis the City Council shall choose a Chairman Pro Tempore and Vice Chairman Pro Tempore to serve in the absence of the Chairman. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 8. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the Council shall be filled by a special election for the remainder of the unexpired term, as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 9. - Qualifications. 
    Each Councilmember shall be a resident citizen of the City of Nacogdoches; have the qualifications of electors therein, and shall have been a resident citizen of the City of Nacogdoches for a period of one (1) year immediately next preceding such election. Councilmembers elected by a ward shall have been a resident of such ward for a period of six (6) months immediately preceding such election. The Councilmembers and other officers and employees shall not be indebted to the City; shall not hold any other elective office of emolument and shall not participate in discussion nor vote on any contract[,] job, work or service for the municipality in which such Councilmember has a substantial interest. Any officer or employee of the City who shall cease to possess any of the qualifications herein required shall forthwith forfeit his office and any such contract in which any officer or employee is or may become interested may be declared void by the Council. No officer or employee of the City (except policemen and firemen in uniform or wearing badge), shall accept any frank, free ticket, passes or service, or anything of value, directly or indirectly from any person, firm or corporation, upon terms more favorable than are granted to the public. Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, and on conviction for such violation, such office or employment shall be forfeited. 
(Election of 5-7-1988; election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 10. - Council constituted legislative and governing body of City. 
    The Council shall enact all ordinances and resolutions, and adopt all regulations; and constitute the legislative and governing body of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 11. - Meeting of the Council. 
    The office of City Council, including the Mayor City Councilmember, shall become vacant upon the Councilmember's death, resignation, removal from office, or forfeiture of office in any manner required by this Charter or State law. If any Councilmember shall file as a candidate for nomination or election to public office, except to some office under this Charter, that Councilmember shall immediately forfeit his office as Councilmember. 
    A vacancy on the City Council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, at the next available uniform election date following the occurrence of the vacancy; however, if the vacancy occurs more than thirty 30 days before the next available uniform election date then, the City Council by a majority vote of all its remaining members shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the position is filled by election. The City Council may appoint from among its members. 
    Within 30 days after the election of the Councilmember has been declared by the City, the Council shall meet at which time the Councilmembers will qualify and assume the duties of their offices. Thereafter, the Councilmembers shall meet at such time as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, but they shall meet at least once each month. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 12. - Legislative procedures. 
    The Chairman of [or] any three (3) Councilmembers may call special meetings of the City Council at any time deemed advisable. The City Council shall determine its own rules and order of business, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings, in a permanently bound book, and any citizen shall have access to the minutes and records thereof at all reasonable times. Any three (3) members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business, and the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the City Council shall be sufficient and necessary to adopt or repeal any ordinance or resolution, [which] shall be taken by "Yea" and "Nay" vote, and entered upon the journal. All members of the City Council present at a meeting shall vote upon every question, ordinance or resolution, which shall be entered upon the journal. Any Councilmember refusing to vote shall be entered on the journal and counted as voting in the affirmative. 
    Every ordinance or resolution passed by the City Council shall be signed by the Chairman and attested by the person acting as City Secretary and the seal of the City impressed thereon within ten (10) days after its passage. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 13. - Compensation and attendance. 
    No Councilmember shall receive compensation for service on the City Council. 
    Any Councilmember who fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the City Council without being granted an excused absence by the City Council shall be deemed to have vacated the office by such absences. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 14. - Ordinance enactment. 
    Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or printed form, shall not contain more than one (1) subject, which shall be clearly stated in the title, but general appropriation ordinances may contain the various subjects and accounts for which monies are to be appropriated. 
Sec. 15. - Emergency measures: Defined and provided for. 
    An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health, or safety, or providing for the usual daily operations of a municipal department, in which the emergency is set forth and defined in a preamble thereto. Ordinances appropriating money and ordinances for the payment of salaries and wages may be passed as emergency measures, but no measure making a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise, or other special privilege or regulating the rate to be charged for its services by any public utility, shall ever be passed as an emergency measure. 
(Election of 5-7-1988; election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 16. - Ordinances: Publication. 
    Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, imprisonment, or forfeiture, shall after the passage thereof, be published once in some newspaper published in the City of Nacogdoches, and no such ordinance shall become effective until ten (10) days after the date of its publication, provided that emergency measures shall take effect according to their terms. 
Sec. 17. - Ordinance: Recording. 
    Every ordinance, or resolution upon its becoming effective, shall be recorded in a permanently bound book kept for such purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman of the Council and the person exercising the duties of City Secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 18. - Investigations by Council. 
    The Council may investigate the financial transaction of any office or department of the city government, and the acts and conduct of any official or employee. In conducting such investigation, the Council may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books and papers, and other evidence, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas or attachments which shall be signed by the Chairman; which may be served and executed by any officer authorized by law to serve subpoenas or other process, or any peace officer of the city. If any witness shall refuse to appear or to testify to any facts within his knowledge, or to produce any papers or books in his possession, or under his control, relating in the matter under investigation before the Council, the Council shall have the power to cause the witness to be punished as for contempt not exceeding a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and three (3) days in the city prison. No witness shall be excused from testifying, touching his knowledge of the matter under investigation in any such inquiry, but such testimony shall not be used against him in any criminal prosecution except for perjury committed upon such inquiry. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 19. - Appointments by City Council. 
    The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City Council. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
ARTICLE V. - THE CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 1. - Appointment. 
    The City Council shall appoint a City Manager at the organization meeting of said board or as soon thereafter as practicable, who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government, under the direction and supervision of said board. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 2. - Residence of City Manager. 
    The City Manager may or may not be a resident of the City of Nacogdoches when appointed; however, the City Manager shall become a bona fide resident of the City of Nacogdoches within six (6) months of appointment and thereafter such residence shall be a requirement of continued employment as City Manager. 
(Election of 5-7-1988) 
Sec. 3. - Term of office. 
    The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City Council. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 4. - Absence of [or] disability of City Manager. 
    During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of said office. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 5. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be: 
(a)  To devote all his working time and attention to the affairs of the City and be responsible to the City Council for the efficient administration of its affairs. 
(b)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(c)  Appoint and, when necessary, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to the charter. The City Council shall approve department heads before said department head assumes his/her duties. The City Manager may authorize any administrative officer subject to the Manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(d)  To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by this Charter or that may hereafter be created by the City Council, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(e)  To attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in the discussions but having no vote; and he shall be notified of all special meetings of said board in the time and manner this Charter requires such notice to be given to the members of said board. 
(f)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants on any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the City Council. 
(g)  To prepare and submit to the City Council prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the estimated amounts required by months for the efficient operation of each department of the City Government and the reasons for such estimated expenditures. 
(h)  To make a full written report to the City Council as soon after the close of each month's accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department of the City government for the preceding month, and a comparison of such monthly expenditures, by departments, with the monthly allowances made for such departments, and to keep said board fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(i)  To act as purchasing agent for the City and to purchase all merchandise, materials and supplies needed by the City; to establish a suitable storehouse where such supplies can be kept, and from which same shall be issued as needed, and to adopt such rules and regulations governing requisitions and the transaction of business between himself, as such purchasing agent, and the heads of the departments, officers and employees of the City, as the City Council may approve. 
The City Manager, as purchasing agent, shall have the authority to bind the City for up to $5,000.00 from any one (1) vendor within any three (3) month period for unbudgeted purchases without the approval of the Council. 
(j)  To recommend to the City Council the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the City, and it shall be the duty of said board to pass ordinances or resolutions, from time to time, fixing rates of compensation. 
(k)  To recommend to the City Council in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; and 
(l)  To do and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or be required of him by the ordinances and resolutions of the City Council. 
(m)  To sign deeds or other documents of conveyance of cemetery spaces, lots or parcels owned by the City of Nacogdoches. 
(Election of 5-7-1988; election of 5-6-1995; election of 5-7-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 6. - Compensation of City Manager. 
    The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 7. - Departments. 
    There shall be such administrative departments, as: Law, Public Works and Utilities, Public Health, Public Safety and Welfare, Accounting and others as the Council shall create. The Council may divide or consolidate the administration of the City's affairs as they may deem advisable, and may discontinue any such office or department, at their discretion, except the office of City Manager and City Secretary. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 8. - Surety bond. 
    Only the City Treasurer or his accredited deputies for whom he and his bondsmen will be responsible, shall collect, receive or handle any funds of the City. 
    The City Council shall have the right to require official bond from all appointive officers and employees of the City, in such amounts as said Board may from time to time fix by ordinance or resolution, and conditioned for the faithful accounting of all credits and things of value coming into the hands of such officers or employees. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 9, 10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- At the election on May 7, 1995, §§ 9, 10, which pertained to the provisions applying only when the City Commission shall appoint a City Manager, and authority of the Commission when an office is vacant, were repealed. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 1. - Establishment. 
    There shall be established and maintained a court designated as a municipal court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal courts. 
(Election of 5-6-1995) 
Sec. 2. - Judge and Clerk of the Municipal Court. 
    The judge or judges of said court shall be appointed by the City Manager for a two-year term unless sooner terminated at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City Secretary or an assistant City Secretary shall be ex-officio of said court. 
(Election of 5-6-1995; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 3. - Powers of Clerk. 
    The Clerk and Deputy Clerk of said court shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by the Clerk of Courts in issuing process of said court and conducting the business thereof. 
(Election of 5-6-1995) 
Sec. 4. - Repealed. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, adopted Nov. 17, 2009, repealed Art. VI, § 4 in its entirety, which previously pertained to substitute judges and derived from Election of 5-6-1995. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1. - Amendments to Charter. 
    This Charter, after its adoption by the qualified voters of the City of Nacogdoches, may be amended in accordance with the provisions of an act of the 33rd Legislature of the State of Texas, entitled, "An Act Authorizing [sic] Cities Having More Than Five Thousand Inhabitants by Majority Vote of the Qualified Voters of Said City, at an Election Held for that Purpose to Adopt and Amend Their Own Charter, Etc.," approved April 7, 1913, and any Acts amendatory thereof. 
Sec. 2. - Ordinances continued in force. 
    All ordinances and resolutions in force at the time of the taking effect of this Charter, not inconsistent with its provisions, shall continue in full force and effect until amended or repealed. 
Sec. 3. - Continuance of present officers. 
    All persons holding office at the time this Charter goes into effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have otherwise been made in accordance with the provisions of this Charter for the performance of the duties of or the discontinuance of any such office. When such provision shall have been made, the term of any such officer shall expire and the office be abolished. The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon any officer, board or department of the City under the laws of this State shall, if such officer, board or department is abolished by this Charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the officer, board or department upon whom are imposed corresponding functions, duties and powers under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 4. - Continuance of contracts and vested rights. 
    All vested rights of the City shall continue to be vested and shall not in any manner be affected by the adoption of this Charter, unless otherwise herein expressly provided to the contrary. All contracts entered into by the City or for its benefit prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect. All public work begun prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall be continued and perfected hereunder. Public improvements for which legislative steps shall have been taken under the laws in force at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such laws. 
Sec. 5. - Construction. 
    The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the purpose of obtaining the objects [objectives] thereof. 
Sec. 6. - Meaning of certain words. 
    Unless some other meaning is manifest, the word "City" shall be construed to mean the "City of Nacogdoches, Texas"; the word "and" may be read "or" and the word "or" may be read "and", if the sense requires it; and words in the present tense include future tense, except when a more restricted meaning is manifest, and singular may mean plural. 
Sec. 7. - Males and females. 
    Throughout this Charter, words used expressing masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine. 
Sec. 8. - [Saving clause.] 
    Should any portion of this Charter be held by the Courts of the State to be unconstitutional, such holding shall not have the effect of invalidating any other portion of this Charter. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - REFERENDUM 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
Date  Section 
this Charter  3-21-1929 Arts. I-VII  4- 4-1961 Art. I, § 2a  8-18-1970 Art. III, § 1  2- 3-1973 Art. IV, § 1  5- 7-1988 Art. II, § 8 Art. III, § 1- 
Art. III, § 3 Art. III, § 8 Art. IV, § 1 Art. IV, § 3 Art. IV, § 9 Art. IV, § 15 Art. V, § 2 Art. V, § 5  5- 6-1995 Art. II, § 1 Art. II, § 15 Art. II, § 18- 
Art. II, § 20 Art. II, § 22 Art. III, § 1 Art. III, § 5 Art. III, § 7 Art. IV, § 1 Art. IV, § 4 Art. IV, § 7 Art. IV, § 9 Art. IV, § 13 Art. IV, § 15 Art. IV, § 19 Art. V, § 1 Art. V, § 3- 
Art. V, § 8 Art. VI, § 1 Art. VI, § 3, 
Art. VI, § 4  5- 7-2005 Art. III, § 8 Art. IV, § 4 Art. V, § 5  
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter 1535-11-09 11-17-2009 3 Art. II, § 15       Rpld Art. III, § 1[3] Art. IV, §§ 11, 15, 19 Art. VI, § 2       Rpld Art. VI, § 4  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Nacogdoches, Texas" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1971, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Generally. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, as printed in part I of this volume. 
    City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Nacogdoches in the County of Nacogdoches and State of Texas. 
    City boards, committees, commissions, officers and departments. Whenever reference is made to boards, committees, commissions, officers or departments, it shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas." Reference to such boards, committees, commissions, officers and departments shall be deemed to include authorized deputies, agents or representatives. 
    City council. The term "city council" shall mean the city council of the City of Nacogdoches. 
    Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Nacogdoches, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday. 
    County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Nacogdoches, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision or section appears requiring a city officer or employee to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the terms "swear" and "sworn." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. Where criminal prosecution may lie, the officers of any corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to prosecution as being included within the term "person." 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" shall include both real and personal property. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard Time, or Central Daylight Saving Time, as the case may be. However, if at any future time any different standard of time is established by the state for an area which includes this city, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as the standard remains in effect. 
    State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane and viaduct in the city, dedicated and devoted to public use. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.302(5). 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future, as well as the present or past. 
State Law reference- Tense, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(a). 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
State Law reference- Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
    V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
State Law reference- Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by writing, printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1971, § 1-2; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Charter reference- Rules of construction, art. VII, § 5 et seq. 
State Law reference- Construction of laws, definitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the title of such section nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall it be so deemed when any section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1971, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    All references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference- Construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Code of Ordinances, City of Nacogdoches, Texas, 1971, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1971, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(4)  Making any appropriation or adopting the budget. 
(5)  Levying or imposing taxes not contained in this Code. 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing grades of streets in the city. 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(9)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(10)  Prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees or any personnel policies and procedures and relating to the Texas Municipal Retirement System and federal old-age and survivors benefits. 
(11)  Approving or prescribing rates, charges and fees, including rates for garbage collection or for public utilities. 
(12)  Prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones. 
(13)  Calling an election. 
(14)  Authorizing street maintenance agreements. 
(15)  Which is temporary although general in effect. 
(16)  Which is special although permanent in effect. 
(17)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. If chapters, sections and subsections or any parts thereof are repealed by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Nacogdoches, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Nacogdoches, Texas is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1971, § 1-4; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1971, § 1-6; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any city ordinance an act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this Code or city ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance that governs or regulates fire safety, zoning or public health shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under state laws. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1971, § 1-8) 
Charter reference- Maximum penalty for violations, art. II, § 22[27]. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violations of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(1); any ordinance making any appropriation or adopting the budget saved from repeal, § 1-9(4); administration of aviation regulations, § 10-31 et seq.; administration of airport zoning regulations, § 10-121 et seq.; administration of minimum urban standards code, § 14-451 et seq.; administrative enforcement of unsafe swimming pool regulations, § 14-823; administration of emergency management regulations, § 30-36 et seq.; administration of health and sanitation regulations, § 46-31 et seq.; human relations, ch. 54; administration of discrimination regulations, § 54-86 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 58; library, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 94; administration of funds for hotel occupancy tax regulations, § 94-206 et seq.; administration and enforcement of use of rights-of-way regulations, § 98-56 et seq.; administration of traffic and vehicles regulations, § 102-31 et seq.; utilities, ch. 106; administration and enforcement of sewer system regulations, § 106-101 et seq.; administration of Lake Nacogdoches rules and regulations, § 114-61 et seq.; administration of zoning regulations, § 118-36 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City council, art. IV. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-51. - Dates and times of regular meetings. 
    The regular meeting dates of city council shall be set by resolution. 
(Code 1971, § 2-2; Ord. No. 1461-8-07 , 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 2-52-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees or any personnel policies and procedures and relating to the Texas Municipal Retirement System and federal old age and survivors benefits saved from repeal, § 1-9(10); housing official, § 14-506 et seq.; enforcement officer of junked vehicles, § 34-117; fire marshal, § 38-56 et seq.; floodplain management administrator, § 42-61 et seq.; health inspector, § 46-61 et seq.; historic preservation officer, § 50-96 et seq.; fair housing administrator, § 54-86. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-91-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL POLICIES 

Sec. 2-141. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Purpose. The personnel policies in this division are designed to bring to the city service a high degree of understanding, cooperation, efficiency, and unity through systematic, uniform application of modern personnel practices. 
(b)  Objectives. The fundamental objectives of good personnel administration sought to be achieved by these policies are to: 
(1)  Promote and increase efficiency and economy in the service of the city. 
(2)  Provide fair and equal opportunity to all qualified applicants to enter and advance in city employment on the basis of merit and fitness as ascertained through fair and practical methods of selection and promotion, without regard to sex, race, color, religion, disability, age, national origin, or any other nonmerit factor. 
(3)  Maintain recruitment, advancement, and tenure practices enhancing the attractiveness of a city career and encourage each employee to give the employee's best effort to the job and the public. 
(4)  Maintain compensation based upon the relative duties and responsibilities of positions in the service of the city. 
(5)  Develop high morale among city employees by fostering good working relationships and by providing uniform personnel policies, opportunity for advancement, and consideration for employee welfare. 
(6)  Ensure that employees are protected against coercion for partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their positions with the city for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the results of any kind of official election. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(a)) 
Sec. 2-142. - Applicability. 
    The personnel rules in this division apply to all city employees. An "employee" is any person appointed to a position in the city service. A person on retainer or under contract is not considered to be a city employee in the absence of a specific agreement to that effect. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(b)) 
Sec. 2-143. - No contract created. 
    The employee handbook is not a contractual agreement. Written applications for employment, statements concerning introductory status, as well as the personnel policies do not imply an agreement of contract between the employee and the city. The personnel policies are available in the personnel office for inspection and review by all city employees. Employment with the city may be terminated by the city at any time without liability for wages or salary except such as may have been earned at the date of termination. Employment with the city is for no definite period of time, and the city can change wages, benefits, and conditions at any time. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(c)) 
Sec. 2-144. - Dissemination. 
    All city employees will be informed of the existence of the personnel policies. All full-time employees will be provided a copy of the personnel policies and all amendments and revisions as they are adopted. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(d)) 
Sec. 2-145. - Amendments. 
(a)  The city council may unilaterally change, rescind, supplement, or supersede the personnel rules at any time without notice. 
(b)  The provisions of the personnel rules control over any contradictory statement made by any city supervisor. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(e); Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-146. - Administration and division of responsibility. 
(a)  With the exception of matters reserved to the city council, the city manager may change or amend the personnel rules in this division within the law to the extent the city manager deems necessary in order to more effectively and efficiently promote the interest of the city and its employees. The director of personnel is authorized and directed to interpret, develop and implement necessary procedures and regulations for the efficient administration of these policies. 
(b)  Department heads and supervisory personnel are responsible for enforcing the provisions of these policies and for cooperating with the personnel department on all related matters pertinent to their organizational units. Department heads may adopt supplemental personnel policies, procedures and work rules not in conflict with these city-wide policies subject to the approval of the city manager or personnel director. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(f); Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-147. - Equal employment opportunity policy. 
    It is the employment policy of the city to obtain individuals qualified and/or trainable for positions in city service without discrimination based upon race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, physical or mental disability, except when age, sex or physical requirements constitute a bona fide occupational qualification necessary for the proper and efficient fulfillment of the job. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(g)) 
Sec. 2-148. - Affirmative action policy. 
(a)  Purpose. In order to achieve equal employment opportunity with the city, a passive prohibition against discrimination is insufficient. An affirmative effort is required to create and preserve an environment conducive to equal employment opportunity. The city will perform those actions necessary to ensure that discrimination does not and will not exist within its jurisdiction. 
(b)  Scope. This policy refers without reservation to all recruitment, selection, and placement, training, promotions, benefits, transfers, layoffs, termination and any other matter affecting employees within the city. This policy will be administered to provide employees with the necessary opportunities for growth and advancement on the basis of individual merit, ability and capability. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(h)) 
Sec. 2-149. - Sexual harassment policy. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the city that all employees are entitled to a work environment that is free from sexual intimidation and any unwelcome sexual advances. The city prohibits any form of sexual harassment as defined under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Any employee who engages in any conduct or action which constitutes sexual harassment is subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to define sexual harassment and to outline the responsibilities of supervisors and employees when this problem is encountered. 
(c)  Definition. Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal and physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
(1)  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis of employment decisions affecting such individual; or 
(3)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. 
(d)  Examples. In relation to the definition in subsection (c) of this section, such conduct includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Repeated offensive sexual flirtations, advances, or propositions; 
(2)  Continued or repeated offensive verbal abuse of a sexual nature; 
(3)  The display of sexually suggestive objects or pictures; 
(4)  Any offensive or abusive physical conduct of a sexual nature. 
(e)  Procedures. Any employee who complains in good faith of sexual harassment will be protected against retaliation or reprisal for making the complaint. All allegations of sexual harassment shall be maintained in a separate filing system and shall not become a part of the employee files. 
(1)  Each supervisor is responsible for maintaining the supervisor's workplace free of sexual harassment. This duty includes discussing this policy and procedure with all employees and ensuring them that they are not required to endure insulting, degrading, or exploitative sexual treatment. 
(2)  Any employee who believes that the employee has been the subject of sexual harassment or who knows of such acts within the city's employment should report the alleged act immediately to the employee's supervisor. Should the immediate supervisor be the offending party in a harassment complaint, the employee may report to the next level of management or to the personnel department. 
(3)  Any sexual harassment observed or reported to a supervisor will be immediately investigated, and the result of the investigation will be reported through the chain of command to the department head. 
(4)  All activities and actions required to resolve sexual harassment complaints will be conducted by management in order to protect the rights of both complaining and offending parties. 
(5)  Disciplinary action shall be taken against any employee in violation of this policy. Such disciplinary action will be determined by the nature of the wrongful act and may result in dismissal. 
(6)  If the employee is not satisfied with the action taken by the supervisor, the employee may bring the complaint to the attention of the personnel director and follow the normal procedure for filing a grievance as stated in the grievance procedures of the personnel policies. 
(f)  Confidentiality. All allegations of sexual harassment shall be treated with strict confidence by all parties involved. Failure to comply with the confidentiality requirement will subject the violator to disciplinary action. 
(g)  Note. At any time during an investigation an employee feels uncomfortable reporting the details of an incident to a supervisor of the opposite sex, the employee will be given the opportunity to report the details to someone of the same sex. 
(Code 1971, § 2-31(i)) 
Sec. 2-150. - Employee responsibilities. 
(a)  Political activity. Except as otherwise provided by law, the following restrictions on political activity shall apply to city employees: 
(1)  City employees may seek election to any public office provided that a mandatory leave is requested, approved, and taken effective no later than the announcement date for candidacy or the official filing deadline for office, whichever comes first, and remains on leave until either withdrawing from the contention or until the election is over. Employees who are elected to salaried public office are required to resign from city employment effective the date they take office. 
(2)  No city employee shall circulate petitions or campaign literature for elective city officials or in any way be concerned with soliciting or receiving any subscriptions, contributions, or political service from any person on behalf of such elective official. 
(3)  No employee shall engage in political activities during the employee's working hours with the city. 
(b)  Solicitations. The following restrictions on solicitations shall apply to city employees: 
(1)  The city forbids unauthorized requests for money and all other types of solicitation on city property and during an employee's work time without the express approval of the city manager. 
(2)  The distribution of any unauthorized literature, pamphlets, or material not related to city operations is prohibited during work time and at all times in work areas. 
(3)  No employee shall be required to make any contribution or be penalized or rewarded in any way in connection with the employee's employment according to the response to any authorized solicitation. 
(c)  Dress code and appearance policy. Department heads may specify certain uniforms for employees in such departments when appropriate for specific work, hygiene or safety. 
(d)  Conditions of work. Conditions of work shall be as follows: 
(1)  Hours of work. The hours during which city offices and departments are open for business shall be determined by the city manager. A department head shall implement schedules to meet these general requirements and to provide for other specific requirements of the department. The city administrative offices observe regular working hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(2)  Attendance. Employees shall be required to be at their places of work in accordance with work schedules established by their department. Any employee who fails to report, leaves the workplace without proper authorization, arrives habitually tardy, or misuses authorized absences may be subject to disciplinary action, including termination. 
(3)  Absences. Absenteeism is to be discouraged; however, there are occasions when an employee must be absent. When these times occur, the employee shall notify his supervisor of the situation and follow the prescribed rules regarding the type of absence taken. It is the employee's responsibility to personally arrange absences directly with the immediate supervisor. It will not be acceptable, except under emergency conditions, to have friends or family members arrange absences, nor will it be acceptable to request coworkers to inform the immediate supervisor of absences. 
(e)  Use of job title. All jobs are designated by job titles on all official records, payrolls, and communications. No job will carry an official title which has not been approved by the city manager as being appropriate to the duties performed. 
(f)  Working relationships. It shall be the responsibility of employees to perform the duties of their positions at a high level of cooperation, efficiency, and economy acceptable to their department and the city. Department heads and supervisors shall plan, organize, direct, and control the work of their units to achieve the objectives of the department, including the establishment of performance standards for positions within their jurisdiction. 
(Code 1971, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-151. - Hiring practices. 
(a)  Creation and filling of positions. All positions and employment in the city service are created for the sole purpose of accomplishing the necessary work program or services of the city as approved in the adopted budget. 
(b)  Medical examination. After a conditional offer of employment, before being appointed, each prospective employee is required to undergo a medical examination by a physician designated by the city, the cost to be borne by the city. Any employee desiring to be examined by his private physician may do so at the employee's own expense. No one who is given a medical examination shall be employed unless the examining physician certifies that the person meets the minimum standards of physical fitness required for the position. Certain classes of employees may be exempted from this subsection upon approval of the city manager. 
(c)  Preemployment drug screening. The policy and procedures for preemployment drug screening shall be as follow: 
(1)  Policy. The city will not hire any applicant for employment found to be engaging in the use or consumption of controlled substances or the abuse of alcohol, unless such controlled substance is prescribed for the user by a physician, and then only if such controlled substance is being used/consumed for the purpose intended. 
(2)  Consent. All applicants for employment shall be required to consent to and pass a controlled substance screening, as a prerequisite to employment. 
(3)  Failure of screening. Applicants for employment who do not consent to and pass the required controlled substance screening will not be hired. Further, such applicants for employment will not be reconsidered for employment for a period of 12 months following a failed or refused controlled substance screen. 
(4)  Confidentiality. All preemployment controlled substance screening results shall be the private and confidential property of the city and will not be shared with anyone except the applicant or as required by a court order or to legally protect the city. 
(d)  Nepotism. The policy for nepotism shall be as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the nepotism policy is to avoid the perception of favoritism and cronyism in government through interpersonal relationships, and to prevent conflicts of interest arising as a result of defined relationships between employees. 
(2)  Policy. An applicant shall be ineligible for employment if related within the second degree of affinity (marriage) or within the third degree of consanguinity (blood) to the mayor, any member of the city council, the city manager or assistant city manager. This prohibition does not apply to any person continuously employed by the city for a period of two years prior to the election of the mayor or city councilmembers, or the appointment of the city manager or assistant city manager. 
(3)  Supervision. No employee may directly or indirectly supervise or be supervised by a member of his immediate family or within the third degree of consanguinity. 
(4)  Marriage/cohabitation. Any situation, in which marriage or cohabitation by employees working in the same department occurs, must be rectified by transferring to another department as soon as a position is open for which the individual involved is the most qualified. Unless an acceptable option is chosen within 120 days, the employee with the shorter length of service will be discharged. 
(e)  Residence. There shall be no absolute residence requirement for city employment except as may be provided by law. Employees likely to be called to work in cases of emergency may be required to reside within reasonable commuting ranges of their places of work. 
(f)  Training policy. It is the policy of the city to strive to provide for the necessary training of its employees. The type of training provided by the city is of an on-the-job nature. The city, at its own expense, may send employees to schools, conferences, or seminars as these training situations become available. 
(Code 1971, § 2-33; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-152. - Orientation. 
(a)  Orientation period policy. Every person initially appointed to the city shall be required to successfully complete an orientation period of six months. Every person promoted in the city service shall be required to successfully complete an orientation period of six months. The initial and promotion orientation period provides a specific timeframe for supervisors to monitor, evaluate, and assist an employee in adjustment to service with the city in general and to the position in particular. 
(b)  Purpose. Department heads and supervisors shall use the orientation period to closely observe and evaluate the work and fitness of employees and to encourage adjustment to their jobs and the city service. Only those employees who meet acceptable standards during the orientation period shall be retained in their positions. 
(c)  Benefits. Employees will accrue vacation and sick leave during the orientation period. Orientation employees may, however, only take sick leave during the orientation period. 
(d)  Failure of orientation. An employee shall fail orientation when, in the judgment of the department head, the employee's fitness and/or quality of work are not such as to merit continuation on the job. Failure of orientation may occur at any time within the orientation period and shall not be considered part of the disciplinary process. 
(Code 1971, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-153. - Compensation. 
(a)  Policy. It is the city's policy to provide equitable compensation for its employees in the form of pay and fringe benefits to attract and retain qualified personnel for all positions. The compensation that an employee receives from the city is based on a schedule of positions, salaries, and wages as approved by the city council and contained in the annual budget. 
(b)  Job descriptions. Jobs are distinguished by a written job specification including job title, duties and responsibilities, and a statement of minimum qualifications necessary for satisfactory performance of the duties of the job. 
(c)  Responsibility. The personnel office shall be responsible for administration of the pay, benefits, and job specifications and qualifications. The personnel office shall revise existing policies and recommend the revisions as the need arises. 
(d)  Continuous study of salary rates. Upon request of the city manager and periodically as the need arises, the personnel office shall prepare an analysis of prevailing rates of pay for similar public and private employment in the area and at large, taking into consideration cost-of-living factors, budget effects of various alternative pay plans, and other factors which may be pertinent in recommending changes in the plan. On the basis of this information, the city manager may recommend changes in pay policy, or change individual pay rates as necessary to keep the pay current, uniform and equitable. 
(e)  Method of payment. The method of payment shall be as follows: 
(1)  Pay periods. Pay periods and dates of payment shall be set by the city manager. 
(2)  Hourly employees. Employees employed on a hourly basis are paid weekly on Fridays. 
(3)  Salaried employees. Employees on a salary will be paid semimonthly on the 15th and the 30th of each month. 
(f)  Overtime. Employees shall work overtime when necessary, and only on the prior approval of the department head. Overtime on any job will be allocated as evenly as possible among all employees. The city's policy is to pay overtime (11/2 times the regular rate) for all time worked over 40 hours per week, excluding firefighters. Department heads are not normally paid overtime, but are given compensatory time. 
(g)  Compensatory time. The city prefers to provide compensatory time off in lieu of monetary overtime compensation at a rate of 11/2 hours of compensatory time for each hour of overtime worked. Fair Labor Standards guidelines will be followed for compensatory time accumulation and compensation of overtime. Department heads and supervisors shall keep employees' accumulated compensatory time to a minimum. Department heads and supervisors may limit amounts of compensatory time accumulated and may schedule compensatory time off for employees. Upon termination, an employee will be paid for accumulated compensatory time at the employee's regular rate of pay. 
(h)  Christmas bonus policy. The city usually provides for a Christmas bonus to full-time employees depending on the restrictions of each year's fiscal budget. 
(i)  Merit system. 
(1)  Policy. Merit pay increases will be based on the results of the performance evaluation and the employee's ability and efficiency in performing the employee's duties and any additional criteria as determined by the city manager. Automatic pay increases shall not be provided for seniority or tenure. All merit increases may be granted only by the city manager on recommendation of the department head. 
(2)  Evaluations. Performance evaluations will be administered twice a year. All merit raises are subject to the restrictions of the current fiscal budget. 
(j)  Payment of accumulated leave upon termination of employment. 
(1)  An employee will be paid for 25 percent of accumulated sick leave, to a maximum of 30 days paid, if the employee has a minimum of two years of service upon termination of employment and separates in good standing. Good standing is defined as follows: 
a.  Gives proper notice of termination to the department (two weeks). 
b.  Takes only appropriate days off during the last two weeks of employment, i.e., weekends or scheduled days off. 
c.  Turns in all city equipment, uniforms, etc., that have been issued. Equipment must be in acceptable working condition. 
d.  Termination for violation of city personnel policies, standard operating procedure, safety policies, or excessive absenteeism will not be considered leaving in good standing. 
(2)  Failure to return city-issued equipment, uniforms, materials, records, or other items may result in delay of payment of terminal pay. Terminal pay may also be delayed due to any pending investigation of an employee. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 2-154. - Leave. 
(a)  Holiday leave. The holiday leave policy shall be as follows: 
(1)  Municipal offices, with the exception of those in emergency categories, shall be closed on the following official holidays: 
a.  New Year's Day. 
b.  Martin Luther King Day. 
c.  Good Friday. 
d.  Memorial Day. 
e.  Independence Day. 
f.  Labor Day. 
g.  Thanksgiving. 
h.  Thanksgiving Friday. 
i.  Day before Christmas (December 24). 
j.  Christmas Day (December 25). 
(2)  If a regularly scheduled holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the holiday is taken on Friday or Monday, respectively. 
(3)  Full-time employees are entitled to paid holidays. Part-time regular employees who would normally have worked on the day observed as a holiday are paid for the number of hours they would have worked had the holiday not occurred. Seasonal employees will receive time off for the holiday without pay. 
(4)  An employee who is absent without authorization or who is on leave without pay on the day immediately preceding or following a holiday shall lose pay for the holiday as well as the pay for that day. 
(5)  An employee who is on vacation, approved military leave, or a scheduled, nondisciplinary leave of absence when a holiday is observed will be paid the employee's regular rate for that holiday. 
(6)  All employees who are required to work on holidays shall be given an alternate day off and shall be paid regular rates for the time worked on the holiday. 
(7)  Holidays falling within an employee's vacation period or within a period of absence properly chargeable to illness shall not be counted against vacation or sick leave. 
(8)  Employees desiring to observe religious holidays not coinciding with official holidays may be given time off without pay or may be authorized to use accrued vacation leave or compensatory time. 
(b)  Vacation leave. The purpose of and policy for vacation leave is as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. Vacation leave is provided for the specific purpose of allowing employees periods of rest and recreation. 
(2)  Policy. All full-time employees earn vacation from the date of employment. Vacation is earned according to the following schedule: 
Years of Service Days Earned Per Month Days Earned Per Year Hours Earned Per Year 0-5 0.83 10  80 6 0.92 11  88 7 1.00 12  96 8 1.08 13 104 9 1.17 14 112 10 1.25 15 120  
a.  Accrued vacation may be used after six months of employment. Accumulated vacation can be carried forward beyond a calendar year. Employees with less than ten years service can accumulate a maximum of 21 days or 168 hours of vacation. Employees with over ten years service can accumulate a maximum of 30 days or 240 hours of vacation. When maximum vacation is accumulated the employee does not earn vacation until accumulated vacation is reduced below the maximum. 
b.  Certified individuals employed in either the police or fire department are entitled to 15 vacation days each year with pay if the member has been regularly employed in the department for at least one year. 
c.  Vacation leave may not be taken prior to the completion of six months of employment except in cases of emergency to be determined by the department head. 
d.  Vacation cannot be taken in advance of being earned. All vacation leave must be approved in advance by the department head. Any employee requesting in excess of 15 consecutive working days of vacation leave must have department head and personnel department approval. 
e.  Leave credits are not transferable between employees. 
f.  Seasonal and temporary employees do not earn vacation. 
g.  Part-time regular employees earn vacation in the proportion that their regularly scheduled work period bears to the regularly scheduled work period of full-time employees in the same department. 
h.  Leave may be taken in four-hour or half-day increments. Although employees are encouraged to take vacations in full-week segments, vacations can also be taken in units of half days and whole days. 
i.  All leave requests must be approved by the department head so that schedules and duties may be adjusted to create minimum disruption of normal work operations. Except in extraordinary circumstances, vacation time must be requested at least one week in advance. 
j.  Holidays falling in the vacation period of the employee will not be counted as part of vacation leave. 
k.  Employees who leave the employment of the city in good standing after serving six months will be paid for their unused vacation time. Employees terminating prior to six months of service will not be paid for vacation time. 
l.  Employees shall not be allowed to receive pay for accrued vacation in lieu of taking time off. 
m.  Employees may not receive cash payment on accrued vacation except upon termination, retirement, or death. 
n.  Employees shall not be allowed to borrow vacation time against future accrual. 
o.  Employees who are laterally transferred, promoted, or demoted shall retain accrued vacation leave. 
p.  Fire department employees who work shifts other than a regular forty-hour week are charged vacation time at the rate of two days per shift. 
(c)  Sick leave. The purpose of and policy for sick leave is as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. The intent of sick leave is to preclude loss of income for absences due to illness or injury during the employee's regular workweek. 
(2)  Policy. All full-time salaried city employees earn 11/4 days of sick leave per month or 15 days per year, based on their anniversary date. Sick leave may be accumulated not to exceed 120 days. 
a.  Full-time hourly employees earn five days of sick leave per year. 
b.  Fire department employees who work shifts other than a regular 40-hour week are charged sick leave time at the rate of two days for one shift. 
c.  During the orientation period, sick leave shall accumulate and may be used. 
d.  Sick leave may not be used in advance of being earned. 
e.  Sick leave credits are not transferable between employees. 
f.  Employees may use vacation time in lieu of sick leave. 
g.  When absence due to illness exceeds the amount of paid leave earned and authorized, the pay of an employee shall be discontinued until he returns to work. 
h.  Employees who are laterally transferred, promoted, or demoted shall retain accrued sick leave. 
i.  Employees can use sick leave for medical, dental, or ocular appointments; personal illness; or physical incapacity. 
j.  To receive sick leave, the employee must notify his immediate supervisor within the time limits established by the department. 
k.  Failure to ensure proper notification without a valid reason shall constitute absence without leave. 
l.  No city employee shall be entitled to sick leave while absent from duty on account of the following causes: 
1.  Disability arising from any sickness or injury purposely inflicted or caused by willful misconduct. 
2.  Sickness or disability sustained while on leave of absence without pay. 
3.  Ordinary tiredness or restlessness. 
4.  Disability acquired as a result of another job. 
m.  A department head may require an employee to take sick leave when evidence exists that an employee is ill or injured and where the department head believes the employee's medical condition may pose a personal hazard or impose risk to others. 
n.  Employees who are absent for more than three successive days of unconfirmed illness may be required by the department head to submit a physician's statement. An employee who consistently uses sick leave as it accumulates may be required to submit a physician's statement for any claimed illness or injury causing an absence from work for more than half a day. 
o.  An employee who misuses sick leave may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
p.  An employee will be paid for 25 percent of accumulated sick leave, a maximum of 30 days paid, if the employee has a minimum of two years of service upon termination of employment. The employee must separate or resign in good standing. 
(d)  Family Medical Leave Act. The purpose of and policy for family medical leave is as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. The Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) requires covered employers to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave to "eligible" employees for certain family and medical reasons. Employees are eligible if they have worked at least one year, and for 1,250 hours over the previous 12 months. 
(2)  Reasons for taking family medical leave. Unpaid family medical leave will be granted for any of the following reasons: 
a.  To care for the employee's child after birth, or placement for adoption or foster care. 
b.  To care for the employee's spouse, son or daughter, or parent, who has a serious health condition. 
c.  For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the employee's job. 
Any accumulated leave (sick, vacation, compensatory, etc.) will be used in lieu of unpaid leave. 
(3)  Advance notice and medical certification. Employees will be required to provide advance leave notice and medical certification. Taking of leave may be denied if requirements are not met. 
a.  The employee ordinarily must provide 30 days' advance notice when the leave is "foreseeable." 
b.  The city may require medical certification to support a request for leave because of a serious health condition and may require second or third opinions, at the employer's expense, and a fitness for duty report to return to work. 
(4)  Job benefits and protection. 
a.  For the duration of Family Medical Leave Act leave, the city will maintain the employee's health coverage. 
b.  Upon return from Family Medical Leave Act leave, most employees will be restored to their original or equivalent positions with equivalent pay, benefits, and other employment terms. 
c.  The use of Family Medical Leave Act leave cannot result in the loss of any employment benefit that accrued prior to the start of an employee's leave. 
(e)  Emergency/bereavement leave. The purpose of and policy for emergency and bereavement leave is as follows: 
(1)  Purpose. Emergency leave is designed to minimize the need for full-time employees to use vacation leave or compensatory time in cases involving death or illness in the employee's immediate family or household. 
(2)  Policy. Any full- or part-time employee may be granted emergency leave with pay by the employee's department head in case of illness or death of members of the immediate family. Seasonal employees may be granted unpaid leave. Such leave will not exceed five working days in a 12-month period to any employee. This leave does not count against sick leave or vacation time. 
(3)  Restrictions. Immediate family is restricted to the following: 
a.  Spouse. 
b.  Child (natural, step, adopted). 
c.  Mother. 
d.  Father. 
e.  Brother. 
f.  Sister. 
g.  Grandmother. 
h.  Grandfather. 
i.  Aunt. 
j.  Uncle. 
k.  Father-in-law. 
l.  Mother-in-law. 
m.  Brother-in-law. 
n.  Sister-in-law. 
o.  Daughter-in-law. 
p.  Son-in-law. 
q.  More distant relative residing in the home of the employee. 
(f)  Funeral leave policy. Leave for attendance of funerals not provided under emergency leave may be granted, through department heads, not to exceed two days per calendar year. 
(g)  Military leave policy. Military leave will be granted in accordance with state and federal laws. 
(h)  Court leave. The policy for court leave is as follows: 
(1)  Pay continued. Employees called upon for jury service will receive their regular salary from the city during such services. 
(2)  Enforcement officers. Court appearances as a city enforcement officer (fire, police, inspections, etc.) are compensated as actual hours worked and are not classified as paid leave. 
(3)  Witness. An employee directed to appear as a witness for the city, the state, or the federal government will be compensated for the employee's time as stated in subsection (h)(1) or (2) of this section. 
(4)  Documentation required. An employee summoned either for jury duty or as a witness must provide an official certificate of attendance to the employee's immediate supervisor. 
(5)  Personal legal business. An employee absent for personal legal business must use accrued vacation or compensatory time. Leave without pay may be used with the department head's approval. 
(i)  Civic leave; time off to vote. Employees are encouraged to register to vote. It is the responsibility of the employee to contact his immediate supervisor regarding choosing a time to vote. The supervisor may select another time if the chosen time conflicts with departmental duties. The supervisor, however, must give sufficient time to the employee to exercise his right to vote. 
(j)  Career enrichment leave. Career enrichment leave may be granted as follows: 
(1)  With the approval of the city manager, a department head may grant an employee administrative absence with pay for purposes of attending a professional conference, convention, training activity, legislative proceeding or civic function or meeting or for purposes of coordinating with governmental and/or private agencies and entities in the interest of the city. 
(2)  All employees in the city service shall be entitled to necessary time off with pay for the purpose of taking qualifying or promotional examinations for other positions within the city service. The amount of time allowed for this activity shall be limited as prescribed by the city manager. 
(k)  Leave of absence without pay. A leave of absence without pay may be granted as follows: 
(1)  Restrictions. Department heads, with the approval of the director of personnel, may grant leaves of absence without pay to regular employees, not to exceed 30 days in duration. In granting such leave, the department head shall give primary consideration to the city's need for the employee's services. A leave of absence without pay may be granted for any legitimate purpose, such as absence for illness, disability, and pregnancy; however, the employee will be obligated to show that the granting of such leave is to the interest of the city. A leave of absence without pay in excess of 30 days may be granted only with the approval of the city manager, and in no case shall the leave exceed six months. 
(2)  Request of leave. Any employee requesting a leave of absence without pay must submit a written request to his department head at least two weeks prior to the date upon which the requested leave is to begin. The employee is responsible for keeping the department informed of his intention and/or ability to work. 
(3)  Limitations. A department head may revoke a leave of absence if the cause for granting leave was misrepresented or has ceased to exist. An employee who takes time off without the approval of the employee's department head or otherwise fails to return to work on the date designated is subject to disciplinary action, including termination. 
(4)  Insurance coverage. An employee on unpaid leave of absence will pay for the employee's dependents coverage and any premium for the employee's own coverage that the city does not currently pay. An employee must make arrangements to pay the costs of the coverage with the personnel department. An employee's failure to make payments to the city on a timely basis will result in the insurance being discontinued. 
(5)  Disciplinary actions. Employees on disciplinary suspension without pay may not use compensatory, vacation, or sick leave to recuperate the lost time. 
(6)  Reinstatement. During an employee's approved leave of absence without pay, the employee's vacant position may be filled temporarily or permanently by appointment, promotion or reassignment of an employee. At the expiration of leave without pay, the employee may be reinstated to the position the employee vacated if the position still exists and if the position has not been filled. If the position has been filled, the employee may apply for any vacant position with the city. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.1) 
Sec. 2-155. - Health and safety. 
(a)  Safety. All employees are required as a condition of employment to exercise due care in the course of work. To prevent or minimize injuries to the employee and the employee's coworkers and to protect and conserve city equipment, each employee shall: 
(1)  Obey all safety rules, regulations and policies published in the Employee Safety Handbook. 
(2)  Report to the employee's immediate supervisor all unsafe work conditions. 
(3)  Keep work areas clean and orderly at all times. 
(4)  Report immediately all accidents in which the employee is involved to the employee's immediate supervisor. 
(5)  Operate only machines or equipment that the employee has been authorized to operate. 
Employees who defy safety procedures or display gross negligence which may or may not cause damage to property or injury to others will be subject to disciplinary action. 
(b)  On-the-job injury/accident reporting. Each employee is required to report any and all accidents, no matter how slight, to his supervisor at once. All supervisors are to report such accidents to the personnel office. At the time an accident is reported to the personnel office, an accident report will be completed in full. 
(c)  Worker's compensation. 
(1)  Supervisor responsibility. All on-the-job injuries and illnesses, regardless of how minor, are to be reported on the City of Nacogdoches-Report of Injury form available in each department. The immediate supervisor of the injured employee will complete the form and forward it through the department head to the personnel department the same day the accident occurs. If a job-related disability injury results in lost time, the personnel department should be notified immediately of the date the employee begins losing time. The personnel department should also be notified immediately of the date the employee returns to work. Failure to advise the personnel department of the status of the injured employee may result in a delay of the employee receiving worker's compensation payment. 
(2)  Employee responsibility. An employee who suffers an occupational injury or illness shall report the incident to his immediate supervisor within 24 hours after it occurs. Any employee who is physically able, but does not meet this reporting requirement, shall not be eligible for injured employee compensation during the initial week of disability (see subsection (c)(3)b of this section). 
(3)  Compensation is given in accordance with the following: 
a.  An employee who suffers a disabling lost-time occupational injury or illness is eligible for worker's compensation benefits, in accordance with the provisions of the law. 
b.  An employee authorized to be off duty due to an occupational injury or illness shall be paid injured employee compensation by the city for a maximum of five workdays, at the regular rate of pay, during the first week of disability. To be eligible for injured employee compensation, an employee must: 
1.  If physically able, report the injury to his supervisor within 24 hours. 
2.  Endorse any worker's compensation checks for the initial five workdays to the city. 
c.  After the initial week of disability, an employee is eligible to receive weekly worker's compensation payments subject to minimum and maximum payments. An employee with accrued sick leave may elect to receive sick leave payments which is chargeable against the employee's accrued sick leave and when added to the worker's compensation shall equal the employee's regular pay. 
d.  An employee who remains disabled after using all available sick leave will continue receiving worker's compensation payments in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(4)  An employee authorized to be off duty due to an occupational injury or illness shall continue to earn vacation and sick leave at the regular rate. 
(5)  The attending physician should complete the City of Nacogdoches Doctor's Medical Report at the time of treatment and return the report to the department head of the employee. The department head shall adhere to the physician's instructions in the report and forward the report to the personnel department. 
(6)  The department head shall initiate the Supplemental Report of Injury form and submit it to the personnel department within 24 hours of any action, such as: 
a.  The employee returns to work from lost-time injury. 
b.  The injured employee has not returned to work after 60 consecutive days; and each subsequent 60-day period thereafter. 
c.  The employee loses additional time because of the original injury. 
d.  The injury was initially reported as "no lost time," but subsequent to that report the employee begins to lose time because of the injury. 
(7)  An employee authorized to be off duty due to an occupational injury and who violates the following shall be subject to disciplinary action, including dismissal, if the employee: 
a.  Is found to be working part time or full time either for pay or otherwise, for himself or another employer; 
b.  Falsifies or misrepresents his physical condition or disability as worse than it in fact is; 
c.  Consistently fails or refuses to follow the instructions of the treating physician; or 
d.  Refuses to return to regular duty or perform light duty when authorized by the treating physician and offered such duty by the department head. 
(d)  Controlled substance and alcohol abuse. The city acknowledges that its success now, as well as in the future, is dependent upon the physical and psychological well-being of its employees. Accordingly, it is the city's right, obligation and intent to maintain a safe working environment for all of its employees; to protect city property, equipment and operations; and to fulfill its obligation to the general public. The policy, purpose and procedures for controlled substance and alcohol abuse are as follows: 
(1)  Policy. The manufacture, distribution, use or possession by an employee of an intoxicating liquor, controlled substance, drug not medically authorized, or any other substance which may impair job performance or pose a hazard or serious risk to the safety and welfare of the employee, fellow employees, the city or general public, whether on or off the job, shall constitute cause for disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(2)  Scope. This policy applies to all employees of the city. This policy also applies to all applicants for employment with the city. 
(3)  Purpose. The manufacture, distribution, possession, use, or consumption of controlled substances or alcohol or being under the influence of controlled substances or alcohol may create serious risk for the involved employee, fellow employees, the city, and the general public. This policy is to assist in the reduction of such risks. 
(4)  Testing of employees. Current employees may be tested for controlled substances or alcohol use under the following circumstances: 
a.  If an accident occurs on the job or on city property. 
b.  When an employee's behavior or work performance gives reasonable cause to believe the employee is affected by the use or ingestion of controlled substances or alcohol. 
c.  To comply with local, state, federal government laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(5)  Failure of test. A current employee failing a controlled substance and alcohol screen required in accordance with this policy is subject to disciplinary action up to and including discharge. 
(6)  Refusal of consent. An employee who refuses to undergo a controlled substance and/or alcohol screening in accordance with this policy shall be treated as if the employee failed the required test. 
(e)  Employee assistance for alcohol or drug dependency. It is the city's desire to provide assistance to those employees who voluntarily request assistance with a personal alcohol or drug dependency problem. Employees are responsible for acknowledging their substance abuse problem and for seeking and accepting counseling or rehabilitation assistance before it impairs their performance or conduct and jeopardizes their employment. Employees who need to enter into a substance abuse treatment program will be allowed to enter a city-approved program one time without endangering their jobs provided they follow all prescribed treatment programs. Time off without pay may be authorized in accordance with the city's personnel policy on leaves of absence, if needed, up to 30 days. In most cases, participating employees will be returned to their former or comparable position if feasible when treatment is successfully completed. Some of the costs of the treatment may be covered by the city's health insurance plan. 
Continued employment is contingent on the employee's participating in any nonwork followup counseling or aftercare treatment programs. The personnel director will be the employee assistance program representative and should be contacted in regard to an employee's participation in an approved treatment program. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.2) 
Sec. 2-156. - Use of city tools, equipment and property. 
(a)  The city attempts to provide each employee with adequate tools, equipment, and vehicles for the city job being performed, and expects each employee to observe safe work practices and safe and courteous operation of vehicles and equipment in compliance with all municipal, county and state regulations. 
(b)  Employees who are assigned tools or equipment or vehicles by their departments are responsible for them and for their proper use. No personal use of any city property, materials, supplies, tools, equipment, or vehicles is permitted, unless authorized by the department head or city manager. 
(c)  If an employee is found to have used any city vehicle or equipment in a negligent manner and such vehicle or equipment becomes destroyed or damaged, the employee may be subject to disciplinary action. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.3) 
Sec. 2-157. - Discipline. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of discipline is to produce a change in the behavior of an employee so that the individual's future conduct complies with city policies and supports the attainment of the organization's objectives. Discipline should be used to correct unsatisfactory behavior and to encourage more effective performance. In disciplining employees, emphasis will be placed on correction-not on punishment for the sake of punishment. 
(b)  Grounds. Disciplinary action may be taken against an employee for just cause. The following list is by way of example only and is not exhaustive of what actions constitute just cause: 
(1)  Illegal, unethical, abusive, or unsafe acts. 
(2)  Violation of city or departmental rules, regulations, policies, or procedures. 
(3)  Insubordination. 
(4)  Neglect or abandonment of duties. 
(5)  Abuse of illness, injury, disability, or other benefits. 
(6)  Tardiness or absence without leave. 
(7)  Falsification of official documents or records. 
(8)  Using or being under the influence of drugs or intoxicating beverages on the job. 
(9)  Waste, damage, or unauthorized use of city property or supplies. 
(10)  Unauthorized use or disclosure of official information. 
(11)  Unauthorized or improper use of official authority. 
(12)  Inability to get along with fellow workers. 
(13)  Discourtesy to the public. 
(14)  Acceptance of any gratuity or gift for the performance or nonperformance of official duties. 
(15)  Engaging in horseplay or scuffling on the job. 
(16)  Fighting or provoking or instigating a fight, on city property. 
(17)  Sleeping on the job during working hours. 
(18)  An accumulation of infractions. 
(19)  Poor work performance. 
(20)  Any other conduct the city manager, department head, or a supervisor believes to be inappropriate. 
(c)  Disciplinary action. Violations of the city's rules and procedures or any other misconduct will result in appropriate disciplinary action. Appropriate disciplinary action will depend upon the circumstances, and may include such things as oral warnings, written reprimands, suspensions, probation, or discharge. 
(d)  Responsibility. Department heads are responsible for enforcing and maintaining proper standards of discipline and personal conduct among their employees. In implementing the disciplinary procedures, a department head/supervisor should consider such factors as the type and severity of the offense, the employee's performance record, and any mitigating circumstances surrounding the offense. All regular employees have the right to appeal a disciplinary action through the grievance process. 
(e)  Documentation. Department heads shall submit documentation of any disciplinary actions and the surrounding circumstances to the personnel director for the inclusion in the official personnel files of the employee involved. Any disciplinary action taken should be documented in writing indicating: 
(1)  The cause of discipline. 
(2)  The specific reason supporting the cause. 
(3)  The discipline to be imposed. 
(4)  The effective date. 
(5)  The employee's right to appeal. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.4) 
Sec. 2-158. - Separations. 
(a)  Resignation. The policy and procedures for resignation from the city are as follow: 
(1)  Policy. To resign in good standing, an employee shall submit a resignation, preferably in writing, to the department head two weeks before the effective date of the resignation. 
(2)  Procedure. A brief signed statement identifying the effective date of the resignation is adequate. An employee may give reasons for resigning, but it is not necessary. The city manager may waive any portion of the notice period. 
Unauthorized absence from work for a period of three working days shall be considered as a resignation. 
(3)  Benefits. 
a.  Employees who leave the city's employment after serving six months will be paid for their unused vacation time. Employees terminating prior to six months' service will not be paid for vacation time. 
b.  Employees will be paid for 25 percent of accumulated sick leave, a maximum of 30 days paid, if the employee has a minimum of two years of service upon termination of employment and separates in good standing. 
(b)  Layoff policy. An employee may be laid off because of changes in duties of the organization or for lack of work or funds. Whenever possible, an employee laid off from one city department shall be transferred to a suitable position elsewhere. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.5) 
Sec. 2-159. - Complaints; grievances. 
(a)  Disciplinary and termination policy. The city's disciplinary and termination policy is as follows: 
(1)  It is the intent of the disciplinary and termination procedure to safeguard the rights of all employees, to ensure that all employees are judged by fair and equitable standards, and to require that all rules are applied on an equitable basis. 
(2)  In the interest of good discipline and efficiency, a department head may demote an employee, suspend an employee without pay, or terminate an employee. All demotions, suspensions or terminations shall be approved by the personnel director prior to action being taken. 
(3)  Before an employee may be reclassified with a reduction in pay, suspended from employment, or terminated, the employee shall be notified in writing of the reason for the action and given an opportunity for a hearing before the department head and personnel director. At the hearing, the employee is entitled to examine evidence, cross examine witnesses or present proof. 
(4)  When an employee receives written notice of reduction in pay, suspension from employment, or termination, the employee may request a hearing with the department head and personnel director within three working days of receipt of the written notice. If a hearing is requested a date and time will be set by the personnel director. Failure of the employee to request a hearing by the specified time shall waive the rights to determination of any employment dispute and shall constitute consent to any employment action proposed or indicated in the original notice letter. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the hearing or as soon as possible thereafter, the personnel director and department head shall make a determination and shall make a written report of the hearing and determination. 
(6)  The employee may appeal the determination made by the personnel director and department head by delivering a signed written notice within five working days of receipt of the decision to the personnel director. A date and time shall be set for the appeal to be heard by the city manager. The city manager may request the presence of the personnel director, department head, and any other persons with knowledge or witness to the cause for action. The decision of the city manager will be final. 
(7)  An employee may be suspended during an investigation of misconduct in accordance with the following: 
a.  A regular employee may be suspended with pay, subject to reinstatement where applicable, where the department head determines that the risk of loss to the city of his continued employment, or the critical necessity of public confidence in his integrity, requires such suspension. 
b.  The conclusion of any investigation and termination or reinstatement of any employee shall take place within 60 days of any suspension, unless the employee consents, directly or by implication, to a longer period of suspension. 
(b)  Termination processing. Procedures for termination are as follows: 
(1)  It will be the responsibility of the terminating department to ensure that all city property (i.e., keys, tools, equipment, etc.) has been turned in prior to submitting the exit checklist to the personnel office. 
(2)  Terminating employees are responsible for completing an exit interview form prior to their last date of employment. This form may be obtained in the personnel office. Employees wishing to talk with the personnel director, prior to their effective date of termination, may do so by calling the personnel office to schedule an appointment. 
(c)  Grievance policy. The grievance policy is as follows: 
(1)  A grievance is defined as something that causes distress or gives reason to complain. Grievances relate to working conditions and situations which the employee feels are unfair. 
(2)  Employees are encouraged to handle all differences of opinion at their department level by bringing the matter to their supervisor immediately. If the discussion with the immediate supervisor produces unsatisfactory results, the employee may submit a written grievance to the department head if the employee is still unsatisfied. If the decision of the department head is not satisfactory, the employee shall, within five working days of receiving a written decision, request from the personnel director a hearing before the city grievance committee. 
(3)  The city grievance committee will consist of three staff members selected by the personnel director. The grievant, for good cause, may request substitution of one of the three chosen committee members. The decision to substitute any member shall be at the discretion of the personnel director. 
(4)  The grievance committee shall hold an informal meeting at which all parties shall have the opportunity to present their case to ascertain the facts surrounding the grievance. The committee shall make a written report and render a recommendation to the city manager within five working days of the hearing. The city manager shall review the recommendations of the grievance committee and provide a final written response to the grievant. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.6) 
Sec. 2-160. - Performance evaluations. 
(a)  Purpose. The performance appraisals are designed to help supervisory personnel and employees measure how well city work is being performed and to provide a tool for management decisions regarding training, assignment, promotion, salary adjustment and retention of city employees. 
(b)  Evaluation. The work performance of each employee shall be evaluated in accordance with procedures developed by the personnel department. Special evaluations may be made if requested by the department head, and in those departments where applicable, performance appraisals should be administered twice annually. All performance appraisals shall be completed on standardized forms provided by the personnel department. 
(c)  Counseling. An employee should sign copies of the employee's own performance appraisal reports. Evaluators shall individually discuss the reports with the employee and shall counsel the employee regarding the job performance, and any improvements in such performance which appear desirable or necessary. 
(d)  Reconsideration. An employee dissatisfied with the performance appraisal may seek reconsideration through the chain of command to the employee's department head. 
(e)  Records. All performance appraisals shall become a permanent part of the employee's personnel file maintained in the personnel department. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.7) 
Sec. 2-161. - Employee records. 
(a)  Official personnel file. The personnel department shall maintain the official personnel file for all city employees. It is the responsibility of supervisors to ensure that all necessary documentation is forwarded to the personnel department for inclusion in the employee's file. The personnel director is responsible for ensuring documents of an evaluative or negative nature clearly indicate the employee is aware of the document prior to placement in the employee's file. The personnel director shall determine the appropriateness of placement of documents in an employee's personnel file. 
(b)  Employee privacy. The director of personnel shall establish procedures necessary to preserve the privacy of employee information as required by applicable state and federal legislation. Access to privileged or confidential employee records shall be based on the need to know as determined by the personnel director. 
The Texas Open Records Act permits an employee or official of a governmental body to dictate whether the public shall have access to the employee's home address and telephone number by submitting a written notice to the personnel director. No employee's home address and telephone number may be disclosed to the public if the employee or city official requests that the items be closed. 
(c)  Personnel file review. An employee at all times has a right to inspect any and all inclusions made a part of the employee's personnel records and may at any time submit personal work-related information that may be included into his official records. 
(d)  Currency of records. Employees shall notify their supervisor who shall notify the personnel department, on the appropriate forms, of any change in the following: 
(1)  Address. 
(2)  Telephone number. 
(3)  Person to notify in case of accident or illness. 
(4)  Name-through marriage or otherwise. 
(5)  Marital status. 
(6)  Number of dependents. 
(7)  Insurance beneficiary. 
(8)  Military status. 
(9)  Expiration of licenses and/or certificates necessary to do the job. 
(Code 1971, § 2-35.8) 
Secs. 2-162-2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Airport advisory board, § 10-56 et seq.; floodplain management board of appeals, § 42-91 et seq.; historic landmark preservation committee, § 50-61 et seq.; Nacogdoches public library advisory board, § 62-86 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 74-26 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 118-66 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, § 118-96 et seq. 

Sec. 2-201. - Appointment and terms of board and commission members. 
(a)  All city board and commission members shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the city council. Appointments are made in open session. 
(b)  All board and commission members shall serve either a full term on the designated board or commission or the unexpired term of a member to fill a vacancy. All members shall serve at the will of the city council. 
(c)  Board and commission terms are set by the city council. However, no member of an appointed board or commission shall serve more than six consecutive years on the same board or commission. 
(d)  The city council reserves the right to waive the six-year rule. A waiver of the six-year consecutive service limit shall require the concurring vote of four-fifths of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1495-7-08, adopted July 15, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 6, Art. I, §§ 6-1, 6-2, Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 6-3-6-11, Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 6-12, 6-13, Art. II, Div. 3, §§ 6-14-6-24, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to animals and derived from Ord. No. 1409-3-06, 3-21-2006. 
Cross reference- Kennels and pet shops, § 18-296 et seq.; animals prohibited in cemeteries, § 22-1; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; livestock and motorized sport vehicles in parks, § 74-63; collection of small dead animals, § 82-99; collection of large dead animals, § 82-100; horse-drawn carriages, § 110-306 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(a)  Prevent hazards to the physical and mental health of the public caused by animals; 
(b)  Prevent cruelty to animals; 
(c)  Decrease the number of unwanted and stray dogs and cats in the city; 
(d)  Encourage responsible animal ownership; 
(e)  Place the responsibility of complying with its requirements upon an animal's owner. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    Abandon means the act of leaving an animal: 
(1)  Without food, water or care for 24 hours or more; or 
(2)  In a situation where conditions present an immediate, direct, and serious threat to the life, safety, or health of the animal. 
    Altered means incapable of reproduction; synonym of sterilized, neutered or spayed. 
    Animal means any warm or cold-blooded vertebrate. 
    Animal control officer means the person designated by the city manager to represent and act for the city in the impoundment of animals, controlling of animals running at large and as otherwise provided and required in this chapter; as well as that person's subordinates and designees. 
    Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the city for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals. 
    At large means to be free of physical restraint beyond the boundaries of owner's premises. 
    Companion animal means dogs and cats. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Makes an un provoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attach and cause bodily injury to that person. 
    Domestic animal includes livestock and normal household pets, such as but not limited to dogs, cats, cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish or small, non poisonous reptiles or nonpoisonous snakes. 
    Dumping means to knowingly desert, forsake or absolutely give up any dog, cat or other companion animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another. 
    Euthanasia means the humane destruction of a companion, domestic or exotic animal by a method, which causes immediate unconsciousness without visible evidence of distress on the part of the animal. 
    Exotic animal means any animal not defined as a companion animal or a domestic animal. 
    Feral cat means a cat too unsocialized to be handled or placed in a typical pet home. 
    Guard dog or attack dog means any dog intended to attack intruders. 
    Harboring means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or providing premises to which the animal returns for all or part of three consecutive days. 
    Inhumane treatment of animals means any treatment of an animal prohibited by any provision of law, including federal, state and local laws, ordinances or rules. 
    Kennel means any place or premises wherein any person boards, breeds, buys, lets for hire, trains for a fee, trades or sells dogs or cats; does not include veterinary hospitals or humane societies. 
    Limited breeder means any person that breeds or allows his or her animal, whether purebred or mixed breed, to produce offspring. 
    Livestock means domestic animals generally used or raised on a farm for profit, work, or pleasure, including, but not limited to, cattle, cows, sheep, pigs, bulls, stallions, mare gelding, jack, jennies, hogs, goats, llamas, ostriches and emus. 
    Managed feral cat colony means a colony of feral cats in which TTVAR-M (trap, test, vaccinate, alter, return, monitor/manage) is being performed. Cats are altered, vaccinated for rabies and ear-tipped before return to the original location. 
    Multiple pet owners mean a person who keeps or harbors more than five dogs or five cats or any combination of five cats and dogs. One litter of puppies or kittens under four months of age may be excluded from the count. 
    Owner means any person who has a right of property over an animal, keeps or harbors an animal, has an animal in his/her care, acts as custodian of an animal, or permits an animal to remain on or about his/her premises. 
    Restraint an animal shall be considered under restraint if it is confined to its owner's premises by a physical fence in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public and from other animals except for animals owned or under the control of the owner; or is secure by a leash and properly fitted collar; or is otherwise under the physical control of the owner or of another responsible person. 
    Secure enclosure shall mean a fenced area or structure that is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the release or escape of an animal; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal by posting signs bearing letters not less than two inches high on all sides of the enclosure; 
(5)  Is tall enough or covered so that the animal cannot climb out; and 
(6)  Has a perimeter structure which prevents the animal from digging out or going under the side fence or wall. 
    Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and which would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment. 
    Shelter means a structure that protects animals from the elements. It must be enclosed on at least three sides and have a roof and a floor. 
    Unprovoked attack means an attack or act by an animal, which took place even though the person or animal attacked did nothing to cause or encourage the attack or act. 
    Vaccination means an injection of rabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture and administered in accordance with state law. 
    Wild animal means those animals of wild nature or disposition so as to require to be reclaimed and made tame by art, industry, or education, or else must be kept in confinement to be brought within the immediate control of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 1626-5-13, 5-7-2013) 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT, IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 6-3. - Authority generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control authority or duly licensed peace officer to carry out all applicable provisions of this chapter and to pick up and impound all animals found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-4. - Authority to use tranquilizer equipment. 
    In the performance of his/her duties, the animal control officers shall have authority to employ tranquilizer equipment and all other animal control devices commonly used by other animal control agencies located within the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-5. - Interference. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or molest any animal control officer in the performance of any duty delegated under this chapter, or seek to release any animal taken and held in custody under provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-6. - Notice of impoundment. 
    The animal control officer shall at once notify the owner, if known, of any animal currently in impound pursuant to this chapter. The notice shall give a description of the animal impounded, including any marks or brands. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-7. - Injured animals. 
    Animals injured on public property may be impounded and given adequate veterinary medical treatment pending notification of the owner. If an injured animal is treated or impounded, the owner of such animal shall be liable for all expenses of treatment and/or impoundment; however, disposition may be made at the discretion of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-8. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
    The owner of any impounded animal may reclaim the animal by signing any citations issued for alleged violations of this chapter and paying all impoundment fees, fines and other accrued expenses, under following conditions: 
(1)  If the owner of any impounded animal pursuant to this chapter shall appear to claim the animal within three business days of notice of impoundment, the animal control officer shall, if he/she reasonably believes that such person is the true owner, turn such animal over to such person upon payment to the animal control officer of a fee for each day that such animal has been impounded. The fees shall be collected by the animal control officer and remitted to the city finance department. 
(2)  The animal control officer shall, upon impoundment, attempt to call the owner of any impounded dog or cat that is identified by a collar or harness with the city's registration tag attached or by an implanted microchip. 
(3)  If the impounded animal is a dog or cat that is not identified by wearing a collar with a valid license tag attached or by a duly registered implanted microchip, the owner of the dog or cat must present a certificate showing that the dog or cat has been vaccinated in accordance with state law from that date or shall have the dog or cat vaccinated prior to its release from impoundment and must provide or secure a valid license for such dog or cat. The license tag is to be attached to the dog or cat's collar. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-9. - Disposal of unredeemed, impounded animals. 
    The animal control officer shall have authority to dispose of in accordance with state law all animals impounded in animal shelter. 
(1)  Any person wishing to adopt an impounded animal shall pay appropriate fees. The prospective owner shall be required to have any dog or cat altered, properly vaccinated and licensed at his/her own expense. 
(2)  The animal control officer may sell the animal impounded and remit the proceeds to city finance department. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-10. - Destruction of impounded animals. 
    If no purchaser or owner can be found for any animal impounded pursuant to this section, the animal control officer is authorized to humanely destroy such animal and to have the carcass destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-11. - Records and reports of animal control officer. 
    The animal control officer shall record a description of all animals impounded by him/her pursuant to this chapter. record shall show date of impoundment, return to owner, or of sale; the name of owner, if known; and name of purchaser or adopter. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 6-12. - Suspicion of rabies when person bitten. 
(a)  If any dog or other animal has bitten any person, the owner of the animal shall immediately, and in any event not later than 24 hours after such biting, notify an animal control officer of such biting and have the dog or other animal quarantined according to the discretion of an animal control officer: in the city animal shelter or a veterinary hospital in the city or in the home of the owner for a period ten days. No such animal so held for observation shall be released from impoundment without authorization from the animal control department. Such impoundment shall be at the expense of the owner of the animal. 
(b)  If, however, at the time of the biting the dog or other animal was duly licensed, properly identified and was lawfully restrained as required by article III of this chapter, expense of confinement shall be against the person so bitten. If such person is on the premises with express or implied consent of the owner, such as delivery persons, guests, post office personnel, utility meter readers, etc., cost of confinement shall be at owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-13. - Suspicion of rabies when animal bitten. 
(a)  The owner of any dog or other animal suffering a bite from a rabid animal or suspected or believed to have been bitten by a rabid animal shall, within 24 hours from the time of such biting, notify an animal control officer and have the dog or other animal administered proper treatment or destroyed. 
(b)  When the owner desires to have proper treatment administered to the animal, confinement shall be under the direction and supervision of an animal control officer, who shall direct the manner and means by which the dog or other animal shall be confined, confinement to be for a period of at least ten days and at owner's expense. 
(c)  Such dog or other animal shall be released only by order of an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
ARTICLE II. - CARE OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-14. - Proper care. 
    Every owner or other person having care and control of any animal shall provide following for each animal under his or her care and control: 
(1)  Sufficient nutritious and wholesome food, served to the animal in clean containers, to maintain the animal in good health; 
(2)  Clean potable water, served to the animal in a clean container, such water to be available to the animal at all times; 
(3)  Adequate shelter and protection from weather at all times; 
(4)  Veterinary care as needed to prevent suffering. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-15. - Inhumane treatment in general prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to treat any animal in any manner that causes or permits unjustified or unwarranted pain or suffering, including torturing an animal, beating an animal, or overworking an animal. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-16. - Abandonment. 
    It is a violation of this chapter for any person to dump or abandon any animal on any property, whether public or private, within the City of Nacogdoches. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-17. - Animals in vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to leave an animal in a vehicle under such conditions or for such period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, cold, lack of food or water, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability or death. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or convey any animal in an open vehicle without making provisions to prevent said animal from jumping from or being thrown from said vehicle or conveyance, or being otherwise injured. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-18. - Tethering; restrictions and requirements. 
(a)  No unattended animal shall be tethered by any means on any public property such as city parks or utility easements, or public access private property without property owner's consent. 
(b)  Any tethered animal in an enclosure shall have continuous access to shade and water, and have unrestricted access to a wind and moisture proof shelter. 
(c)  Any tethered animal shall be arranged so that the tethering device cannot become entangled in such a way as to prevent access to shade, water and shelter. 
(d)  The tether used must be at least ten feet in length or five times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the base of the dog's tail, whichever is greater; it must be attached to a running line, pulley or trolley system, and equipped with swivel ends, positioned in such a manner as to prevent the animal from becoming entangled with any obstruction, from partially or totally jumping any fence, or from leaving any part of its owner's property, and must be secured to the animal using a properly fitted collar or harness. 
(e)  Choke type, pinch type or prong type collars may not be used to tether the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.076 et seq. 
Sec. 6-19. - Fighting, fighting paraphernalia prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful to cause any animal to fight with another. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or use, or in any way be connected with, or interested in the management of any place used for the purpose of fighting animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to receive money for the admission of any person to any place kept or used for the purpose of fighting animals, or to permit or suffer any place belonging to or under his control to be so kept or used. It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, encourage, assist or arrange for an animal to fight, or to issue a challenge for the purpose of bringing about an animal fight. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have on their person or property any paraphernalia used in fighting. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, breed, maintain, or harbor any animal, which is used or intended to be used for fighting. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-20. - Trapping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or set any trap or to trap any animal by any form of trap other than a humane live cage trap as specifically authorized by the animal control department. 
    Any trap placed or set in violation of this chapter shall be impounded by the animal control officer or the police. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-21. - Tripping of horses prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to trip a horse. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-22. - Sanitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any pen, enclosure, pound or area for any animal in a manner that is a nuisance or threat to the health or safely of the public. 
(b)  The keeper of any pen shall be responsible for pickup and disposal of all animal feces found in such pen. Feces must be removed often enough so that there is no odor or fly attraction which would disturb a person of normal sensibilities or to constitute a health hazard to humans or animals. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-23. - Running at large. 
(a)  No animal shall be allowed to run at large and cause a nuisance. The owner of every animal shall be held responsible for every behavior of such animal under provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner; causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; or chases vehicles, or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property or private property other than that of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-24. - Animal in heat. 
    Any person who owns, harbors or keeps any female dog or cat shall, during the period such animal is in heat, keep such dog or cat in a secured area and in such a manner as to prevent a male dog or cat from having access to such female except for controlled breeding permitted by the owner of the female. Additionally, the female dog or cat shall not be restrained in a manner that prevents her from defending herself or from avoiding a male. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Secs. 6-25-6-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 6-30. - Dogs and unaltered cats under restraint. 
    Dogs and unaltered cats must be under restraint at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-31. - Rabies vaccination required. 
    Every owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies in accordance with state law. Any person moving into the city from a location outside the city shall comply with this chapter within ten days after having moved into the city. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-32. - License required. 
    Every resident that owns or harbors a dog or cat within the corporate limits shall obtain a license for the animal from the city. 
    Participating veterinarians may issue city license upon administering rabies vaccine. Veterinarians may retain $1.00 for each city license issued and shall remit said license fees to the city on a monthly basis providing description and name of the animal, license number, name of animal owner, address and phone number. 
(1)  Dog and cat licenses shall be issued by the city upon payment of the license fee, and presentation of a properly completed application for license and a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog or cat has been vaccinated for rabies and that the vaccination is current according to state law. Animals less than four months and 30 days or age are exempt. The application for dog or cat licenses shall be upon printed forms furnished by the city for such purpose and shall require: 
a.  Name, address, phone number and email address, if available, of the owner; and 
b.  Name, breed and sex of the dog or cat; and 
c.  The number of any implanted microchip. 
For a dog or cat that is not registered or reregistered within ten days from the expiration date of the license or when otherwise required, a penalty, may be assessed in addition to the licensing fee. 
(2)  Members of managed feral cat colonies are considered licensed. 
(3)  Term. Dog and cat licenses shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(4)  Tag. Upon compliance by the owner of a dog or cat with registration and licensing requirements of this chapter, the owner shall be issued a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog or cat so licensed. 
(5)  Duplicates. If a dog or cat tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the city upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the license fee for current time, presentation of a certificate showing that the dog or cat has been vaccinated within one year of date thereof, and the payment of a fee for such duplicate. 
(6)  Transferability refunds. Dog or cat tags shall not be transferable from one dog or cat to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog or cat license fee because of the death of a dog or cat or the owner's leaving the city before expiration of the license period. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-33. - Identification required. 
(a)  Dogs and pet cats. The owner of a dog or cat shall see that such dog or cat has proper identification: 
(1)  A collar or harness to which the license tag required by this chapter shall be affixed, worn by the dog or cat at all times; and/or 
(2)  An implanted microchip. 
(b)  Members of managed feral cat colonies are identified by ear-tipping. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-34. - Limitation on number of dogs and cats. 
    No person shall keep or harbor more than five dogs or five cats or any combination of five dogs and cats without obtaining a permit to maintain a multiple pet household or to operate a kennel. For purposes of this section, a maximum of one litter of puppies or kittens less than four months of age may be excluded from the count. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-35. - Multi-pet household. 
    Any person wishing to keep more than five dogs or five cats or five dogs and cats in any combination, and who does not possess a commercial business permit, may apply for a multi-pet permit. The multi-pet permit will be issued only if the applicant meets all provisions of this chapter. The permit shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. Upon inspection of premises, the permit shall be issued if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All animals over four months of age must be altered; 
(2)  The facility must be adequate for number and type of animals to be kept. Facility must be of sufficient size as to allow animals to move about freely. This shall apply to each animal kept. Size of facility shall be in proportion to the size of the individual animal's height and weight; 
(3)  The premises must be kept in sanitary condition and free of odor or stench which would be offensive to person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(4)  The animals must be maintained in a manner, which does not pose a danger to the health of animals themselves, or to adjacent animals; 
(5)  The animals must not cause noise, which is offensive or disturbing to person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(6)  The applicant or holder of the permit shall not have been issued citations for violation of this chapter on two separate occasions, or animals covered by or to be covered by permit have not been impounded on two separate occasions. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Secs. 6-36-6-39 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK, SWINE AND WILD ANIMALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1626-5-13, adopted May 7, 2013, changed the title of Art. IV from "Livestock, swine and other farm animals" to "Livestock, swine and wild animals". 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-40. - Registration of livestock. 
    All livestock kept inside the city must be registered with the Nacogdoches Animal Services and Adoption Center. Owner's information, including two contact emergency phone numbers must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-41. - Pens and structures. 
    All livestock kept under this section shall be provided a stable, shed, pen, or other structure of adequate size for the storage, shelter, and safekeeping of such animals. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-42. - Space required for livestock. 
    Every owner or keeper of any livestock, except swine, shall provide a minimum of 10,000 square feet for each animal. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-43. - Proximity of livestock to buildings. 
    No allowable livestock shall be kept or allowed to be within 150 feet of any inhabited house, public meeting place, or business, except that of the owner or caretaker thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-44. - Riding or leading horse, mule, and cattle on sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or lead any horse, mule or cattle of any kind on any sidewalk or walking path in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-45. - Keeping of swine. 
    No person shall keep any swine, or build or maintain any swine pen within the city. The keeping of any swine within the city constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
DIVISION 2. - FOWL 

Sec. 6-46. - Operation, maintenance of chicken houses. 
    Operation and maintenance within the city of any broiler house, brooder house or chicken house, for commercial purposes or under crowded and concentrated conditions, is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and any person who shall maintain the nuisance shall be punished. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-47. - Location of pens for fowl. 
    Any chickens or other fowl shall be kept in a pen which is located no closer than 100 feet from any city street. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Secs. 6-48, 6-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WILD ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-50. - Keeping certain animals-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or maintain within the city limits the following animals: 
(1)  Bats; 
(2)  Skunks; 
(3)  Any wild animal whose normal mature weight exceeds 40 pounds; 
(4)  Any dangerous wild animal as defined in [V.T.C.A.] chapter 822, health and safety code. 
(Ord. No. 1626-5-13, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-51. - Keeping certain animals-Prohibited-Exceptions. 
    The provisions of section 6-50 shall not apply to or prohibit the keeping of wild animals by the following: 
(1)  A publicly- or privately-owned zoo meeting the definition of a zoo as stated in section 118-1. 
(2)  Publicly- or privately-maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo which does not remain in this city for longer than 30 days out of each year. 
(3)  Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals. 
(Ord. No. 1626-5-13, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 6-52. - Restraint of wild animals. 
    It shall be the duty of each owner of a wild animal in the city to keep the same under restraint at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1626-5-13, 5-7-2013) 
Secs. 6-53-6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-60. - General regulations. 
    No person who owns or keeps a dangerous dog shall allow the dog to engage in fierce or dangerous conduct. A dog engages in fierce or dangerous conduct when it threatens to attack or terrorizes a person or other animal on public or private property or in a public place, or has behaved in such a manner that the person who keeps the dog knows, or should reasonably know, that the dog has a known propensity to attack or bite and occurs in a place other than a secure enclosure in which the animal was being kept. This section shall apply subject to the defenses listed in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § [822.006]. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-61. - Defense. 
    Upon attack by a dangerous dog, the animal control department may defend himself/herself, a complainant or property at the officer's discretion, taking such means as is necessary in that situation. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-62. - Unattended guard dog prohibited. 
    Except for dogs used in law enforcement by law enforcement agencies, it shall be unlawful to place or maintain any dog which is specifically trained to attack in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the dog is physically confined to a secure enclosure, as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-63. - Investigation. 
    Upon receiving a report concerning a dangerous dog, the animal control officer or police officer shall obtain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the complainant. 
(2)  Date, time and location of incident. 
(3)  Specification of the facts and circumstances of the incident. 
(4)  Description of the animal. 
(5)  A sworn statement describing how the animal behaved in a vicious manner. 
(6)  A description of other aggravating facts or circumstances, if any, relating to the incident. 
After a sworn statement has been obtained, the dog shall be investigated by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-64. - Knowledge of ownership of a dangerous animal. 
    A person learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog when the owner knows of an attack described in the definition of dangerous dog, or the owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is dangerous or the owner receives notice that a justice court, county court, or municipal court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.0423. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-65. - Appeal. 
    An owner, no later than the 15th day after the date he/she is notified that an animal owned by him/her is a dangerous animal may appeal the determination of the animal control department to municipal court. An owner may appeal the decision of municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other civil cases. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-66. - Requirements for owner of a dangerous dog. 
    Not later than the 30th day after it has been determined that a person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall comply with all requirements set out in state law V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.042 and 822.043. In addition, the following requirement and restrictions shall apply to any dog in the city determined to be a dangerous dog: 
(1)  The dog must be altered within ten days of the determination that the dog is dangerous. 
(2)  If the dog is subsequently responsible for the death of or serious injury to any person or animal, the dog will be destroyed pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  The owner or person harboring a dangerous dog shall have the animal identified by a numbered tattoo, numbered ear-tipping, or other identifier approved by the animal control authority, and all identifying information shall be provided to the animal control authority immediately. 
(4)  The dog shall at all times wear a collar and attached tag marked with an orange color visible at a minimum distance of 50 feet. 
(5)  The dog, when taken outside the enclosure required in this chapter, must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or impair its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal, and must be restrained by a substantial chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of 1,000 pounds and not to exceed six feet in length. 
(6)  The owner or person harboring such a dog shall keep the dog in a secure enclosure, as defined in this chapter. 
(7)  The animal control department may, as a condition of registration for the dog, require of the owner or person harboring the dog, annual attendance of a class on responsible pet ownership conducted by the city animal control department or its designee. 
(8)  The city animal control department may inspect the enclosure in which any dangerous dog is maintained, without notice, at any reasonable hour. 
(9)  The city may charge a reasonable fee for the licensing of dangerous dogs. 
10)  The owner of any dangerous dog must register the animal with the city within ten days of bringing the animal into this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-67. - Seizure of a dog determined to be dangerous. 
(a)  If a justice court, county court, or municipal court finds that owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with the requirements for the owner of a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions. 
(b)  The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the municipality or county related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANIMAL FACILITIES; BREEDERS, KENNELS, PET SHOPS 

Sec. 6-69. - Definitions. 
    Kennel means any place or premises, other than a veterinary hospital or humane society, wherein any person boards, breeds, buys, lets for hire, trains for a fee, trades or sells dogs or cats. Any person, group of persons or business entity that in any calendar year sells more than a single adult dog or cat one year or older or produces and sells more than one litter of puppies or kittens shall be considered as operating a kennel. 
    Limited breeder means any person that breeds or allows his or her animal, whether purebred or mixed breed, to produce offspring. To qualify as a limited breeder, the breeder in any calendar year must sell no more than a single adult dog or cat one year or older, or produce and sell no more than a single litter of dogs or cats. 
    Pet shop means any establishment where dogs and cats are bought, sold or traded. The term includes all establishments selling dogs or cats exclusively or buying, selling or trading dogs or cats along with other animals. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-71. - Kennels and pet shops; permit required. 
    Any person, persons or establishments operating a kennel or operating a pet shop must apply for a permit, subject to the conditions enumerated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-72. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
    Any breeder, kennel or pet shop found to be in violation of any zoning law, health law or any other applicable city or state ordinance, or if the facility is maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of mind of persons residing in the immediate vicinity, may have its permit suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-73. - Sales permit required. 
    All persons engaged in commercial sale of any animals, domestic or otherwise, including, but not limited to, pet stores and stores in which pets and animals are not the central item of sale within the store such as department stores, drugstores and convenience stores, must apply for a commercial sales permit. The commercial sales permit shall be issued provided the applicant meets all provisions of this chapter. The fee shall be set by the city council and shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Those persons currently engaged in selling animals in the aforementioned manner are required to apply for a commercial sales permit immediately. Any advertising must include [a] permit number. Upon inspection by the animal control officer of the premises where the animals are bred or sold, the permit shall be issued if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Facilities in which animals are stored or housed must be adequate for number and type of animals kept. Facilities shall be of sufficient size as to allow animals to move about freely. This shall apply to each animal kept. Size of facility shall be in proportion to size of each individual animal's height and weight. 
(2)  Adequate food and water must be provided so that any and all animals kept shall be maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration. 
(3)  Premises shall be kept in sanitary condition and reasonably free of animal waste, parasites, insects and flies that could be harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of the general public. 
(4)  Animals and facility must be kept free of odor or stench, which is offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(5)  Animals must be maintained in a manner, which does not pose a danger to the health of the animals themselves, or adjacent animals. 
(6)  Animals must not cause noise, which is offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary sensibilities on adjoining, adjacent, or neighboring premises. 
(7)  The applicant for permit has not been issued citations for violation of this chapter on three separate occasions within a one-year period. 
a.  Limited breeders shall be issued a limited breeder disposal permit in order to sell any puppies or kittens on public or private property within the city limits. No private breeder may sell any dog, cat or pet animal in the city limits without such a disposal permit. A licensed veterinarian must verify the basic health of the animal(s) before a permit is issued. Any advertising must include the permit number. 
b.  Any person or group of person offering or advertising for sale or trade a dog or cat within the city, whether or not the person resides within the city, must demonstrate compliance with the conditions for the appropriate sales permit as described in this chapter. Any advertising must include the permit number. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 6-74. - Revocation of sales permit. 
    The commercial sales permit may be revoked by the animal control department if upon investigation, it is determined that the permit holder has failed to adhere to any conditions of this chapter. Once the permit has been revoked, the facility whose permit has been revoked may not reapply for a period of six months and shall not engage in sale of animals as described in this chapter for said period. 
    Upon revocation of the commercial sales permit, the owner of the animals covered in the revoked permit is to remove those animals from the city within ten days and notify the animal control department of the location to which they will be moved. If the owner does not comply with removal of animals within this ten-day period, the animal control department shall have authority to remove the animals for impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Sec. 6-75. - Fees for registrations, permits, impoundment and adoption. 
The cost of registrations and permits shall be as follows: 
Altered dog and cat registration annual ..... $5.00 
Unaltered dog and cat registration, annual ..... 15.00 
Dangerous dog ..... 100.00 
Kennel, pet shop, commercial sales permit annual ..... 150.00 
Limited breeder permit ..... 25.00 
Multi-pet permit fee ..... 25.00 
The cost of reclaiming animals from city animal services facility shall be as follows: 
Altered: 
1st impoundment (per animal) ..... 30.00/ticket 
2nd ..... 60.00/ticket 
3rd ..... 90.00/ticket 
Unaltered: 
1st impoundment (per animal) ..... 45.00/ticket 
2nd 100.00/ticket 
3rd 150.00/ticket 
Boarding fee (daily for all or part of any one day) ..... 10.00 
Micro chipping fee ..... 20.00 
Rabies quarantine fee ..... 100.00 
Small animals (sheep, goats, etc.): 
Capture and impoundment, per head ..... 25.00/week 
Boarding, per head per day ..... 10.00 
Large animals (cattle, horses, etc.): 
Capture and impoundment, per head ..... 25.00/week 
Boarding fee, per head per day ..... 10.00 
The cost of adopting an animal from the city animal services facility shall be as follows: 
Dogs, cats, ferrets, reptiles, birds, other ..... 20.00 
plus cost of spay/neuter, rabies vaccination 
Already altered pets ..... 30.00 
Euthanasia fee-no livestock ..... 35.00 per animal 
Surrender fee ..... 15.00 for adult animal 
plus $5.00 for a litter 
Citations may be issued for failure to pay applicable fees. 
(Ord. No. 1495-7-08, 7-15-2008) 
Chapter 10 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Aviation, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 21.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aircraft means any contrivance known or that may be invented, used or designed for flight in the air. 
(Code 1971, § 31/4-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definition of aircraft, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 21.001. 
Sec. 10-2. - Rules and regulations adopted by reference; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Use of airport restricted. No person or persons shall utilize the airport for any commercial activity unless approved as a fixed base operator (FBO) as defined in the minimum standards for fixed base operators and airport tenants in chapter 10 airports and aircraft of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Nacogdoches. In the event an aircraft owner requests the services of a person (not associated with an approved FBO) to render services of a commercial or compensated nature for his particular aircraft, that person shall first register with and gain prior approval of the airport manager and shall offer proof of general liability insurance which covers his activity at the A.L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport. The insurance shall provide minimum coverage in the amount of $100,000.00 per person, $300,000.00 per occurrence for personal injury and $100,000.00 for property damage or in limits as may be determined by the City of Nacogdoches. The airport manager reserves the right to waive this requirement in the event of an emergency. 
(b)  General rules and regulations. The following rules and regulations shall pertain and be observed in the use, operation and conduct of the A.L. Mangham Jr. Regional Airport, hereinafter referred to as Airport, viz: 
Rule 1. The Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs) promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for the observance by aircraft operated anywhere in the United States, and presently or hereafter effective or amended, are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as though fully set forth and incorporated herein. 
Rule 2. Safeguard of persons and property. The airport manager shall at all times have authority to take such action as may be necessary to safeguard any person, aircraft, equipment or property at the airport and to enforce all rules and regulations adopted herein. Persons shall promptly comply with any instruction or directive issued by the airport manager that may affect the safety or security of the airport facility or persons using the facility. No minors are allowed on the aircraft movement area of the airport property unless under the direct supervision of an adult. 
Rule 3. Lease of airport property to private individuals, companies or corporations. The City of Nacogdoches may lease portions of the airport for tiedown of aircraft, erection of buildings, auto parking areas, conduct of fixed base operators activities and aircraft hangars in accordance with the airport layout plan (ALP). All leased property and all buildings or structures erected on the leased property shall be in conformity with the airport master plan. 
Rule 4. Unauthorized signs, structures and uses. No signs, structures, equipment, portable buildings, mobile homes, travel trailers or recreational vehicles may be erected, moved in or installed on the airport property except as may be specifically authorized by the airport manager and incidental to aviation related activities, which include but are not limited to hangar construction, repair and renovation. At least 50 percent of hangar floor area must be used for aircraft and aviation related purposes. All property stored in hangar must meet local fire codes. The airport shall not be used for residential purposes. With the prior written consent of the airport manager and city engineer and with compliance with all other applicable city requirements and standards including sewage disposal, temporary quarters may be constructed within a structure otherwise permitted at the airport. Such quarters shall not include kitchen facilities and shall not be permanently occupied. For purposes of this rule permanent occupancy shall be deemed to be occupancy of such quarters more than ten days in any calendar month. Presently existing residential uses may be continued as non-conforming uses provided they are (1) disclosed in writing to the airport manager within 30 days of the passage of this rule, (2) not increased in the future either as to size or number of occupants and (3) not discontinued for a period of more than six months. Violation of either of the standards in (2) or discontinuance under (3) shall result in the automatic termination of such non-conforming residential use, as shall subsequent sale or sub-lease of the hangar. 
Rule 5. Wrecked or inoperable aircraft. Every aircraft owner, his pilot and agents shall be responsible for the prompt removal of wrecked or inoperable aircraft from the operational areas of the airport. 
Rule 6. Repairs to aircraft. No aircraft shall be repaired on any part of the landing, taxiing or take-off area, and all outdoor repairs shall be made at the places designated by the airport manager. Emergency repairs may be made at any location approved by the airport manager. 
Rule 7. Agricultural operations. Agricultural spraying operations will be conducted in accordance with the standards set by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) in an area so designated by the airport manager. 
Rule 8. Injury to person. Any person entering upon or utilizing airport property does so at his/her own risk and with no liability to the City of Nacogdoches for any injury or damage to person or property. 
Rule 9. Registration. The identification of persons stationed, employed, or receiving flight instruction, shall be maintained at the office of the applicable fixed-base operator. Identification numbers of all aircraft domiciled at the airport shall be maintained at the office of the airport manager. 
Rule 10. Litter. No litter, junk, garbage, trash or rubbish shall be left or strewn upon the floor of any building or upon any part of the surface area of the airport. 
Rule 11. Construction/renovation. All construction, remodeling or renovation of property, hangars, structures or utilities at the airport shall be approved by the City of Nacogdoches prior to the commencement of work and shall comply with all city codes and ordinances. 
(c)  Ground operations. 
Rule 12. Vehicular traffic. All motorized vehicles shall be confined to paved surfaces, roads, streets, avenues and alleys provided on the airport grounds for that purpose and shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour. Motorized ground vehicles are prohibited from operating or parking on runways, taxiways or unpaved surfaces without authorization from the airport manager. Ground vehicular traffic and/or parking shall not be allowed on the paved ramp area or unpaved areas north of the airport fence, except for fuel trucks, aircraft owners proceeding to and from their hangars, and passenger/cargo loading and unloading. There shall be no parking on non-paved surfaces anywhere on airport property unless approved by the airport manager. 
Rule 13. Fueling of aircraft. 
a.  Aircraft shall not be fueled while the engine is running or while in a hangar or other enclosed area. 
b.  Aircraft being serviced will be grounded to the fuel truck or to the fuel source or by means of any other approved method. 
Aircraft fuel trucks will be equipped, operated and maintained in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association, Incorporated (NFPA) Manual 407 Aircraft Fuel Servicing, 1980 as amended or supplemented, and which is incorporated herein by reference. Persons or aviation businesses wishing to supply or dispense fuel for their private use shall comply with all NFPA, FAA and City of Nacogdoches requirements. 
Aviation or auto fuels other than in auto tanks or aircraft tanks shall not be stored within a hangar. 
Rule 14. Tiedown of aircraft. The aircraft owner or his agent is responsible for and shall insure the tiedown or security of his aircraft at all times and particularly during inclement weather. Aircraft based on the airport and tied down on the paved ramp shall pay a fee to the appropriate FBO. 
Rule 15. Running aircraft engines. No airplane will be propped, started or left running without qualified personnel at the controls. 
No engine shall be started or run inside any building except as part of an authorized engine maintenance activity that is properly supervised and isolated from other equipment and personnel. 
Aircraft operators shall use caution to start, run or warm up engines to assure aircraft is in such position that the propeller stream or jet blast will not damage or injure buildings and groups of people in observation areas in the path of the aircraft. 
Rule 16. Damage to airport. Any person causing damage of any kind to the airport shall immediately report such damage to the airport manager. Persons causing damage to the airport as a result of negligence or willful acts shall be liable therefore to the City of Nacogdoches. 
Rule 17. Procedures. The airport manager may, in the interest of safety, designate special traffic procedures for certain operations, including but not limited to, air shows, skydiving activities, agricultural operations, ultra-lights, helicopters and lighter-than-air operations. 
(d)  Fire safety regulations. 
Rule 18. Fire regulations. 
a.  Every person going upon or using the airport or its facilities in any manner shall exercise the greatest care and caution to avoid and prevent fire. Smoking or open flames within 50 feet of any aircraft or fuel tank is strictly prohibited. Compressed flammable gases shall not be used, kept or stored upon the airport, except at such locations as may be approved by the fire marshal or his designee. All approved locations must be clearly marked with a proper placard indicating the presence of and type of such flammable gases. The locations must have approved rechargeable fire extinguisher with a current inspection tag. 
b.  No one shall smoke, ignite a match or lighter in any building, except in offices, waiting rooms or buildings where permitted by the airport manager. 
c.  Hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. 
The floors of all buildings shall be kept clean and free from oil. Volatile, flammable substances shall not be used for cleaning any floors. 
d.  No boxes, crates, cans, debris, bottles, paper, tall grass/weeds or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate in or about a hangar. 
e.  All aviation fuel nozzles shall have "dead man" controls, which will shut off the fuel flow when the nozzle hand control is released. Automatic fuel cut-off nozzles are not permitted for fueling aircraft. 
f.  The pilot and passengers will exit the aircraft and the aircraft will be unoccupied during fueling operations. 
g.  In all matters related to aircraft fueling safety, the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the City of Nacogdoches, and NFPA Manual. Any person receiving instruction from the airport manager or fire marshal to remove a potential hazard from the airport property shall do so immediately. 
(e)  Compliance with environmental regulations. Individuals or approved businesses who wish to conduct certain activities on airport property including, but not limited to, painting, stripping, sanding or detailing of aircraft, cleaning or degreasing parts, engines or equipment, aircraft maintenance, or disposing of the by-products of such activities, may require a permit from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) in Austin (512) 239-2213. It is the responsibility of the individual or business to comply with these requirements. Additionally, the city has adopted a storm-water pollution prevention plan, which prohibits the discharge of pollutants, waste or hazardous materials onto airport property or into drainage, water or wastewater systems. 
(f)  Knowledge of rules implied. By publication of this ordinance/order as required by law, all persons will be deemed to have knowledge of its contents. However, the airport manager is directed to have copies of the ordinance/order printed and posted where appropriate. Copies will be available at all times in the airport manager's office, and copies will be furnished to owners and operators of aircraft based on the airport. 
(g)  Conflict in rules. If and where there is conflict in these rules and the federal aviation regulations (FARs), the FARs shall prevail. 
(h)  Penalty for violation. 
(1)  Any person(s) not in compliance with any of these rules and regulations, or refusing to comply therewith may at once be ejected from the airport, or may for any period of time not exceeding 15 days, be denied use of the airport by the airport manager. Upon a hearing by the city council, the person may also be deprived of further use of the airport and its facilities for such a period of time as may appear necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(2)  Any violation of this ordinance/order shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in any sum not to exceed $2,000.00. This section is cumulative of all other penalties for violation of federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances. 
(i)  Saving clause. Should any part of this order/ordinance be held invalid or unconstitutional, no other part shall be necessarily affected thereby. 
(Code 1971, § 31/4-4; Ord. No. 1347-12-03, 12-16-2003; Ord. No. 1475-11-07, 11-20-2007; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-3. - Minimum standards for fixed base operators and airport tenants adopted. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Fixed-base operator. Any person, firm or corporation performing any of the functions or furnishing any of the services as hereinafter set out for fixed-base operators at the A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any commercial activity as a fixed-base operator as herein defined unless the same is done in full compliance with the standards herein set forth, and as is contained in the airport rules. 
    Airport tenant. Any person, firm, or corporation leasing or subleasing property at the A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport who is not a fixed-base operator, and owns, leases or subleases not more than 35 percent of the number of hangars of all types located at the A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport, whether or not such hangars are subleased. 
    Air transportation. Carriage of cargo or persons for hire beyond a 25 statute mile radius from the airport of departure per CFR 14 Parts, 91, 121, and 135. 
    Specialized commercial services. Operations and activities for compensation, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Aerial photography 
(2)  Seismography operations 
(3)  Banner towing and aerial advertising 
(4)  Pipeline or power line patrol 
(5)  Non-stop sightseeing flights that begin and end at the same airport 
(6)  Aircraft cleaning, painting or detailing 
(7)  Car rental 
(8)  Sale of aviation parts and equipment 
(9)  Manufacturing of aircraft components 
    Airport authority or authority. The City of Nacogdoches, Texas 
(b)  All fixed-base operators shall protect the public generally, the customers or clients of such fixed-base operators, and the City of Nacogdoches from any and all lawful damages, claims or liability and shall carry comprehensive general liability insurance in a company authorized to do business in the State of Texas with limits of not less than $300,000.00 per person, $500,000.00 for each occurrence for personal injury, and $200,000.00 property damage with the City of Nacogdoches named as an additional insured, which policies must be approved by the city manager and the airport manager and a certificate of insurance thereof furnished to the authority. It is further understood that as circumstances in the future dictate, the authority may require an increase in bodily injury and property damage insurance. 
(c)  A fixed-base operator shall satisfy the authority that it is technically and financially able to perform the services of a fixed-base operator. This may include the responsibility for demonstrating continued financial solvency and business ability by the submitting of an annual balance sheet, credit references and other proof that the lessor may require from time to time. In cases of doubt by the authority of such ability of a fixed-base operator, the authority may conduct a hearing to determine appropriate action. In each instance, the authority shall be the final judge as to the qualification and financial ability of the fixed-base operator. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation capable of meeting the minimum standards set forth herein for any of the stated fixed-base operator categories is eligible to become a fixed-base operator at the airport, subject to the execution of a written agreement for not less than five years containing such terms and conditions as may be determined by the authority. A fixed-base operator or airport tenant shall not engage in any business or activity on the airport other than that authorized under a particular FBO category or categories. Any person who wishes to gain approval as a fixed-base operator, or, if already approved as a fixed-base operator and who desires to extend his operation into more than one category, shall first apply in writing to the airport authority for permission to do so, setting forth in detail the reasons and conditions for the request. The authority may then grant or deny the request based on such terms and conditions as the authority deems to be prudent and proper under the circumstances. The request will be submitted first to the airport advisory board for a recommendation and then to the city manager, who shall exercise final authority to approve or deny the request. The authority may require submittal of a detailed site plan and any other information or documentation deemed necessary to aid in making a decision. In the event the request is denied, the person, firm or corporation may appeal the city manager's decision to the city council, in writing, within ten days of the date the request was denied. 
(e)  All construction required of such operators shall be in accordance with design and construction standards required or established by the authority for the facility or activity involved. All construction shall be in accordance with the approved A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport Layout Plan (ALP). FAA Form 7460-1 "Notice of Proposed Construction" will be submitted to the Federal Aviation Administration, airport district office along with an information copy to the Texas Department of Transportation, Division of Aviation. No construction may begin unless and until approval of the request is received from the FAA. No structure will be erected that will violate the airport building restriction line (BRL), be located within the runway protection zone of any runway or violate the transition or approach surface of any runway. When and if subject lessee vacates the lease for any reason, he may either remove said buildings at his expense within 30 days or title will automatically pass to the authority. 
(f)  The rates or charges for any and all activities and services of such operators shall be determined by the operators and all such rates or charges shall be reasonable and be equally and fairly applied to all users of the services. 
(g)  All operators at the airport shall be full-time, financially sound and progressive business enterprises, with adequately manned and equipped facilities, including ample office and parking facilities, which observe normal or specifically required business hours. 
(h)  All fixed-base operators shall, at their own expense, pay all taxes and assessments against any buildings or other structures placed on the premises by them, as well as all taxes and assessments against the personal property used by them in their operations. 
(i)  All operators shall abide by and comply with all state, county and city laws and ordinances, the rules and regulations of the authority, and the rules and regulations of the state and Federal Aviation Administration. 
(j)  In the event the authority constructs the physical plant facilities (hangars, etc.) for any operator under the provisions of any lease or other contract, such lease or contract with such operators shall be on such terms and conditions as to guarantee reasonable return of the investment. 
(k)  All contracts and leases between such operators and the authority shall be subordinate to the provisions of any existing or future agreement between the City of Nacogdoches and the United States, relative the operation or maintenance or the airport, the execution of which has been or may be required as a condition precedent to the expenditure of federal funds for the development of the airport properties. 
(l)  Beginning with the effective date of adoption of these minimum standards, no lease term to fixed-base operators and airport tenants shall be for a period of less than five years. This paragraph shall not limit the ability of the authority to permit any number of renewal terms of duration of five years provided the authority has the right to end such lease at the end of each five-year period. In addition leases shall, at the discretion of the authority, be subject to review and reevaluation at the end of each year in relation to the United States Consumer Price Index For All Urban Consumers (CPI-U). In this regard, when at the end of each year, the cost of living index is determined by the authority to be five or more percent higher than at the date the lease became effective, the rental terms thereof may be increased to such percentage of increase or of said cost of living index. If, at the end of each year, the said cost of living index has changed less than five percent; the authority shall take no action to review or reevaluate the rental terms of the lease. 
(m)  Lessee will, at all times during the continuance of the term of the lease and any renewal or extension thereof, conduct, operate and maintain for the benefit of the public, the fixed-base operation provided for and described therein, and all aspects and parts and services available to the public, and that it will make all such services available to the public, and that it will devote its best efforts for the accomplishment of such purposes, and that it will at all times make charges to patrons and customers for all merchandise or materials and services finished or rendered, but that it will refrain from imposing or levying excessive or otherwise unreasonable charges or fees for any facilities or services. Notwithstanding anything contained in a lease that may be or appear to the contrary, it is expressly understood and agreed that the rights granted thereunder are nonexclusive and the lessor reserves the right to grant similar privileges to another operator or operators upon formal application by that operator, and upon demonstration of compliance with subsections (c) and (d) herein. 
(n)  The authority reserves the right to take any actions it considers necessary to protect the aerial approaches to the airport against obstructions, together with the right to prevent any fixed-base operator from erecting, or permitting to be erected, any building, sign, or other structure on the airport which, in the opinion of the authority, would limit the usefulness of the airport or constitute a hazard to aircraft or persons. 
(o)  The provisions of these standards shall in no way negate or cause to be null or void existing leases with fixed-base operators or airport tenants at the A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport. Upon the adoption of these standards, any new leases entered into and any amendments to existing leases shall be in accordance with these standards. 
(p)  The lessee shall remove from the airport, or otherwise dispose of in a manner approved by the airport manager all garbage, debris and other waste material (whether solid or liquid) arising out of its occupancy of the premises or out of its operations. Said lessee shall keep and maintain his leased premises in a neat and orderly manner; lessee shall keep the grass neatly trimmed and buildings maintained and painted. Any garbage, debris, or waste which may be temporarily stored in the open shall be kept in suitable garbage or waste receptacles, the same to be made of metal and equipped with tight fitting covers and be of a design to safely and properly contain whatever may be placed therein. The lessee shall use extreme care when effecting removal of all such waste. Neither airport tenants nor fixed-base operators shall be involved in any operation, action or storage, which would lead to imposition of liability to the authority under any federal, state or local hazardous waste regulation. 
(q)  The authority reserves the right to further adopt airport operational policies and procedures or develop or improve any area of the airport as it may deem appropriate, regardless of the desires or views of any fixed-base operators, and without interference or hindrance from any such fixed-base operators. 
(r)  The authority reserves the right to enter upon any premises leased to fixed-base operators at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspections as it may deem expedient, to the proper enforcement of these minimum standards and covenant or condition of any fixed-base operators contract or lease agreement. 
(s)  The authority recognizes the rights of any person, firm or corporation operating aircraft on the airport to perform services on its own aircraft with its own employees. However, said persons, firms or corporations may not hire any unapproved vendors of aircraft services, aircraft parts or fuel from off-airport premises to perform services on the airport unless said vendors register with and receive approval of the airport manager in accordance with the airport rules and regulations. 
(t)  An aircraft owner/lessor may hire a pilot to fly his personal aircraft on a contract basis without such owner/lessor or pilot being required to have fixed-base operator status. 
(u)  Any fixed-base operator may be required to operate the airport UNICOM, as directed at any time by the authority. 
    A lessee shall not be deemed to be engaged in commercial operations for purposes of determining whether such person is or should become a fixed-base operator engaged in hangar rental if the lessee allows such storage or parking pursuant to a written sublease agreement on a form provided by the authority, which requires a sub-lessee to honor all terms and conditions of the primary lessee's lease with the city. 
    The fact that a lessee or sub-lessee is a corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited partnership, or association shall not, of itself, cause the lessee's or sub-lessee's use of the leased premises to be deemed commercial use. Use of the leased premises for purposes other than storage or parking of tenant's aircraft (whether owned or leased to tenant) and storage and use of aircraft related items such as tools and parts and lessee's or sub-lessee's maintenance on his personal owned or leased aircraft, or expense sharing as set out in this section, shall be deemed commercial. 
    The city shall waive enforcement of provisions of airport ground or tenant leases to the extent that such provisions are more restrictive regarding hangar construction, leasing or subleasing than this section, as amended by this amendment. 
(v)  If and where there are conflicts in the minimum standards prescribed herein and the FAA's Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), the latter shall prevail. If and where there exists a conflict between any of the minimum standards prescribed herein and any city council regulation, policy or ordinance applicable to the same area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(w)  Contractual obligations as related to fixed-base operators do not apply to the authority should it choose to serve as a fixed-base operator. 
Fixed-base operator categories 
Category A.  flight instruction: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Have available at least one person properly certified by the FAA as a flight instructor to conduct the type of training offered. 
2.  Provide and at all times maintain a minimum of one aircraft owned or leased by and under the exclusive control of this fixed-base operator, which is properly equipped and certified for flight instruction. A copy of the ownership or lease agreement shall be filed with the authority. 
3.  Lease from the authority sufficient land on which to locate all required building and parking improvements, to include for his exclusive use, a minimum of 1,000 square feet of classroom and/or office space, with a restroom. 
Category B.  Aircraft rental: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Have available at least one person having a commercial pilot's certificate with appropriate ratings. 
2.  Provide and at all times maintain a minimum of one aircraft owned or leased by and under his exclusive control, which is properly equipped and certified for rental. A copy of the ownership or lease agreement shall be filed with the authority. 
3.  Lease from the authority sufficient land on which to locate all required building and parking improvements, to include a minimum of 1,000 square feet of office space, with a restroom. 
Category C.  Air transportation: Fixed-base operator in this category shall: 
1.  Have available at least one FAA certified commercial pilot who is appropriately rated to conduct the air transportation service being offered. 
2.  Lease from the authority or sublease sufficient land to locate all required building and parking improvements under terms agreeable to the city, and for his exclusive use a minimum of 1,000 square feet in a building for passenger shelter, restrooms and telephone. The facilities shall meet current security guidelines for the processing of passengers, handling of luggage, ticketing and ground transportation. 
3.  Provide and maintain at least one aircraft owned or leased by and under his exclusive control, where the aircraft meets all FAA requirements for the type of air transportation service being provided. A copy of the ownership or lease agreement shall be filed with the authority. 
    When an individual or group rents an aircraft and makes separate arrangements for the services of a pilot(s) to provide air transportation on an infrequent basis, and payment of the cost of renting the aircraft and compensation of the pilot are distinct and separate from each other, then this type of arrangement does not require FBO status. However it is the responsibility of the parties involved in making the arrangements to determine if appropriate FAA regulations must be complied with. 
Category D.  Crop dusting and spraying: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Have available at least one FAA certified commercial pilot, properly rated for the aircraft to be used and meeting the requirements of Part 137 of the FAA and applicable regulations of the State of Texas. 
2.  Lease from the authority, or sub-lease sufficient land for building and parking improvements for his exclusive use, to include a minimum of 3,000 square feet of shop and storage space, with a restroom. 
3.  All agricultural chemicals, including empty chemical containers, shall be stored in an enclosed building or tamper-proof fenced area capable of being locked, and which may not be displayed or placed outside the storage area or other open area without surveillance. 
4.  The spray operator shall maintain a list of poison control centers in the state with their current telephone numbers in the case of chemical poisoning. The list shall be posted in plain sight for employees and the public. 
5.  All aspects of the agricultural spray operations on A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport shall be conducted in accordance with the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Commission On Environmental Quality (TCEQ), Texas Department of Agriculture, City of Nacogdoches and Nacogdoches County pesticides laws, rules and regulations, the word "pesticides" being the generic term for all chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, defoliants, fertilizers, etc, which may be used by the spray operator. 
Category E.  Aircraft sales: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Have available at least one FAA certified commercial pilot certificate properly rated for the types of aircraft being demonstrated. 
2.  Lease from the authority or sublease sufficient land on which to locate building and parking improvements, to include for his exclusive use a minimum of 1,000 square feet of office space, with a restroom. 
3.  Provide arrangements satisfactory to the authority for parking and storage of aircraft displayed for sale. 
Category F.  Aircraft, engine, propeller and accessory maintenance: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Have available at least one person certified by the FAA with an airframe and/or power plant rating appropriate for the work being performed. 
2.  Lease from the authority, or sublease sufficient land on which to locate building and parking improvements, to include for his exclusive use a minimum of 3,000 square feet of hangar, shop and storage space, with a restroom. 
3.  The operator shall provide sufficient equipment, supplies and availability of parts to perform maintenance in accordance with manufacturers' recommendations or equivalent. 
Category G.  Radio and instrument maintenance: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Lease from the authority, or sublease sufficient land on which to locate building and parking improvements, to include for his use a minimum of 1,000 square feet of hangar, shop and storage space, with a restroom. 
2.  Have available at least one FAA certified technician qualified to perform aircraft electronic and/or instrument service. 
3.  Provide arrangements satisfactory to the authority for access to and storage of aircraft being worked on. 
Category H.  Sale of aviation petroleum products and ramp service: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Lease from the authority or sublease sufficient land on which to locate storage and dispensing equipment, required buildings, vehicle parking area, aircraft parking area, tie downs, taxiways, apron or other facilities. 
2.  Construct or lease from the authority petroleum storage, dispensing equipment and required building with a minimum of 1,000 square feet conveniently located, to accommodate anticipated customer use and incorporating properly lighted and heated/air conditioned floor space for office(s), pilot lounge, public lounge, restrooms and public telephone. 
3.  Have personnel on full-time duty during daylight hours, seven days per week, adequately trained to operate fuel dispensing equipment in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws. On-call service shall be required during hours of darkness. 
4.  Provide, in addition to fueling services, aircraft parking and tie down facilities, including approved ropes and chocks, for a minimum of ten aircraft. Demonstrate capability to efficiently and safely conduct or move aircraft to such areas and park them. Additional services such as aircraft washing and tire inflation shall be available. 
5.  Comply with the following criteria regarding fuel storage and dispensing facilities: 
a.  Provide, lease or sublease and maintain a minimum of 10,000 gallons of tank storage capacity for each grade of aviation fuel usually required for aircraft using the airport, with 100 octane and Jet A fuel tanks as a minimum. 
b.  Maintain separate pumping equipment for each grade of fuel, meeting all applicable safety requirements with reliable metering devices subject to independent inspection, and with a pumping efficiency capable of servicing all aircraft normally using the airport. Each fuel pump will be labeled and color-coded to indicate the type and octane of fuel dispensed. The pumps will be color coded blue for 100 low lead aviation gas, and black for Jet A Aviation fuel. 
c.  Provide and maintain metered filter-equipped dispensers, fixed or mobile, for dispensing each grade of aviation fuel usually required. Fuel dispensers and truck shall be properly and conspicuously marked as to the type and grade of fuel dispensed. 
d.  Prohibit any fuel transfer from a common carrier transport into anything except authority approved storage tanks. 
e.  Prior to fueling any aircraft, fuel trucks used for fueling aircraft shall have bonding cables for bonding the fuel truck to the aircraft being fueled. The fuel truck and the aircraft shall be properly bonded in accordance with NFPA Standard 407. 
f.  Provide adequate fire extinguishers in all fuel dispensing areas and on all mobile dispensing fuel trucks as required in NFPA Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition adopted by the authority. 
g.  In all matters relating to fueling fire safety, the requirements of NFPA Standard Fire Prevention Code, latest edition as adopted by the authority, shall prevail. 
6.  Have the following minimum amounts of liability insurance in force: 
$1,000,000.00 each occurrence; $1,000,000.00 aggregate 
Category I.  Airport tenant: Airport tenants in this category shall: 
1.  Lease from the authority or provide under terms agreeable to the authority, sufficient land for his exclusive use, which shall be approved in accordance with applicable zoning and construction permits pertaining to the airport. 
Category J.  Flying clubs: The following requirements pertain to all flying clubs desiring to base their aircraft on the airport. 
1.  Each club must be a non-profit corporation, association or partnership. Each member must be a bona fide owner of an interest in the aircraft or stockholder in the corporation. The club shall maintain a set of books showing all club income and expenses. Said books shall be available for inspection by the airport manager to determine compliance with these provisions. 
2.  The club's aircraft will not be used by other than bona fide members for rental and by no one for commercial operations as defined by Category "A" through "L". Student checkouts and/or instruction can be given in a club aircraft to club members by either a fixed-base operator on the airport who provides flight training or by an instructor who is a bona fide club member. 
Category K.  Parachute jumping: The following requirements pertain to businesses that desire to provide skydiving instruction, shuttling of jumpers, and/or to base their aircraft on the airport: 
1.  Lease from the authority sufficient land on which to locate all required building and parking improvements, to include for his exclusive use, a minimum of 1,000 square feet of classroom and/or office space, with a restroom. 
2.  Have at least one jumpmaster or instructor available during jumping operations. 
3.  Establish an approved drop zone IAW approved meeting FAA criteria. 
4.  Issue proper NOTAMS in a timely manner prior to commencing drops to be coordinated with the airport manager. 
Category L.  Specialized commercial services: The following requirements pertain to specialized commercial services as defined in Category L of this section: Fixed-base operators in this category shall: 
1.  Lease from the authority sufficient land on which to locate all required building and parking improvements, to include for his exclusive use a minimum of 1,000 square feet of appropriate office space, and a restroom. 
2.  The operator shall have in his employ at least one person having a current commercial pilot certificate with ratings appropriate for the aircraft to be flown, or one person fully qualified to perform the commercial service being offered. 
    The airport manager may approve a temporary FBO designation for a particular commercial service, specialized commercial service or activity for a period not to exceed 30 days. The operator will be required to pay all appropriate FBO fees and provide general liability insurance in a form and amounts as determined by the authority. Facilities and land to be utilized for the commercial service is subject to approval by the airport manager. Such operators will be responsible for proper clean up of any areas of the airport utilized for their activity, as determined by the airport manager. 
    For the purpose of granting variances to minimum standards for fixed-base operators in appropriate circumstances, the airport board is hereby constituted as the airport board of adjustment. The rules, membership, organization, leadership, quorum and the like of the airport board shall likewise apply to the airport board in its function as the airport board of adjustment. 
(x)  Powers of the board: The airport board of adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Decide appeals of airport manager decisions. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the airport manager in the enforcement of these minimum standards; 
(2)  Variances to the standards: 
A.  Findings. The airport board of adjustment, pursuant to the powers conferred upon it by the city, may grant variances and exceptions to the provisions of the standards upon finding that: 
1.  Such variance is in harmony with the intent and purpose of the airport layout plan, FAA regulations and assurances and the city's rules and leases; 
2.  Such variance will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of property; 
3.  Such variance will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
4.  Such variance will not authorize the operation of a use other than those uses specifically authorized for the airport. 
5.  The plight of the building or property for which the variance is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, including but not limited to the area, shape, or slope; and that the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property, and are not merely financial, and are not due to or the result of general conditions at the airport; and 
6.  The requested variance is not a self-created hardship. 
B.  Variances. The airport board of adjustment may permit such modification of the standards as the board may deem necessary to secure an appropriate use or development of airport property. 
C.  Decision. The concurring vote of at least four members of the airport board of adjustment shall be necessary to authorize a variance. 
D.  Application for variance. Variances to be considered by the airport board of adjustment may be initiated by the lessee of the affected property or his/her authorized representative or any aggrieved party who files the required application and pays the appropriate fee, or by any person aggrieved by the airport manager. 
(y)  Appeal of decisions made by officers of the city: Appeal of airport manager's decision: Appeals to the airport board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department or board of the city affected by any decision of the airport manager. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days, by filing with the airport manager and with the airport board of adjustment a notice of appeal, which shall specify the grounds thereof. The airport manager shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
(z)  Appeal stays airport manager action: An appeal from the action of the airport manager shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of such action unless the airport manager certifies to the board that a stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property. In the event the airport manager shall make and file such certificate, that action shall not be stayed unless a restraining order which may be granted by the board, or by a court of record, upon application of the party aggrieved by the action of the airport manager, and after notice to the airport manager. 
(aa)  Hearing: The airport board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and may authorize the city staff to do such. The airport board of adjustment shall decide such appeal within a reasonable time. Upon hearing of such appeal, any interested party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(bb)  Powers of the board of adjustment: In exercising the powers set out in this section, the airport board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the airport manager from whose action the appeal is taken. 
(cc)  Airport board of adjustment decision: 
A.  Required vote. A reversal by the airport board of any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the airport manager against the applicant, and a finding in favor of the applicant by the board of adjustment, shall require the concurring vote of three members of the board of adjustment. 
B.  Lapse of order. Any reversal by the airport board of adjustment shall lapse after the expiration of 90 days where action by the appellant is not taken pursuant thereto within such period. 
(dd)  Appeal to the city council: Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the airport board of adjustment, or any officer, department, or board of the city may appeal any such matter within ten days of the board decision to the city council for reconsideration at a public meeting. 
(Code 1971, § 31/4-3; Ord. No. 1462-8-07, 8-21-2007; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-4. - Flying too low; stunt flying. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of any aircraft to operate the aircraft within 1,000 feet of the ground level of any part of the city limits or to operate any aircraft in a manner commonly known as stunt flying while over the city limits; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to aircraft operated over the municipal airfield. 
(b)  Each street over which an aircraft is operated in violation of subsection (a) of this section and each stunt shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1971, § 31/4-2) 
Secs. 10-5-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-31-10-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-201 et seq. 

Sec. 10-56. - Composition; appointment; terms. 
    The city airport advisory board shall be composed of five members and two alternates to be appointed by the city council. The airport advisory board shall select from its membership a chair. The terms of the five-member board and two alternates shall be two years. 
(Code 1971, § 31/4-5(b); Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1586-1-12, 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 10-57. - Rules of procedure; duties and responsibilities. 
    The airport advisory board shall be an advisory board to the city council. It may establish its own rules and regulations for its meeting and proceedings. Its recommendations may be presented to the city council as needed. The airport advisory board shall advise the city council and make recommendations in the following matters: 
(1)  Master planning for the use, expansion and development of the airport and its property; 
(2)  Construction, expansion, improvements, maintenance and operation of the airport; 
(3)  Consultant selection for the various planning and construction projects; 
(4)  Selection of all fixed base operators and other lessees of airport property; 
(5)  Terms, conditions, duties, responsibilities, consideration and other lease provisions to be contained in all lease arrangements concerning airport property; 
(6)  Methods and matters in recruiting and creating interest in the airport; 
(7)  Planning and developing airport services and working toward the general improvement of the airport as an air transportation center; and 
(8)  All other types of matters that may arise regarding the operation, facilities or services provided at the airport. 
(Code 1971, § 31/4-5(a)) 
Secs. 10-58-10-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT ZONING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference- Airport zoning act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-86. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. The elevation of A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport is 355 feet above mean sea level located on the runway centerline at the end of runway 33. 
    Airport hazard means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport, or at any installation or facility relating to flight, and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; which is hazardous, interferes with or obstructs such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles. 
    Airport hazard area means any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided by this article. 
    Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. The airport reference point (ARP) for A. L. Mangham, Jr. Regional Airport is latitude 31° 34' 36.88? N; longitude 94° 42' 34.02? W. 
    Approach surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 10-92. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones mean the zones set forth in section 10-91. 
    Board of adjustment means a board consisting of five members appointed by the city council as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.032. 
    Conical surface means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    Hazard to air navigation means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation. 
    Horizontal surface means a horizontal plane 150 feet above established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    Joint airport zoning board means a board consisting of seven members, two members appointed by the city council, two members appointed by the commissioners court of Nacogdoches County, Texas, and two members appointed by the commissioners court of Angelina County, Texas. The six members so appointed shall elect a seventh member who shall serve as chair of the Nacogdoches-Nacogdoches County-Angelina County Joint Airport Zoning Board. 
    Landing area means the surface area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use means any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with this article or an amendment to this article. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
    Obstruction means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 10-92. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative. 
    Precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS), a microwave instrument landing system (MLS), or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan (ALP) or any other planning document. 
    Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary surface for other than utility runways is as follows: 
(1)  For nonprecision instrument runways having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile, 500 feet. 
(2)  For nonprecision instrument runways with visibility minimums as low as three-fourths of a statute mile, and for precision instrument runways, 1,000 feet. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but not limited to buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Transitional surfaces means the surfaces extending outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal surface. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth. 
(Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-87. - Enforcement; applications for permits and variances. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city planner to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this article. 
(b)  Applications for permits shall be made to the city planner upon forms published for that purpose. 
(c)  Applications required by this article to be submitted to the city planner shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. 
(d)  Applications for variances shall be made to the board of adjustment by first filing the application for variance with the city planner, who shall forthwith transmit the application to the board of adjustment for determination. 
Sec. 10-88. - Enforcement remedies. 
    The city council may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this article or of any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or enforcement, including but not limited to an action for injunctive relief as provided by the airport zoning act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.044. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-89. - Penalties for violations. 
    Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated under this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
Sec. 10-90. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail as provided by the airport zoning act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.901. 
Sec. 10-91. - Zones. 
    In order to carry out this article, there are created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surface as they apply to the airport. Such zones are shown on the hazard zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the state department of aviation and dated August 30, 1991, which is incorporated by reference in this article and made a part of this article. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones. Approach zones shall be as follow: 
a.  Runway 36. The approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of runway 36 on the airport for precision instrument landings and takeoffs. The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of 1,000 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of 200 feet beyond the end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet beyond the end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
b.  Runway 18. The approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of runway 18 on the airport for nonprecision instrument landings and takeoffs with visibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile. The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of 1,000 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at the end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet beyond the end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
c.  Runway 15-33. The approach zone is established beneath the approach surfaces at the ends of runway 15-33 on the airport for nonprecision instrument landings and takeoffs with visibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile. The inner edge of the approach zones shall have a width of 500 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at the ends of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet beyond the ends of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline on the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. Transition zones are established beneath the transition surfaces adjacent to each runway and approach surfaces as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of the runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transitional surfaces extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of 7:1 from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is the area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runway 18-36 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Conical zone. The conical zone is the area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
Sec. 10-92. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit established in this section for such a zone. Such applicable height limitations are established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones. Height limits for approach zones are as follow: 
a.  Runway 36. The height limits are one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 10,000 feet from the end of the primary surface, then rising one foot in height for each 40 feet in horizontal distance for an additional 40,000 feet. 
b.  Runway 18. The height limits are one foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 10,000 feet from the end of the primary surface. 
c.  Runway 15-33. The height limits are one foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 10,000 feet from the end of the primary surface. 
(2)  Transition zone. The transition zone slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation, which is 355 feet above mean sea level. In addition, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established at 150 feet above the airport elevation, or a height of 505 feet above mean sea level. 
(4)  Conical zone. The conical zone slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation, which is 705 feet above mean sea level. 
(b)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
Sec. 10-93. - Land use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other section of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft; 
(2)  Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others; 
(3)  Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport; 
(4)  Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; 
(5)  Create bird strike hazards; or 
(6)  Otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
Secs. 10-94-10-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 10-121. - Obstruction marking and lighting. 
    Any permit or variance granted pursuant to this article may, if such action is deemed advisable by the city planner or the board of adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to allow the city planner to install, operate, and maintain, at the expense of the city, such markings and lights as may be necessary. 
Secs. 10-122-10-145. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Board of Adjustment 

Sec. 10-146. - Created; powers. 
    There is created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the power to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city planner in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass. 
(3)  Hear and decide specific variances. 
Sec. 10-147. - Composition; terms; removal. 
    The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. Each member shall serve for a term of two years and shall be removable for cause by the city council upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1534-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 10-148. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with this article. 
(b)  Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chair and at such times as the board of adjustment may determine. 
(c)  The chair or, in his absence, the acting chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(d)  All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. 
(e)  The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or falling to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be public records. 
Sec. 10-149. - Decisions. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under this article. 
(b)  The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city planner or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article or to effect any variation in this article as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.032(d). 
Sec. 10-150. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the city planner made in his administration of this article, if of the opinion that a decision of the city planner is an improper application of this article, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals under this article must be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the city planner a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city planner shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the city planner certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that because of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the city planner, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the city planner and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, shall give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
Sec. 10-151. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the airport zoning act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.041. 
Secs. 10-152-10-175. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Permits 

Sec. 10-176. - Future uses 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in subsection (b) of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land that would create a hazardous condition as described in section 10-93, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be permitted to grow in any zone created in this article in excess of the excepted height limitation allowed in subsection 10-92(b), unless a permit thereafter shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations prescribed in this article. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with this article shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with section 10-206. 
(b)  Exceptions to subsection (a) of this section are as follow: 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
(2)  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of land contour or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zone. 
(c)  Nothing contained in any of the exceptions in subsection (b) of this section shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any height limits established by this article, except as set forth in subsection 10-92(b). 
Sec. 10-177. - Existing uses. 
    No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives or any amendments to this article or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, each application for such permit shall be granted. 
Sec. 10-178. - Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. 
    Whenever the city planner determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations in this article. 
Secs. 10-179-10-205. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Variances 

Sec. 10-206. - Application; grant or denial. 
(a)  Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree or use his property in violation of the regulations prescribed in this article may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance of such regulations in question. 
(b)  The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. 
(c)  Such variance shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of this article will result in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for variance to this article may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport advisory board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport advisory board does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny the application. 
Secs. 10-207-10-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 10-231. - Existing structures or trees. 
    The sections of this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to this article as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing contained in this article shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives and is diligently prosecuted. 
Sec. 10-232. - Marking and lighting. 
    Notwithstanding section 10-231, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city planner to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city. 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city relating to building regulations, art. II, § 22[17]. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; fire protection and prevention, ch. 38; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; historic preservation, ch. 50; demolition or removal of historic landmarks, § 50-191 et seq.; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; signs, ch. 78; solid waste, ch. 82; collection of building wastes, § 82-98; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 106; waterways, ch. 114; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference- Authority of city relating to building regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.003, 213.001 et seq., 214.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Fire limits established. 
    The fire limits, described as "Exhibit A" and attached hereto as reference, shall apply to and be coextensive with the territory within the boundaries designated or which may be established as the fire limits of the City of Nacogdoches, except such provisions as are by special reference made applicable to all the territory within the corporate city limits, and the fire limits shall be on file in the City of Nacogdoches Building Permits Office. 
(Code 1971, § 8-1; Ord. No. 1565-2-11, 2-1-2011) 
Sec. 14-2. - Building standards commission created. 
(a)  Commission created. There is hereby created the Building Standards Commission for the City of Nacogdoches. 
(b)  Membership. The building standards commission shall consist of seven members and two alternates all being appointed by the city council. To the extent possible, members of the commission should be qualified in one or more of the fields of fire prevention, building construction, sanitation, plumbing, electricity, mechanical systems, engineering, architecture or public health. Failure of a person to be qualified in any of such fields shall not prevent or disqualify that person from sitting on the commission. 
(c)  Officers. The board shall select from its membership a chair, vice chair and secretary. The chairperson of the commission may designate an alternate to serve in the event of the absence or resignation of a regular member. Neither members nor alternates shall be employees of the city. 
(d)  Terms of service. All such members and alternates shall hold office for a period of two (2) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified as required by law. Vacancies which occur for any reason shall be filled for the length of the unexpired term in the same manner in which appointments are required to be made. 
(e)  Functions. The functions, purpose, and responsibilities of the board shall include the following: 
(1)  The commission shall serve as the board of appeals for Building, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Energy Conservation, Fire and Fuel Gas codes as may from time to time be adopted by the city council and shall be the venue for appeals based on claims that the intent of these codes or rules legally adopted related to these codes have been incorrectly interpreted or that the provisions of these codes do not fully apply. The commission shall periodically review the construction and fire codes and to make recommendations to the city council pertaining to the minimum construction and fire code safety standards and amendments. 
(2)  The commission shall have the authority to suspend building trades licenses issued by the city for due cause. 
(3)  The commission shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities as shall be from time to time provided for and delegated to the city by the legislature of the State of Texas, it being the intent of the city to fully implement Subchapter C of Chapter 54 of the Local Government Code and to further provide to the building standards commission, as well as any other commission, officer or legal authority as provided for under the provisions of state law, such powers, privileges and rights as may be from time to time provided for by the legislature of the State of Texas without restriction or limitation. 
(4)  In addition to the purposes established above, the building standards commission shall be the successor to all authority, responsibility, and functions, as set out in any and all ordinances of the City of Nacogdoches, previously exercised by the building code board of adjustments and appeals, the plumbing appeals and advisory board, the heating/air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration board, the board of electrical examiners, the fire prevention board, and the urban standards board of adjustment and appeals. Any reference in any city ordinance to the building code board of adjustments and appeals, the plumbing appeals and advisory board, the heating/air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration board, the board of electrical examiners, the fire prevention board and the urban standards board of adjustments and appeals, or a member of same, shall hereafter be interpreted to mean and said ordinances are hereby amended to refer to the building standards commission and the members thereof. 
(f)  Meetings. The board shall meet at such frequency as its chair or at other times the members of the board shall determine. All meetings shall be conducted as open meetings following timely postings of notice and agenda in conformity with the Texas Open Meetings Law, save and except as such meetings are to be conducted in closed session as permitted under said law. In addition to any meetings set by the board, the chairman or the housing official may call meetings. Four members shall constitute a quorum. To take official action, affirmative votes of the majority of members present shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 1, 4-20-2010) 
Secs. 14-3-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 14-31. - Adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain building codes known as the International Building Code, 2009 edition and International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings, 2009 edition with appendixes and amendments thereto, save and except such portions as are hereinafter amended or deleted, of which one copy with all amendments notes therein shall be on file in the office of the city secretary, available to all persons for inspection, and the same are hereby adopted as the building code(s) of the city as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 8-13; Ord. No. 1265-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1430-7-06, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-32. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the term "municipality" is used in the building code adopted in section 14-31, it shall be held to mean the City of Nacogdoches, Texas. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the building code adopted in section 14-31, it shall be held to mean the city attorney of the City of Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 8-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-33. - Amendments. 
    The building code adopted in section 14-31 is amended or altered in the following respects: 
Section 104.5 Contractor's License and Bond Required shall be amended to read as follows: 
(a) Every contractor or builder who shall make contracts for the erection, construction, demolition, renovation or repair of buildings, structures or improvements for which a permit is required by the City of Nacogdoches and every contractor or builder making such contracts and subletting or assigning the same or any part thereof shall apply to the building official of the City of Nacogdoches for a license for such occupation and possession of such license shall be prerequisite to the exercise of the occupation described in this sentence. 
(b) It shall be the duty of every contractor or building, who shall make contracts for the erection, construction, demolition, renovation, repair or improvements of structures or buildings for which a permit is required by the City of Nacogdoches, and very contractor or builder making such contracts and subletting the same, or any part thereof, to pay an annual license fee to the City of Nacogdoches in the amount of $25.00, with no proration of said fee, which shall be due and payable in October of each year. 
(c) The building official shall register the name of each contractor or builder in a book provided for that purpose, giving the name, residence, and place of business; and in case of change of residence or place of business, the building official shall make a corresponding change in said register upon notice of such change. It shall be the duty of such contractor or builder to notify the building official of such changes. 
(d) It shall be the duty of every contractor or builder to give good and sufficient surety bond in the amount of $5,000.00, as reasonably required and approved by the city attorney, conditioned to conform to the building regulations of this building code, and all other ordinances and laws of the City of Nacogdoches and State of Texas. 
(e) Persons erecting, constructing, or repairing buildings on their own homesteads, as reflected by public records, are exempt from the licensing and bonding provisions hereof; provided that such erection, construction or repair is performed only by the person owning the homestead, that a permit as provided shall have first been obtained by such person, and such person shall have complied with all other requirements of this code except the licensing and bonding provisions. 
Section 104.5.1 Revocation of Contractor's License shall be added to read as follows: 
A contractor's license issued pursuant to section 104.5 of this code may be revoked by the building official for the following reasons: 
(a)  It has been determined that the applicant knowingly gave false or misleading information on the application for a contractor's license. 
(b)  The contractor or builder holding a license has been finally convicted in any court of the State of Texas or of any state of the United States of any charge of theft, robbery, fraud, unfair or deceptive business practices, or any other offense involving or constituting an act or acts of moral turpitude. 
(c)  The contractor or builder holding a license has been finally convicted of a violation of this code. 
Section 104.5.2 Appeal of License Revocation shall be added to read as follows: 
(a) A decision of the building official to revoke a contractor's license may be appealed to the building code advisory board by giving written notice of intent to appeal said decision within ten calendar days from the date the contractor or builder is notified of the revocation of the license. Such notice shall contain the reason or reasons why the board should change the decision of the building official. Failure to state the reason(s) shall result in the termination of the appeal. 
(b) Upon receipt of said notice of intent to appeal, the building official shall schedule a meeting of the building code advisory committee to consider such appeal. Such meeting shall be held within ten calendar days of the building official's receipt of the notice of intent to appeal, unless the contractor or builder requests a longer period of time, whereupon the building official shall schedule a meeting within 30 calendar days of the building official's receipt of the notice of intent to appeal. 
(c) At the hearing for such appeal, the building code advisory committee shall receive evidence submitted by the appellant concerning the reason or reasons for license suspension and shall also receive evidence from the building official as to why the license revocation should be sustained. The committee shall render a decision sustaining, amending, or reversing the decision of the building official based upon the evidence presented at the hearing. 
Section 110 Violations and Penalties shall be amended to read as follows: 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate or cause to be violated a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish, or move any structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by section 1-14 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Nacogdoches. 
Section 903.2.7 Group M. 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m 2 ). 
2.  A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m 2 ). 
Section 1505.1 is amended to add a subsection to read as follows: 
1505.1.1 Wood Shingles and Shakes. Where Permitted. Outside the fire district only buildings of single-family resident occupancy (detached) may be roofed with grade labeled no. 1 or no. 2 wood shingles and no. 1 shakes with minimum butt thickness of one-half inch, securely fastened with rust-resistant nails. 
Section 3108.4.4 is amended to add a subsection to read as follows: 
3108.4.4.6 Signs Projecting Over Public Property. Signs projecting from a building or extending over public property shall maintain a clear height of nine feet above the sidewalk, and all such signs shall not extend more than 18 inches behind the curbline. All signs constructed and maintained upon any street within the city that is designated a federal highway, state highway or farm to market road shall be so constructed and maintained to comply with the provisions of the respective authorities controlling them. 
Appendix B Recommends Schedule of Permit Fees is amended to provide that the fees are on file in the city building permit office and the city secretary's office. 
Exemption of fees, the City Manager of Nacogdoches may waive fees for the development of low-income single-family dwellings when all the following criteria are met. 
(1)  The dwelling is/or will be occupied by the low-income owner of the dwelling and property. 
(2)  Is permitted by licensed and insured contractors as required by the State of Texas or City of Nacogdoches. 
(3)  Is sponsored by an organization meeting a charitable organization status or the City of Nacogdoches as can be verified by the City of Nacogdoches through federal or state tax exempt forms on file with that exempt government. 
Fees that may be waived are; plan review fees, inspection fees, building permit fees, electrical permit fees, mechanical permit fees, plumbing permit fees, demolition permit fees, house move off lot fees, sewer tap fees, water tap fees, zoning fees, board of adjustment fees, planned development fees, driveway access fees and any other fees the City of Nacogdoches could levee and finds appropriate to the successful completion of the structure. 
Fee waivers are not available for, owners with outstanding Housing Code, Zoning Code, or Environmental Health Code violations or on units or projects on which they are affiliated with the owning entity as a sponsor, partner, or partial owner. 
A denial of a fee waiver request by the city manager may be appealed to the city council. All fee waver requests that have been denied by the city manager shall be appealed to the city council in writing within 21 calendar days of the initial denial. 
(Code 1971, § 8-15; Ord. No. 1362-5-05, 5-3-2005; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1637-6-13, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 14-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 2, adopted April 20, 2010, repealed § 14-34 in its entirety. The former § 14-34 pertained to construction code board of adjustment and appeals and derived from Ord. No. 1360-4-04, adopted April 6, 2004; and Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, adopted Nov. 17, 2009. 
Sec. 14-35. - Energy Conservation Code-Code adopted. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition with its amendments and appendixes, are hereby adopted as the energy conservation code for the City of Nacogdoches, except for such exceptions and additions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1430-7-06, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
Secs. 14-36-14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-61. - Code adopted. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2011 edition with its amendments and appendixes, are hereby adopted as the electrical code for the City of Nacogdoches, except for such exceptions and additions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 11-1; Ord. No. 1296-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1356-3-05, 3-15-2005; Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-62. - Definition of electric wiring and apparatus. 
    The term "electric wiring and apparatus" as used in this article shall be construed to include all materials, devices, machinery, appliances, appurtenances or conductors used in connection with the production or transmission of electric light, heat or power or the transmission of electrical signals, except where specifically limited to one or more of these materials, devices, machinery, appliances, appurtenances or conductors, and then only as specifically limited. 
(Code 1971, § 11-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-63. - Building official to decide questions not covered. 
    The building official shall decide all questions not provided for in this article or in the electrical code adopted in this article pertaining to the installation, operation or maintenance of electric wiring and apparatus. 
(Code 1971, § 11-33) 
Sec. 14-64. - Wires interfering with fire protection. 
(a)  No wire shall be installed, operated or maintained over any street; vehicle parking lot, both public and private; alley; sidewalk; or building in the city which may seriously interfere with the work of the fire department in the use of its ladders or other apparatus or which shall obstruct or render hazardous the use of fire escapes. On complaint of the fire official, such obstructing, interfering or hazardous wires shall be removed or properly rearranged. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department, fire official or electrical inspector shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electric current where the circuits interfere with the work of the fire department during the progress of a fire. 
(Code 1971, § 11-3) 
Sec. 14-65. - Liability for damages. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person installing, operating or controlling any electrical wiring or apparatus for damage to anyone injured thereby, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability because of the inspection authorized in this article or any certificate or permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-4) 
Sec. 14-66. - Special wiring for commercial business. 
(a)  Commercial structures in the fire limits as established in section 14-1 shall be wired in raceways as defined in the electrical code adopted in this article. 
(b)  For commercial structures outside of the fire district with less than 2,000 square feet of floor area or under roof, raceways shall be used in all accessible areas. Nonmetallic, sheathed cable may be used in inaccessible wall, floor and ceiling assemblies. Commercial structures with more than 2,000 square feet of floor area or under roof shall be wired in raceways. 
(Code 1971, § 11-5) 
Sec. 14-67. - Commercial electrical installations. 
(a)  A government entity or private business which employs a full-time, city-licensed electrician shall be responsible for ensuring that all electrical maintenance, renovation and alteration on its property or equipment be installed in accordance to the guidelines of the current electrical code as adopted and amended by the city in this article. 
(b)  Every government entity or private business which does not employ a full-time, city-licensed electrician must meet all applicable sections of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-41) 
Secs. 14-68-14-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1360-4-04, adopted Apr. 6, 2004, repealed Div. 2, board of electrical examiners, § 14-96, which pertained to established; composition; quorum; appointment and derived from Code 1971, § 11-59. 

Secs. 14-96-14-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 14-126. - Required. 
    No electric wiring and apparatus shall be installed, altered, or changed within the city limits unless a permit has first been obtained therefor from the authority having jurisdiction. However, this section shall not apply to minor repair work, such as the repair of flush and snap switches; replacing fuses; changing lamp sockets and receptacles; taping bare joints; and repairing drop cords, plug-in appliances or devices with a disconnect. Any master electrician shall be permitted to make repairs replacing a device with a like device and shall have the privilege of making any minor repair or alteration when the labor and materials do not exceed $20.00. 
(Code 1971, § 11-19) 
Sec. 14-127. - Applications generally. 
(a)  Every applicant for a permit to install, alter or change any electric wiring and/or apparatus shall first file an application therefor with the authority having jurisdiction describing the proposed installation, alteration or change, including the apparatus and materials to be used. The permit application shall be initiated by a licensed master electrician employed to do such installation, alteration or change, on forms furnished by the city, and shall contain a description of all electrical work to be done along with the street address and/or city lot and block number of the property, name of the owner of the property, the owner's agent or any person employed to do the work. 
(b)  On all electrical project sites, a master or journeyman electrician currently licensed by the city shall be present and responsible for all the electrical system installations, deletions or changes while work is being performed. 
(c)  Where work for which a permit is required by this division is commenced prior to obtaining the permit, the fees specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the currently adopted electrical code or all other sections of this article in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in this article or in laws. 
(Code 1971, § 11-20) 
Sec. 14-128. - Fees. 
    The fees to be charged for electrical permits and inspection of electrical work shall be $25.00, and shall be paid at the office of inspection services before the work is commenced. 
(Code 1971, § 11-21; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005) 
Sec. 14-129. - Deviations from application. 
    No deviation shall be made in the details for electrical wiring or apparatus as shown on the permit application required by this division without first obtaining permission from the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1971, § 11-22) 
Sec. 14-130. - Suspension or revocation; right of appeal. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to this division shall be suspended for any misrepresentation in the permit application. If the authority having jurisdiction determines that any misrepresentation or material error is intentional, the permit shall be revoked. Any person whose permit has been suspended or revoked by the authority having jurisdiction pursuant to this section shall have the right to appeal this decision to the building official and then, if necessary, to the city-appointed electrical board. 
(Code 1971, § 11-23) 
Secs. 14-131-14-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 14-156. - Office of inspector created. 
    The office of electrical inspector is created in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 11-15) 
Sec. 14-157. - Appointment of inspector. 
    The electrical inspector shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 11-17; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 14-158. - Assistant inspectors. 
    The city manager, with the consent of the city council, shall have the power to appoint one or more assistant electrical inspectors. Each one of such assistants shall be competent to discharge the duties of the electrical inspector, and the rights and privileges conferred upon the electrical inspector are conferred upon each such assistant. 
(Code 1971, § 11-16; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 14-159. - Qualifications of inspector. 
    The electrical inspector shall be of good moral character; shall possess such executive ability, training and experience as is required for the performance of his duties; and shall be well-versed in the rules and requirements of the electrical code adopted in this article. The electrical inspector should be a journeyman or master electrician or should possess or be able to attain the SBCCI Electrical Inspector certification within one year of employment. 
(Code 1971, § 11-18) 
Sec. 14-160. - Right of entry of inspector. 
    The authority having jurisdiction shall designate and direct an electrical inspector, who shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building, public or private, manhole or subway in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making any test of the electrical apparatus or appliances therein contained. For that purpose he shall be given prompt access to such buildings, manholes and subways upon notice to the person owning or in control of any such building, manhole or subway. The designated inspector shall have the right to enter during an emergency without notice if the owner or responsible person cannot be located in a reasonable amount of time. 
(Code 1971, § 11-31) 
Sec. 14-161. - Noncompliance with order, notice of inspector. 
    Any person neglecting or refusing to comply with any order or notice of the electrical inspector of the authority having jurisdiction made pursuant to this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, § 11-34) 
Sec. 14-162. - Interference with duties of inspector. 
    No person shall interfere with the designated electrical inspector or any competent person lawfully deputized to assist him while in the performance of his duty. 
(Code 1971, § 11-35) 
Sec. 14-163. - Records, reports by inspector. 
    The designated electrical inspector shall keep a full and complete record of all work done, permits issued, examinations made, or other official work performed as required by this article and shall annually make a full and detailed report thereof to the city. Such record shall be so arranged as to afford prompt information concerning the condition and general arrangement of any electrical equipment at the time of the electrical inspector's last visit. All such records shall be maintained in the office of inspection services. 
(Code 1971, § 11-32) 
Sec. 14-164. - Authority to turn off current. 
    The authority having jurisdiction is authorized and empowered to cause termination of electric current from all conductors or apparatus which are deemed to be in an unsafe condition or which have not been installed in conformity with the electrical code adopted in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-29) 
Sec. 14-165. - Installations, alterations; issuance of certificate. 
    Upon the completion of the installation or alteration of electric wires and apparatus, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the authority having jurisdiction who shall make necessary inspections as soon as practical. If the installation or alteration is approved by the authority having jurisdiction, posting of such inspection shall be made by the inspector showing the results of the inspection, which shall contain the date and location of the inspection and an outline of the results of such examination, but no certificate or authorization to connect to a utility company shall be issued unless all apparatus, wires, etc., connected therewith are in strict conformity with the rules and regulations set forth in this article and the current electrical code adopted in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 11-24) 
Sec. 14-166. - Certification required for turning on current. 
    No electrical apparatus or wire shall be energized until satisfactory inspections have been made and authorization to connect is made by the authority having jurisdiction. Failure to obtain inspections or authorization to connect the power shall be sufficient cause to have power disconnected by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1971, § 11-25) 
Sec. 14-167. - Supervision of sign erection. 
    The authority having jurisdiction shall designate and direct an inspector who shall supervise the erection of all electric signs within the city. All sign circuits and conduits must be installed by a licensed electrician. Sign contractors may make the final electrical connection to the sign when the sign circuit is present. 
(Code 1971, § 11-30) 
Cross reference- Signs, ch. 78. 
Sec. 14-168. - Placement of material near wires. 
    Any person desiring to place any pipe, sheetmetal or similar material within six inches of any electric wire installed for use in connection with electric light, heat or power shall, before proceeding with the execution of the work, notify the authority having jurisdiction who shall inspect the work and cause all wires to be placed in a safe and secure condition. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to refer to wires installed in approved metallic conduit (EMT) or armored cable. 
(Code 1971, § 11-26) 
Sec. 14-169. - Concealed wiring, apparatus. 
(a)  No person shall conceal or cause to be concealed any electric wiring or apparatus except with the express permission of the authority having jurisdiction, who is authorized and directed to have such person remove any flooring, drywall, paneling, insulation, lathing or plaster, sheetmetal or other material which might conceal any electric wiring or apparatus contrary to this article or the electrical code currently adopted in this article. 
(b)  Upon completion of the inspection of any electric wiring or apparatus designed to be concealed and found to be in full compliance with the electrical code adopted in this article, the inspector for the authority having jurisdiction shall post a notice to that effect on the construction inspection placard or contact the electrician in person or in writing or by telephone. Such notification shall be considered an express permission to conceal such electric wiring and apparatus, but no concealment shall take place until such notice has been posted by the inspector for the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1971, § 11-27) 
Sec. 14-170. - Dangerous conditions; notice. 
    Whenever the authority having jurisdiction suspects or acting upon a complaint received that any electric wiring or apparatus within the city is in a dangerous or unsafe condition or interferes with the work of the fire department, an inspection of wiring and apparatus shall be made and, if such conditions are found to exist, shall notify the person owning, using or operating the wiring and apparatus to place the wiring and apparatus in a safe, secure and noninterfering condition. When such conditions exist where life or property is in immediate danger, the authority having jurisdiction is authorized to remedy the unsafe condition by whatever means necessary, including termination of electrical service where such unsafe conditions exist. 
(Code 1971, § 11-28) 
Secs. 14-171-14-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ELECTRICIAN'S LICENSE 

Sec. 14-196. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall install, alter or repair electric wiring and apparatus within the city unless such person has first obtained a master electrician license or a journeyman electrician license from the authority having jurisdiction and all permits required under this Code or other city ordinances. 
(b)  No license in effect, issued or renewed under the terms of this division shall be transferable to or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued, nor shall a holder of a license allow his name or license to be used by any other person to obtain a permit or to perform work under such license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-57) 
Sec. 14-197. - Minimum qualifying experience. 
(a)  Every applicant for a master electrician license shall have passed a master electrical exam approved by electrical examiners board and shall have had at least four years' experience as a journeyman electrician in the electrical construction industry or shall be a graduate of a recognized electrical trade school with a four-year curriculum and shall have had at least two years as a journeyman electrician or shall have graduated after majoring in electrical engineering from an accredited college or university which has not less than a four-year curriculum and shall have had at least one year of practical experience. 
(b)  Every applicant for a journeyman electrician license shall have passed a journeyman electrical exam approved by electrical examiners board and shall have had at least two years' experience in the electrical construction industry or shall be a graduate of a recognized electrical trade school with a four-year curriculum. Journeyman applicants shall provide a notarized certificate of experience. 
(Code 1971, § 11-58) 
Sec. 14-198. - Examination required. 
(a)  All applicants for a master electrician license shall first present proof of passing the Southern Standard Building Code Master Electrical Examination to determine their ability and qualifications to do electrical work within the city as master electricians and to determine their contractual responsibility. 
(b)  All applicants for a journeyman electrician license shall first present proof of passing the Southern Standard Building Code Journeyman Electrical Examination to determine their ability and qualifications to do electrical work within the city as a journeyman electrician. 
(c)  All applicants for a journeyman electrician license must submit a notarized resume stating the time, place and company where electrical experience was obtained. 
(d)  Every applicant for a journeyman electrician license must also submit a letter from a master electrician stating the applicant has had two years' experience in the electrical construction industry and in the master electrician's opinion the applicant is a qualified electrician. 
(e)  Journeymen and masters who have obtained their licenses through an alternate testing agency other than the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. shall present their information to the board of electrical examiners. The electrical examiners board has the right to examine all information concerning the applicant for a journeyman electrician license or a master electrician license and to grant or reject a license. Only those individuals who have taken an exam that is equal to or exceeds the Southern Standard Building Code Journeyman or Master Electrical Exam shall be considered for a license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-60) 
Sec. 14-199. - Fees. 
(a)  Before any master electrician license is issued, the applicant for the license shall pay a fee, which is on file in the city secretary's office, to the office of inspection services. 
(b)  Before any journeyman electrician license is issued, the applicant for the license shall pay a fee, which is on file in the city secretary's office, to the office of inspection services. 
(Code 1971, § 11-67) 
Sec. 14-200. - Reciprocal licensing. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, the authority having jurisdiction may continue to honor current reciprocal agreements with cities, however no new cities may be added in lieu of the testing program. 
(b)  An electrician holding a currently valid license or certificate of registration in another reciprocating city may apply for and receive a similar license or certificate of registration in this city without taking an examination, provided the following conditions are complied with: 
(1)  The electrician shall submit evidence satisfactory to a majority of the board of electrical examiners that the electrician's license or certificate of registration was issued under regulations at least as restrictive as those required by the city in this division for issuance of a license and that an electrician holding a license issued by this city would be permitted to apply for and receive a similar certificate of registration or license in such other city under the reciprocal agreement. 
(2)  The electrician shall pay the license fee required and comply with all other requirements of this article. 
(3)  The electrician shall submit a letter from the electrical inspector or the board of electrical examiners of the applicant's home city attesting to the fact that the applicant had successfully passed an appropriate written examination, giving the date the examination was administered and the passing score. Such information will be presented to the building official/inspection services department of the city where application is being made, whereby the information may be presented to the electrical examiners board. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to exclude any individual coming within the provisions of the reciprocal agreement for valid and factual reasons. 
(Code 1971, § 11-74) 
Sec. 14-201. - Issuance generally. 
(a)  The building official shall issue a master electrician license to any person who has passed the Southern Standard Building Code master exam or who has passed an equivalent exam approved by the board of electrical examiners for the license and who has paid the fee required by this division. 
(b)  The building official shall issue a journeyman electrician license to any person who has passed the Southern Standard Building Code journeyman exam or who has passed an equivalent exam approved by the board of electrical examiners and been certified for the license by the board of electrical examiners and who has paid the fee required by this division. 
(Code 1971, § 11-64) 
Sec. 14-202. - Issuance to minors. 
    No master electrician license or journeyman electrician license shall be issued to any minor. 
(Code 1971, § 11-72) 
Sec. 14-203. - Issuance to holders of revoked licenses; appeals. 
    The authority having jurisdiction is authorized to refuse to issue a master electrician license or journeyman electrician license to any previous holder of a license for a period no longer than three years. If the license is revoked, the applicant shall submit to retesting. Any party so refused shall have the right of appeal to the electrical examiners board. 
(Code 1971, § 11-71) 
Sec. 14-204. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall expire on December 31 of each year and are renewable as of January 1 of each year. A 30-day grace period shall be granted for the purpose of renewal. Any license not properly renewed by February 1 will become invalid on that date and will remain invalid until the office of inspection services receives the renewal application, together with all cumulative renewal fees and the current fee. If a license has been expired for three years or longer, the person may not renew the license. The person may obtain a new license by submitting to reexamination and complying with the requirements and procedures for obtaining a new license. 
(Code 1971, § 11-68) 
Sec. 14-205. - Renewal. 
(a)  Any master electrician license issued pursuant to this division may be renewed annually upon payment of a fee on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Any journeyman electrician license issued pursuant to this division may be renewed annually upon payment of a fee on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1971, § 11-69) 
Sec. 14-206. - Grounds for revocation; forfeiture of bond; disposition of proceeds. 
    Any failure on the part of the holder of a master electrician license or a journeyman electrician license to comply with the provisions of the electrical code adopted in this article or any section of this Code or city ordinance regulating electric wiring and apparatus or to faithfully carry out the conditions of a contract for installing electric wiring and apparatus shall be deemed sufficient cause for the authority having jurisdiction to revoke the license and to cause the forfeiture of the bond filed pursuant to this article. The amount realized upon the forfeiture of the bond over and above the expense involved in its forfeiture shall be expended in making the necessary changes in the electric wiring and apparatus found to be contrary to this article or the electrical code adopted in this article or any contract entered into and covered by the bond, and the unused balance, if any, shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1971, § 11-70) 
Sec. 14-207. - Appeals generally. 
    If the board of electrical examiners refuses to certify an applicant for any license within the scope of this division, the applicant shall, within ten days therefrom, have the right to appeal to the city council by a letter addressed to the chair of the city council, stating an appeal from the board of electrical examiners is desired to the city council as a whole. Upon receiving the appeal, the city council, as soon as practical thereafter, shall hear the appeal and shall either sustain or reverse the decision of the board of electrical examiners. If no appeal is taken from the action of the board of electrical examiners within the ten days, the finding of the board shall be final. 
(Code 1971, § 11-65; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 14-208. - Insurance required prior to issuance of permit. 
(a)  Before any master electrician is issued an electrical permit, the applicant for the permit shall file with the city proof of general liability insurance coverage in the following amounts: 
(1)  General aggregate ..... $200,000.00 
(2)  Product/completed operations ..... 200,000.00 
(3)  Each occurrence ..... 100,000.00 
(b)  Every master electrician shall notify the city if the aggregate limits of insurance are exhausted during the policy period and shall immediately purchase additional aggregate insurance limits in an amount of no less than $200,000.00. 
(Code 1971, § 11-66) 
Secs. 14-209-14-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Plumbing standards and licensing, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-236. - Adoption of code. 
    The International Plumbing Code, 2009 edition with its amendments and appendixes, are hereby adopted as the plumbing code for the City of Nacogdoches, except for such exceptions and additions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 22-1; Ord. No. 1265-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1430-7-06, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
State Law reference- Adoption of plumbing standards, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, § 5B. 
Sec. 14-237. - Amendments to plumbing code. 
    The plumbing code adopted in section 14-236 is amended as follows: 
Section 105, Permits is amended by adding the following subsections: 
105.3 Permits required. 
(a) It shall be unlawful to construct, install or cause to be installed any plumbing as defined herein without securing a plumbing permit from the City of Nacogdoches in the amount of $25.00, therefore except as otherwise provided for in paragraph 105.4. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to make any extension to any lines or pipes, using water from city water mains, whether within or without the corporate limits of the city, or to add any pipes or to change any pipes or lines from a water line, apartment, house, premises, or meter without first securing a permit for such changes except as otherwise provided in paragraph 105.4. 
(c) Permits shall be required for the replacement of water heaters. 
105.4 Permits not required. 
No plumbing permit is required to do minor repairs such as the maintenance, repair or replacement in kind of the following: 
(a)  Yard hydrants and sillcocks; 
(b)  Flush valves and float-balls in water closet tanks; 
(c)  Accessible traps on lavatories or sinks; 
(d)  Replacing of plumbing fixtures where no change on "roughing-in" is involved except replacement of water heaters. (See subparagraph 105.3(c).) 
The above examples are representative only and should not be considered as a limitation on the term "minor repairs." 
105.5 Issuance of permit. 
The plumbing inspector or his designated representative shall issue all plumbing permits in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this code. All applications for permits shall give the correct location of the building, name of the owner of such building, and a complete statement of the work and fixtures to be installed. The plumbing inspector may require a complete plan of the work to be performed if considered necessary. 
105.6 Special permits authorized. 
A special permit may be issued, in writing, by the plumbing inspector when plumbing cannot be installed in accordance with all of the provisions of this code, if in his judgment the conditions require it. Application for this type permit shall be made in writing accompanied by a sketch showing the work to be done. Said sketch must be kept on file in the plumbing inspector's office. In other work pertaining to but not specifically covered by this code, the plumbing inspector may prescribe such specifications as may be necessary and shall be consulted before any work is started. 
105.7 Persons who may obtain a permit. 
Permits shall be issued only to the following: 
(a)  Any master plumber licensed by the state board of plumbing examiners. 
(b)  Any property owner for plumbing work to be done by him in a building owned or occupied by him as his home. 
(c)  Any appliance dealer or employee of an appliance dealer who is acting as an appliance installation man or appliance service man in connecting appliances to existing piping installations. 
105.8 Permits not transferable. 
Each permit issued under this code shall be personal to the permittee. No such permit shall be assigned or transferred to another person, and no person shall permit another person to obtain a permit in his name or permit any plumbing or gasfitting work to be performed under his permit by any person other than a person authorized to do the same. If there is any doubt as to whether or not a person is authorized to do such plumbing work for the permittee, evidence of cancelled payroll check may be required. 
105.9 False statement or bad faith. 
Any person who shall willfully make a false statement in order to obtain a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty herein. Bad faith or unreasonable delay in the performance of plumbing work shall be deemed a sufficient reason for subjecting the plumber so offending to a suspension of the permit, and no further permit shall be issued until such act of bad faith or unreasonable delay has been corrected. 
Section 705.2 Large pipes is amended to read as follows: 
(a) For building sewers six inches and larger, manholes shall be provided and located at each change in direction and at intervals of not more than 500 feet. 
(b) Building drains six inches and larger shall be provided with full size cleanouts. 
Section 1302 is amended by adding the following subsection: 
1302.6 Depth of building sewer. 
Building sewer must be installed with minimum of 12 inches of cover. Where conditions prohibit the required amount of cover, cast iron soil pipe with caulked or approved mechanical joints must be used. 
Appendix H(a), Permit fees is amended to provide that the permit fees are on file in the city inspections department. 
(Code 1971, § 22-3; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005; Ord. No. 1433-9-06, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 14-238. - Other regulatory authority. 
    State or federal regulatory agency requirements shall take precedence over the International Plumbing Code adopted in this article and the International Gas Code adopted in section 14-326. 
(Code 1971, § 22-5; Ord. No. 1265-9-01, 9-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-239-14-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1360-4-04, adopted Apr. 6, 2004, repealed Div. 2, plumbing appeals and advisory board, §§ 14-266-14-269 derived from Code 1971, § 22-2(c)(1)-(3). 
State Law reference- State board of plumbing examiners, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, §§ 4-8B. 

Secs. 14-266-14-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBER'S LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Plumber's license required, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, §§ 3(a)(2), 12. 

Sec. 14-296. - Required. 
(a)  Every person who engages in or works at the actual installation, alteration, repair and renovating of plumbing shall possess either a master or journeyman plumber's license in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing License Law of 1947, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101. 
(b)  An apprentice shall not be permitted to do plumbing work alone. He shall at all times be under the immediate supervision of a journeyman or master plumber. 
(Code 1971, § 22-2(b)(1)) 
Sec. 14-297. - Exemptions. 
    The following acts, work and conduct shall be expressly permitted without a plumber's license: 
(1)  Homeowner. Plumbing work done by a property owner in a building owned or occupied by him as his home. However, a homeowner may do plumbing work only after securing a plumbing permit. No plumbing permit is required to do minor repairs such as the maintenance, repair or replacement in kind of the following: 
a.  Yard hydrants and sillcocks. 
b.  Flush valves and float-balls in water closet tanks. 
c.  Accessible traps on lavatories or sinks. 
d.  Replacing of plumbing fixtures where no change in roughing-in is involved except replacement of water heaters. 
The examples in this subsection are representative only and should not be considered as a limitation on the term "minor repairs." 
(2)  Maintenance, utility and appliance work. Plumbing work done by anyone who is regularly employed as or acting as a maintenance man or maintenance engineer, incidental to and in connection with the business in which he is employed or engaged and who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general public; construction, installation, and maintenance work done upon the premises or equipment of a railroad by an employee thereof who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general public; and plumbing work done by persons engaged by any public service company in the laying, maintenance and operation of its service mains or lines and the installation, alteration, adjustment, repair, removal and renovation of all types of appurtenances, equipment and appliances; appliance installation and service work done by anyone who is an appliance dealer or is employed by an appliance dealer, and acting as an appliance installation person or appliance service person in connecting appliances to existing piping installations. However, all work and service named or referred to in this subsection shall be subject to inspection and approval in accordance with the terms of all local valid city ordinances. 
(Code 1971, § 22-2(b)(2)) 
State Law reference- Acts permitted without a license, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, § 12. 
Sec. 14-298. - Bond or insurance required. 
    Before any person shall engage in the business of plumbing in the city, he shall first obtain the proper license and deposit with the city a good and sufficient bond or certificate of insurance in the sum of $300,000.00, conditioned that the person engaged in the plumbing business will faithfully observe all the laws pertaining to plumbing. The bond or certificate of insurance shall be further conditioned that the city shall be indemnified and saved harmless from all claims arising from accidents and damage of any character whatsoever caused by the negligence of such person engaged in the plumbing business or by any other unfaithful, inadequate work done either by himself or his agents or employees. 
(Code 1971, § 22-2(a)) 
State Law reference- Certificate of insurance for plumbers licensed, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, § 155(c). 
Secs. 14-299-14-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GAS CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 

Sec. 14-326. - Adopted. 
    The International Gas Code, 2009 edition with its amendments and appendixes, are hereby adopted as the gas code for the City of Nacogdoches, except for such exceptions and additions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 22-1; Ord. No. 1265-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1430-7-06, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
Secs. 14-327-14-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 

Sec. 14-356. - Adopted. 
    The International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition with its appendix and amendments, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code for the City of Nacogdoches, except for such exceptions and additions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 173/4-1; Ord. No. 1265-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1430-7-06, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
Sec. 14-357. - Additions. 
    Additions to the mechanical code adopted in section 14-356 are as follows: 
(a)  Title of ordinance. The title of this ordinance shall be "The Heating, Air Conditioning and Mechanical Refrigeration Code of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas," and may be cited as such. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  Scope. The purpose of this code is to protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the general public and to protect the public from any improper business practices employed by any person or persons, and to ensure the safe design, construction, installation and service of mechanical equipment pertaining to heating, ventilation, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration in the city. 
(2)  Adopted. All requirements found in the state rules and regulations concerning the practice and licensing of air conditioning contractors, also known as Title 16, Economic Regulations, Part IV Texas Department of Labor and Standards, Chapter 75, Air Conditioning License Law, as amended are adopted by reference. 
(c)  Air conditioning board. 
(1)  Creation; composition. There is created the city heating, air conditioning, and mechanical refrigeration board, variously called "the board," consisting of six members. The six members of the board shall be appointed by the city council. Each of the six positions shall be numbered, and the board shall elect one member to be chair. The positions are as follows: 
a.  Position number one shall be filled by a person actively engaged in the construction of commercial or residential buildings in the city. 
b.  Position number two shall be filled by a state-registered engineer or architect actively engaged in commercial or residential building in the city. 
c.  Positions number three, four, and five shall be filled by persons duly licensed by the state under this code who have actively engaged in such work for at least five years immediately prior to the confirmation and approval to serve on the board. 
d.  Position number six shall be filled by a city employee or some other person not engaged in the construction business. 
(2)  Appointments; terms. Each member shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms, with no appointed member being eligible to serve over three terms or six years. The terms of office shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 24-month period. Any member shall be subject to discharge or removal from his position on the board at any time by the city council for good cause. 
(3)  Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the board, the city council shall appoint another person as member to serve out the unexpired term of such vacancy. 
(4)  Meetings. The board shall meet regularly, at intervals, to be determined by the chair, and shall serve without compensation. 
(5)  Quorum. Three members of the board at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the board. A majority vote of the members present at any meeting shall constitute the official action of the board. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Code interpretations. The board is hereby additionally authorized to hear and act upon interpretations of this article, to hear appeals regarding the same, to review new materials presented to it, and to submit recommendations regarding changes to the city council. 
(8)  Bylaws. The board shall adopt and may amend bylaws to govern its procedure, consistent with this article. 
(d)  Board of appeals and variance. 
(1)  Creation and function. The six members of the city heating, air conditioning, and mechanical refrigeration board shall act as the board of appeals and variance. The board of appeals and variance shall have the power to: 
a.  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article. 
b.  Authorize, in special cases, such variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement of the provisions of this article result in unnecessary hardships and so that the spirit of this article shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(2)  Appointments of officers; rules to govern. The members of the board of appeals and variance will appoint a chair and secretary from its membership and may adopt rules to govern its proceedings. 
(3)  Procedure. The procedure for appeals to the board from said actions, orders, or rulings shall be as follows: 
a.  The appellant shall file with the city secretary a written statement specifying: 
1.  Description of the place where the subject construction or installation is located, including postal address and legal description. 
2.  Name of assistant, inspector, or other officer, if any, whose action, order, or ruling is the subject of complaint. 
3.  Description, including scale diagram, of the subject construction or installation, or so much thereof as involved in the complaint as to action, order or ruling. 
4.  Date of the subject action, order or ruling. 
5.  Statement of the nature of the action, order or ruling. 
6.  Statement of reasons why such action, order or ruling is incorrect and a declaration of the action the appellant desires of the city building official. 
7.  The mailing address of the appellant. 
The statement shall be signed by an owner of the subject property, or by a person duly licensed by the state under this code or by a representative of a contractor working or applying to work on the subject property, and duly acknowledged under oath, or by a representative of the city if the city is the appellant. 
b.  The city secretary shall immediately notify the building official and the chair or the secretary of the board. Such board officer shall fix a hearing day, hour, and place of hearing in the city hall for appeal. The hearing day shall not be more than 15 days after the day upon which the written request for appeal is filed with the city secretary. 
c.  The board shall have the right to affirm, modify, or reverse the appeals action, order or ruling, and it shall mail written notice of its decision and the reasons therefor to all interested parties of record, within seven days after final adjournment of the hearing. In no case shall notice of decision be mailed later than 25 days after the first day of said hearing. In the event the board fails to decide upon said appeal within such 25-day period, the appeal shall be affirmed. Within 15 days after the board's decision, either party may appeal the decision to the city council. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Permits. 
(1)  Permit required. A person, firm, or corporation shall not install, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or replace any mechanical system, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a mechanical permit for such building or mechanical system from the mechanical official. 
(2)  License required. No mechanical permit will be issued by the city to any person, firm or corporation unless they have obtained a license according to the State of Texas Department of Labor and Contractors Licensing Section. Exceptions to this requirement are found in section 75.8 of the above state law. 
(3)  Obtaining permits for others. A permit obtained under the provisions of this section will require that the work be done by or under the supervision of the person obtaining the permit. Licensed air conditioning contractors shall not be simultaneously employed by, or work for, more than one business entity for the purpose of doing or supervising work that can only be done by authority of a permit obtained under the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Installation. The installation of window air conditioners and space heaters are specifically exempted from the permitting provisions of this article. Installations shall not include any plumbing on a gas unit except from the unit itself to the gas stop which shall not be more than 36 inches from the unit. It shall include conduit drainlines, but shall not include tapping of same into the existing plumbing system of the building. Installation shall not include any electrical work except connection of the unit to the existing electrical disconnect within sight of the unit. 
(Code 1971, § 173/4-2; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 14-358. - Amendments. 
    Amendments to the mechanical code adopted in section 14-356 are as follows: 
Appendix C, section C101.2, schedule of permit fees, shall be amended to read as follows: 
Fees for mechanical permits shall be $25.00 per category. 
(Code 1971, § 173/4-2; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005) 
Sec. 14-359. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14. If any such violation is committed by a corporation or company, the officers, agents, and person responsible for directing, authorizing or permitting the violation shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section. All remedies or penalties expressed in this section shall not be exclusive, but shall be accumulated. 
(Code 1971, § 173/4-4) 
Secs. 14-360-14-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FENCES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 118. 

Sec. 14-386. - Permit required. 
(a)  Prior to construction of any fence on any property located within the city, the owner or his agent or representative shall apply and submit plans to the city building inspection department and obtain the required permit. 
(b)  Such plans shall show the location of the fence in regard to the distance of the proposed fence from the back of the curb or the center of the flow line where no curb and gutter exist. If such fence is within the visibility triangle as described in section 118-426, the plans must also show the height of the proposed fence. 
(c)  The fee for the fence permit shall be $25.00. 
(Code 1971, § 8-35; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005) 
Secs. 14-387-14-415. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MINIMUM URBAN STANDARDS CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-416. - Title. 
    The sections embraced within this article shall constitute and be known and may be cited as "The Minimum Urban Standards Code," sometimes referred to as "this code." 
(Code 1971, § 8-40(a); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-417. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means the same as a junked vehicle in section 34-116. 
    Addition means an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure. 
    Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction or occupancy. 
    Apartment means a dwelling unit as defined in this section. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means a private single-family residence in which lodging for one or more nights and breakfast is provided by the resident owner for compensation. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Extermination means the control and extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods. 
    Floor area means the total area of all habitable space in a building or structure. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room means a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
    Hotel means any building containing six or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. 
    Housing official means the officer or other person charged by the city manager with the administration and enforcement of this article or his duly authorized representative. 
    Infestation means the presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Lienholder means any person holding a substantial legal property interest or claim on property for payment of some debt, obligation or duty, either acquired by contract or by operation of law. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Mobile home means a structure, constructed before June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designated to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Multiple dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, and includes flats and apartments. 
    Nuisance means any of the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law by statute or ordinance, or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children, whether in a building, on the premises of a building or lot, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris, pool or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  All unoccupied substandard buildings structures, manufactured or mobile home within the terms of this article which shall constitute a menace, hazard, and/or threat to the health, safety, comfort or general welfare of the public generally and which are unfit for human habitation or use. 
(4)  A building, structure, manufactured home, mobile home, dwelling or other enclosure which regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children or 
(5)  A building, structure, manufactured home, mobile home, dwelling or other enclosure which is boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
a.  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
b.  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry. 
    Openable area (window) means that part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple or any person, group of persons, company, association, corporation or other legal entry or person in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. It also means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have: 
(1)  Legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possession or assignee of rents, lessee, or other person in control of a building or such person's duly authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with this article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. It is his responsibility to notify the actual owner of the reported infractions of this article pertaining to the property which apply to the owner. 
    Plumbing means the practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building structure or conveyance; also, the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste, or sewerage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal. 
    Premises mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures including manufactured housing, or mobile home thereon. 
    Public areas mean an unoccupied open space adjoining a building and on the same property that is permanently maintained accessible to the fire department and free of all encumbrances that might interfere with its use by the fire department. 
    Repair means the replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term "repair" or "repairs" does not apply to any change of construction. 
    Required means required by some provision of this article. 
    Residential buildings means buildings in which persons, families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are provided, and all dormitories shall be classified as "residential occupancy." Such buildings include, among others, the following: dwellings, multiple dwellings, and rooming houses. 
    Rooming house means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible material; paper; rags; cartons; boxes; wood; excelsior; rubber; leather; tree branches; yard trimmings; tin cans; metal; mineral matter; glass; crockery; and dust. 
    Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surfaces of the floor or roof next above. 
    Structure means that is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by or under control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
    Travel trailer or house trailer means a vehicle used or intended to be used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways, and duly licensed as such, and shall include self-propelled and nonself-propelled vehicles so designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirting so arranged as to be integral to or portable by the house trailer. 
    Valuation or value, as applied to a building, means the estimated cost to replace the building in kind. 
    Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
    Yard means an open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building or structure extending along the entire length of a street, or rear, or interior lot line. 
(b)  Whenever the terms "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit," and "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the phrase "or any part thereof." 
(Code 1971, § 8-41; Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-418. - Construction of article. 
    The minimum urban standards code which comprises this article is declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, and demolition of unsafe buildings. 
(Code 1971, § 8-40(b); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-419. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article and the minimum standards for occupancy set forth in this article shall apply to all unoccupied commercial, industrial, building or residential structure within the corporate limits; to garages and other accessory structures; or to any portions thereof. Minimum urban standards shall apply to mobile homes or HUD code manufactured. 
(b)  This article establishes minimum standards for occupancy and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for construction, replacement or repair of buildings except such as are contrary to this article. 
(c)  Buildings or structures moved into or within the city limits other than manufactured housing shall comply with the requirements in the Standard Building Code for new buildings. Manufactured housing shall comply with HUD Code, see definition. 
(d)  This article shall apply to any unoccupied building or structure within the corporate limits, regardless of when such building may have been originally constructed and regardless of when such premises may have been annexed into the city. 
(Code 1971, § 8-40(c), (d); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-420. - Maintenance. 
    All buildings or structures, including manufactured housing and mobile homes, both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
    All devices or safeguards which are required by this article in a building when erected, altered, or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(Code 1971, § 8-40(e); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-421. - Application of zoning ordinance. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any section of the zoning ordinance in article II of chapter 50 and in chapter 118 of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1971, § 8-40(f); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-422. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person or agent who shall violate any section of this article or who shall fail to comply with this article or with any of the requirements of this article or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish, or move any structure or who has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved, or demolished a building or structure in violation of this article shall be punished as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Each and every day or portion thereof that any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person violating the terms of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, §§ 8-40(g), 8-54; Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-423. - Appeals. 
(a)  Where the literal application of the requirements of this article causes undue hardship on an owner or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this article or any regulation in this article has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such building, structure, manufactured housing or mobile home, or his duly authorized agent may appeal from the decision of the housing official to the urban standards board of adjustments and appeals. 
(b)  Any person receiving written notice from the housing official of deficiencies under this article may, within 30 days following the date of such notice, enter an appeal in writing to the urban standards board of adjustments and appeals. Such appeal shall state the location of the property, the date of the notice of violations, and the number of such notice. The appellant must state the variance or modification requested, the reasons therefor, and the hardship or conditions upon which the appeal is made. 
(Code 1971, § 8-44; Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-424-14-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-451. - Liability. 
    Any officer or employee or member of the urban standards board of adjustments and appeals charged with the enforcement of this article, in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of this article shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Code 1971, § 8-42(f); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-452. - Restrictions on employees. 
    An officer or employee connected with the inspection service department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the urban standards board of adjustments and appeals established by this article, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of such building. Such officer or employee shall not engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the inspection service department. 
(Code 1971, § 8-42(b); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-453-14-475. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Reserved[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1360-4-04, adopted Apr. 6, 2004, repealed Subdiv. II, urban standards board of adjustments and appeals, §§ 14-476-14-480 derived from Code 1971, § 8-52(a)-(e); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, adopted Dec. 4, 2001. 

Secs. 14-476-14-505. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Housing Official[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, § 2-91 et seq. 

Sec. 14-506. - Enforcement officer. 
    The enforcement of this article shall be by the housing official. 
(Code 1971, § 8-42(a); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-507. - Right of entry. 
    The housing official, in enforcing this article, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in charge of such property, may enter any building, structure, dwelling, apartment, apartment house or premises, manufactured home or mobile home during all reasonable hours. In an emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve the potential loss of life or severe property damage, the limitations in this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1971, § 8-42(d); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-508. - Reports. 
    The housing official shall annually submit a report to the chief administrator covering the work of the inspection service department during the preceding year. He shall incorporate in the report a summary of the decisions of the urban standards board of adjustments and appeals during the year. 
(Code 1971, § 8-42(g)) 
Sec. 14-509. - Records. 
    The housing official shall keep or cause to be kept a record of the business of the inspection service department. 
(Code 1971, § 8-42(c); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-510. - Letter of compliance. 
    A letter indicating compliance with this article may be issued by the housing official. 
(Code 1971, § 8-42(h); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-511. - Inspections. 
    The housing official shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of buildings and premises in the interest of safeguarding the health and safety of future occupants of such buildings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the housing official is authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all unoccupied buildings or structures for the purpose of verifying that such premises are, in fact, unoccupied and whether or not the buildings or structures thereon are in compliance with the minimum standards set forth in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 8-43; Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-512-14-535. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Permits 

Sec. 14-536. - Required generally. 
    Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change an unsafe and uninhabited building or structure or to cause any such work to be done shall first make application for and obtain any required permits. 
(Code 1971, § 8-53(a); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-537. - Time limits for demolition permits. 
    Demolition permits which are issued for structures posted due to the enforcement of this article shall be valid for 90 days from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1971, § 8-53(b); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-538-14-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 14-566-14-590. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Facilities 

Sec. 14-591. - Required sanitary facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet, all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(a); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-592. - Location of sanitary facilities. 
(a)  All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit and shall be accessible to the occupants of the dwelling unit. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user, and such room shall have a minimum floor space of 30 square feet, with no dimension less than four feet. 
(b)  Bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or other protected or enclosed areas, not including kitchens or other food preparation areas. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(b); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-593. - Hot and cold water supply. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through a city-approved distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(c); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-594. - Water heating facilities. 
    Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory, basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. Minimum storage capacity of the water heater shall be 30 gallons. Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required under this article are not in operation. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(d); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-595. - Heating facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities or gas or electric heating connections which are properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition and capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet above floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(e); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-596. - Cooking and heating equipment. 
    All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be installed in accordance with the building, mechanical, gas or electrical code and shall be maintained in a safe and good working condition. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(f); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-597. - Garbage disposal facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, the type and location of which such facilities or containers are approved by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(g); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 14-598. - Fire protection. 
    A person shall not let to another for occupancy any building or structure which does not comply with the applicable sections of the fire prevention code adopted by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(h); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-599. - Fire detection. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. 
(Code 1971, § 8-45(i); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-600-14-625. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Light and Ventilation 

Sec. 14-626. - Windows generally. 
(a)  Every habitable room of a building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home erected after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall have one or more windows, unless otherwise specifically provided in this article, to afford adequate light and ventilation. The requirements specified in this article shall be considered as minimum requirements supplementary to all state laws regulating light and ventilation. 
(b)  Where windows are required, such windows shall open on a street, public space, yard, or approved open space that will afford adequate air and light. Required windows shall be so constructed that, when fully opened, the total open space shall not be less than one-half the required window area. 
(Code 1971, § 8-46(a); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-627. - Emergency egress openings. 
(a)  Every sleeping room on the first and second stories of a multiple dwelling and every sleeping room in one- and two-family dwellings shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. The units must be operable from the inside to a full clear opening without the use of separate tools. Where windows are provided as a means of egress or rescue, they shall have a sill height of not more than 44 inches above the floor. 
(b)  The minimum net clear opening height dimension shall be 22 inches. The minimum net clear opening width dimension shall be 20 inches. The net clear opening area shall in no case be less than four square feet. 
(c)  Each egress window from sleeping rooms must have a minimum total glass area of not less than five square feet for a ground floor window and not less than 5.7 square feet for a second story window. 
(Code 1971, § 8-46(b); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-628. - Bathrooms. 
    Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements in this division for habitable rooms, except that no window or skylight shall be required in an adequately ventilated bathroom equipped with an approved ventilating system. 
(Code 1971, § 8-46(c); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-629. - Electric lights and outlets required. 
    Where there is electric service available to the building structure, every habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote convenience outlets, and bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one wall-switch controlled ceiling- or wall-type light fixture. In kitchens, three separate and remote convenience outlets shall be provided, and a wall- or ceiling-type light fixture controlled by a wall switch shall be required. Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one electric fixture. In bathrooms, the electric light fixture shall be controlled by a wall switch. In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one convenience outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. 
(Code 1971, § 8-46(d); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-630. - Light in public halls and stairways. 
    Every common hall and inside stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least one foot-candle intensity at the floor in the darkest portion of the normally traveled stairs and passageways. 
(Code 1971, § 8-46(e); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-631-14-655. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Electrical Systems 

Sec. 14-656. - Compliance with electrical code. 
    Every electrical outlet and fixture required by this article shall be installed, maintained and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code adopted in section 14-61. 
(Code 1971, § 8-47; Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-657-14-680. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Exterior and Interior of Structures 

Sec. 14-681. - Foundation. 
    The building foundation system shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(a); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-682. - Exterior walls and floors. 
    Every exterior wall and floor shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All siding material shall be kept in repair. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(b); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-683. - Roofs. 
    Roofs shall be structurally sound and maintained in a safe manner and shall have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(c); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-684. - Means of egress. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level. Stairs shall have minimum headroom of six feet, eight inches. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(d); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-685. - Stairs, porches and appurtenances. 
    Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(e); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-686. - Protective railings. 
    Protective railings shall be required on any unenclosed structure over 30 inches from the ground level or on any steps containing four risers or more. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(f); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-687. - Windows and doors. 
    Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent-proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(g); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-688. - Glazing of windows. 
    Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(h); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-689. - Window sash. 
    The window sash shall be properly fitted and weathertight within the window frame in a dwelling unit. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(i); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-690. - Opening of windows. 
    Every window required for light and ventilation for habitable rooms shall be capable of being easily opened and secured in position by window hardware. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(j); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-691. - Door hardware and maintenance. 
    Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(k); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-692. - Door frames. 
    Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling building. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(l); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-693. - Screens. 
    Every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have a screen door with a self-closing device, and every window or other device with an opening to outdoor space used or intended to be used for ventilation shall likewise have a screen. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(m); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-694. - Protective treatment. 
    All exterior wood surfaces on a building, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(n); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-695. - Accessory structures. 
    Garages, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(o); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-696. - Interior floors, walls and ceilings. 
(a)  Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(b)  Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(p); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-697. - Structural supports. 
    Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained structurally sound and shall show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(q); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-698. - Protective railings for interior stairs. 
    Interior stairs and stairwells more than four risers high shall have handrails located in accordance with the requirements of the building code. Handrails or protective railings shall be capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Code 1971, § 8-48(r); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-699-14-725. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Dwelling Space Requirements 

Sec. 14-726. - Required space in dwelling unit. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant. The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable rooms. 
(Code 1971, § 8-49(a); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-727. - Required space in sleeping rooms. 
    In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 8-49(b); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-728. - Minimum ceiling height. 
(a)  Habitable (space) rooms other than kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet. Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. 
(b)  If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half of the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 8-49(c); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 14-729. - Dwelling unit below grade. 
    No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness; 
(2)  The total window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area size as required in subdivision III of this division; 
(3)  Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and 
(4)  The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required under section 14-627, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation. 
(Code 1971, § 8-49(d); Ord. No. 1274-12-01, 12-4-2001) 
Secs. 14-730-14-755. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UNSAFE STRUCTURES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, adopted April 20, 2010, amended div. 4 in its entirety. The former div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1971, §§ 8-42(e), 8-50, 8-50(1)-(8). 8-51; Ord. No. 1274-12-01, adopted Dec. 4, 2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, adopted Nov. 17, 2009. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 

Sec. 14-756. - Adoption of subchapter C of Chapter 54 of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas; providing for the implementation of said chapter within the city limits of the city. 
    The city adopts the provisions of the V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, ch. 54, subch. C thereof, which is entitled Quasi-Judicial Enforcement of Health and Safety Ordinances of Home-Rule Municipality, and does declare the implementation of that subchapter. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-757. - Duties of the housing official. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate a housing official who shall perform such duties as directed by the city council, the city manager and by orders of the building standards commission of the city, constituted and acting pursuant to the provisions of the V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, ch. 54, subch. C thereof relating to the Quasi-Judicial Enforcement of Health and Safety Ordinances of Home-Rule Municipalities. In addition, the housing official shall inspect all buildings or structures reported or believed to be substandard and shall present preliminary reports to the commission. Further, upon proper notice to property owners and occupants and upon direction of the commission, the housing official shall present testimony to the commission in support of any allegations of substandard character of buildings and structures. 
(b)  The housing official, in performance of the duties of said office, shall give notices and shall take such actions as shall be from time to time provided for and directed by the City of Nacogdoches Code of Ordinances and the legislature of the State of Texas, as currently set out in the provisions of the V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, ch. 54, subch. C thereof, as well as any amendments and changes which shall be made from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-758. - Standards for declaring substandard buildings or structures. 
(a)  The building standards commission shall hear evidence and shall, upon finding of the conditions and circumstances as hereinafter set out, declare a building or structure substandard and may order its repair, vacation or demolition as it may deem just, proper and appropriate taking into consideration the circumstances and conditions found to exist. 
(b)  A building or structure may be found to be substandard if: 
(1)  Deteriorated building or structure. A building or structure has become deteriorated and unsafe through natural causes or by damage as a result of exposure to the elements to the extent that the roof, windows and doors or portions of the house, building or structure which protect from the weather will no longer reasonably protect from the elements thereby threatening the health, safety and well-being of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city. 
(2)  Fire hazard. A building or structure, which because of its wiring, construction or present status, constitutes a fire hazard. 
(3)  Pestilence. A building or structure which constitutes a menace to the health and safety of the residents, citizens and inhabitants of the city because of the existence of conditions therein which are conducive to the harboring of rats or mice or other disease-carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease. 
(4)  Structural deformities. A building or structure which has been built and constructed in such a manner as to be hazardous in that the construction of the building or structure is of such a nature that it has placed the same in jeopardy of collapse or that the building or structure will not reasonably withstand customary and ordinary exposure to the elements; a building or structure which, because of the deficiency of its materials, methods or means of construction, including the foundation, structural elements, wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances or exits, renders the building or structure unsafe and dangerous. 
(5)  Inadequate fire safety provisions. A building, structure or improvements which, because of the materials used, types of construction or design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires or location, design or width of the entrances or exits, make the structure hazardous. 
(6)  Other. The existence of such other conditions or circumstances which may from time to time be delineated under the terms and provisions of law and within the scope of authority of the building standards commission. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-759. - Procedure for determination and abatement; notice; hearing; appeal. 
    The procedure set out herein shall be the minimum necessary for the building standards commission to enter a valid order concerning any building or structure in the city. A case before the commission may be commenced by the housing official or by the commission on its own initiative; in either case, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  Upon written report of the housing official or recommendation of the building standards commission, the commission shall establish a docket and make inquiry into the present conditions and circumstances of any building or structure alleged to be substandard under the criteria set out herein. If, upon receipt of such information, the building standards commission believes and concludes that there is a reasonable basis upon which to investigate such preliminary allegations and findings, then the commission shall proceed as herein provided. 
(2)  Notice shall be provided to the property owners and all occupants and lienholders of the property, identifying such property owners and occupants and lienholders as can best be determined by statutory due diligence and further identifying the property, its location and the improvements thought to be substandard. A title examination may occur in order that all owners and lienholders might be identified. Such notice shall state the possible result if the condition(s) described are judged substandard and shall state any deadlines that have been established for the hearing and review process. The owners and occupants shall be given notice of an opportunity to appear and show cause why said building, structure or improvements should not be declared substandard under the criteria set out in this Code and why the Commission should not enter appropriate orders to remedy the conditions determined to exist. 
Such notice shall be delivered by certified mail, with return receipt requested, or by delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, to the known owners and occupants and lienholders at their last-known business address or place of residence and may also be personally delivered to the owners, tenants or occupants residing upon the property. Notice to all unknown owners shall be given by posting the same by attaching a copy to the front door or as close to the front door as practicable on each structure situated on the affected property. The notice shall be mailed and posted before the tenth day before the date of the hearing before the Commission and must state the date, time and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality on one occasion before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing. 
Notice of a proceeding before the commission may be filed in the Official Public Records of Real Property of Nacogdoches County. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the affected property, and a description of the proceeding. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the proceeding on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(3)  On the day set in such citation and notice to show cause, a hearing shall be held before the building standards commission. The housing official or other designated individual appointed by the city manager shall present evidence before the commission, and the commission shall hear any additional evidence or rebuttal that may be presented by any party to the hearing. Based upon the evidence and solely under the criteria set out in this Code, the commission shall then determine whether or not such building or structure is a substandard building or structure. 
(4)  The building standards commission shall have the power to order the demolition, partial demolition, repair, renovation or remodeling of any structure found to be substandard under the criteria herein provided. The commission shall issue an order as to any decision made, and such order shall specify the action to be taken and the time in which such action is to be taken and shall make affirmative findings as to the name of the property owner(s) and/or tenants and lien holders. 
A copy of the final order of the commission shall be served upon the property owners and occupants and lien holders in the same manner as provided for the service of the notice herein required. 
(5)  In the event any notice which is required herein to be served in person or by certified mail cannot be served because neither the owner nor occupant can be found, such notice shall be deemed to have been served if the same is published in a newspaper of general circulation. Any notice so published need not be the exact text of the notice intended to be mailed but may be a synopsis thereof so long as the same is of sufficient clarity and content to place all persons on notice as to the intent thereof. 
(6)  Either the owner and/or occupant of any building or structure declared substandard by order of the building standards commission or any other third party aggrieved by a decision of the building standards commission may appeal the decision of the building standards commission by giving notice thereof to the city secretary within ten days from the date of such order and by paying a fee of $150.00. 
Upon perfection of such appeal, the secretary of the building standards commission shall forward the record of the commission to the city secretary. The city council shall review the same and may make any additional investigations or hear additional evidence and/or receive additional documents, which may be tendered and/or deemed necessary in order to determine the merit of any appeal. Upon appeal, the city council shall have the power to affirm, reverse or modify the order of the building standards commission and shall enter its order in accordance with its findings. A copy of the final order of the city council shall be served upon the appellant, the property owners and occupants in the same manner as provided for the service of the notice herein required. 
(7)  If the owner or his representative shall fail or refuse to carry out such order or shall fail to carry out such order satisfactorily, the building standards commission or the housing official may, upon approval of the city manager, proceed to carry out such orders either by private contract or through an agency of the city, and the cost thus incurred shall constitute a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-760. - Emergency procedure. 
(a)  When it shall appear that a building or structure in the city is a substandard building under the terms of this article and that such building or structure or the manner of its use constitutes an immediate and serious danger to life or property, the condition shall be deemed a condition justifying the use of emergency measures. In such case, the building standards commission, a majority of the commissioners or the housing official may, with the consent and approval of the city manager, order any of the following emergency measures to be taken: 
(1)  Immediate vacation of such building, structure and/or adjoining buildings or structures; 
(2)  Vacation of the danger area around such building or structure; 
(3)  Such emergency shoring-up and bracing of walls, roofs and supports as are required to render such building or structure safe; 
(4)  Destruction of such walls, roofs and supports or the entire structure or so much thereof as cannot be braced or made secure with safety; 
(5)  Posting of notices on or near such building or structure or buildings or structures notifying the public of such order and ordering all persons to keep out of such building, buildings, structure or structures and the areas of danger surrounding it or them; and 
(6)  Securing the structure to prevent or restrict entry. 
(b)  When any of the above-mentioned measures are ordered to be taken, notice of such order shall be given as follows: 
(1)  Such order shall be directed to the owner of such substandard building or structure or his authorized representative if the same is known. Where notification can be accomplished without increasing the danger to life or property, notice shall be given by personal service on the owner of the building or structure or his said representative. 
(2)  In the event that such notification would create such a delay as would materially increase the danger to life or property, then such notice need not be given. 
(c)  If the owner or his representative shall fail or refuse to carry out such order or shall fail to carry out such order satisfactorily, the building standards commission or the housing official may, upon approval of the city manager, proceed to carry out such orders either by private contract or through an agency of the city, and the cost thus incurred shall constitute a valid lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-761. - Standards for declaring unsafe conditions. 
(a)  The building standards commission shall hear evidence and shall, upon finding of the conditions and circumstances as hereinafter set out, declare a condition unsafe due to accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents and may order abatement of said nuisances as it may deem just, proper and appropriate taking into consideration the circumstances and conditions found to exist. 
(b)  The buildings standards commission shall follow the same procedures for declaring unsafe conditions as are followed for determining unsafe buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-762. - Civil penalties. 
    Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of any order of the building standards commission or of the city council within the time specified shall constitute a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the city, of this article and of the requirements of law. Pursuant to the requirements of law, any owner, owner's representative or third party found by the building standards commission or by the city council upon appeal to have control over any premises made the subject of any order of the commission or of the city council shall be deemed to be in violation of the terms and provisions of said order and in violation of this Code if such person shall fail to take such action as is mandated or required by said order; and upon the effective date of said order as set out therein, such person shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-763. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce the orders of the building standards commission or of the city council by filing action in the appropriate court of this state when authorized. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-764. - Liability of city. 
    Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1540-4-10, § 3, 4-20-2010) 
Sec. 14-765-14-795. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SWIMMING POOLS[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Swimming pools, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.064; authority to regulate swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.101. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-796-14-820. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UNSAFE SWIMMING POOLS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 

Sec. 14-821. - Title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Unsafe Swimming Pool Ordinance of the City of Nacogdoches." 
(Code 1971, § 14-113) 
Sec. 14-822. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department of urban development means the city building, environmental health and code enforcement divisions of the City of Nacogdoches. 
    Private swimming pool means any swimming pool located on private property under the control of the owner, lessee or invitee, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing by members of the family, invited guests, or officers or employees of the owner, lessee or invitee. 
    Public or semipublic swimming pool means any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by numbers of persons for swimming or bathing operated by any person, whether he be owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessioner, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. 
    Shall is mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Swimming pool means any structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing of 18 inches or more in depth at any point. This definition does not include lakes, ponds, stock ponds, fish ponds, reflecting pools, fountains, streams, rivers or other similar natural or artificial bodies of water not commonly used for swimming, diving or recreational bathing. 
    Unsafe public or semipublic swimming pool means a public or semipublic swimming pool, as described in the definitions of the terms "public or semipublic swimming pool" and "swimming pool" in this section, which: 
(1)  Is located at an abandoned residence or a residence unoccupied for a period of 60 days; 
(2)  Is located on nonresidential property which is abandoned or seasonally closed; 
(3)  Contains water which is polluted, as polluted water is described in section 46-2; or 
(4)  Contains dangerous objects or animals. 
    Unsafe swimming pool means a private swimming pool, as described in the definitions of the terms "private swimming pool" and "swimming pool" in this section, which: 
(1)  Is located at an abandoned residence or a residence unoccupied for a period of 60 days; 
(2)  Is located on nonresidential property which is abandoned or seasonally closed; 
(3)  Contains water which is polluted, as polluted water is described in section 46-2; 
(4)  Contains dangerous objects (organisms in dangerous number or concentration) or animals; or 
(5)  Is surrounded or partially surrounded by a fence or wall which does not meet the standards set out under section 14-828 or in which the doors and/or gates are broken, nonfunctional or frequently left open or unlatched. 
(Code 1971, § 14-114) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-823. - Administrative enforcement. 
    Administrative enforcement of the terms of this division shall be by the department of urban development. 
(Code 1971, § 14-119(a)) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 14-824. - Additional remedies. 
    In addition to any other penalty provided by this division, the city council may direct the city attorney to initiate an action in any court having competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this division or for an injunction to compel compliance with this division. 
(Code 1971, § 14-119(b); Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 14-825. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this division or failing to comply with any requirement of this division will, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. The violation of any section of this division or the failure to comply with any requirement of this division shall each constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Code 1971, § 14-119(c)) 
Sec. 14-826. - Amendments. 
    This division or any part of this division may be altered, repealed or amended at any time, and no rights or privileges may ever be acquired by this division which may not be altered, repealed or modified by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-119.1) 
Sec. 14-827. - Using unsafe pool. 
    No person shall swim, wade, bathe in or otherwise enter water of an unsafe pool. 
(Code 1971, § 14-116) 
Sec. 14-828. - Enclosure by fence or wall. 
(a)  Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than five feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger than four inches in any dimension except for doors and gates. If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal dimension shall not exceed four inches. A dwelling house, accessory building or similar structure may be used as part of such enclosure. 
(b)  All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. 
(c)  This section shall be applicable to all swimming pools existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives and new swimming pools constructed, other than indoor pools, and shall apply to all private swimming pools existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives which have a minimum depth of 18 inches of water. No person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser, lessee, tenant or a licensee, upon which is situated a private swimming pool having a minimum depth of 18 inches, shall fail to provide and maintain such fence or wall as provided in this section. 
(d)  The department of urban development may make modifications in individual cases, upon which a showing of good cause, with respect to the height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gates or latches or the necessity therefor, provided the protection as sought under this section is not substantially reduced thereby. The building department may permit protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not substantially less than the protection afforded by the wall, fence, gate and latch described in this section and particularly where fencing which does not literally comply with this section is already in place. The department of urban development shall allow a reasonable period within which to comply with the requirements of this section. The department of urban development shall automatically grant a variance for fences around private swimming pools existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives which are four feet or greater in height and which otherwise comply with this section. Such automatic variance shall not apply to an unsafe swimming pool as defined in section 14-822. 
(Code 1971, § 14-115) 
Sec. 14-829. - Correction of violations. 
(a)  The person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, heir to, purchaser, lessee, tenant, or a licensee, upon which is located an unsafe swimming pool, shall immediately: 
(1)  For violations of subsection (3) or (4) in the definition of the term "unsafe public or semipublic swimming pool" in section 14-822 or subsection (3) or (4) in the definition of the term "unsafe swimming pool" in section 14-822, remove all dangerous objects or animals or remove or purify all polluted water. 
(2)  For violations of subsection (1) or (2) in the definition of the term "unsafe public or semipublic swimming pool" in section 14-822 or subsection (1), (2) or (5) in the definition of the term "unsafe swimming pool" in section 14-822, either: 
a.  Fill such unsafe swimming pool level to the top with sand, earth or other similar material acceptable to the inspection service department; or 
b.  Enclose such unsafe swimming pool with a fence or wall as described in section 14-828 and, further, lock all doors and gates with a key or combination lock. 
(b)  Violations of subsection (3) in the definition of the term "unsafe swimming pool" in section 14-822 may also be remedied by compliance with section 14-828. 
(Code 1971, § 14-117) 
Secs. 14-830-14-855. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 

Sec. 14-856. - Scope. 
    The developer shall design and construct drainage facilities in accordance with this article and the city's construction specifications. The design criteria in this article are the city's minimum methods and standards. Other hydrologic and hydraulic design methods may be used to satisfy drainage requirements with prior city approval. 
(Code 1971, § 8-60) 
Sec. 14-857. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, § 8-72) 
Sec. 14-858. - Appeals. 
    The owner of a property affected by this article may appeal a city decision to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever one of the following conditions are alleged: 
(1)  The sections of this article do not apply to a specific case. 
(2)  An equally good or more desirable design or installation can be employed in a specific case. 
(3)  The true intent and meaning of this article has been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Code 1971, § 8-71) 
Sec. 14-859. - Stormwater detention. 
    All new development with proposed impervious surfaces exceeding 14,000 square feet shall provide for on-site stormwater detention in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Twenty-five-year storm runoff exceeding existing amounts shall be detained on site. Credit shall be given for runoff storage volumes equivalent to that generated by 14,000 square feet of impervious surface. 
(2)  SCS TR-55 methodology shall be used for detention facility design. 
(3)  Outfall shall be to the nearest approved public drainage facility. 
(4)  Minimum discharge pipe size shall be four inches. 
(5)  Discharge pipe materials shall be as follows: 
a.  PVC-SDR 26 or schedule 40. 
b.  RCP-class III. 
c.  CMP-14 ga. min., aluminized. 
d.  HDPE-H20 per ASTM D 3350. 
(6)  Overflow spillways shall be reinforced concrete unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(7)  All earthen areas shall have approved erosion protection. 
(8)  Freeboard appropriate to the volume of detention shall be provided. 
(9)  There shall be 3:1 maximum side slopes. 
(10)  The property owner shall be responsible for detention facility maintenance. 
(Code 1971, § 8-61) 
Sec. 14-860. - Plans. 
(a)  A drainage plan shall be provided for all proposed development. For projects requiring runoff detention or drainage facility construction, the plan shall be prepared and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the state and shall be supported by a detailed drainage study. The drainage study shall include hydrologic and hydraulic calculations and other design support documentation. This drainage plan shall be a complete construction document from which the proposed improvements can be constructed. 
(b)  Drainage information on site plans required for issuance of building permits must include all information required by the city engineer. 
(Code 1971, § 8-62) 
Sec. 14-861. - Upstream conditions. 
    The developer shall design all drainage facilities based on potential and fully developed upstream conditions in accordance with current land zoning. 
(Code 1971, § 8-63) 
Sec. 14-862. - Discharge points. 
    The developer shall terminate all drainage improvements at a discharge point approved by the city. Drainage flow patterns from developed property shall follow historic, predevelopment patterns where such flow crosses property lines. Flow at the discharge point shall not exceed the capacity of downstream receiving facilities. The developer shall design and construct such discharge point, or outlet, to prevent damage to or overflowing into adjacent property. The city may require creek improvements, channel lining, energy dissipaters or other improvements for such outlet to prevent erosion or increase the downstream flow capacity. 
(Code 1971, § 8-64) 
Sec. 14-863. - Public streets as drainage facilities. 
(a)  Construction of new streets shall require installation of storm drain facilities. 
(b)  The maximum depth of water to be allowed in local streets at the ten-year design flow shall be at the top of crown or top of curb, whichever is least. 
(c)  Maximum spread of water in collector streets at the ten-year design flow shall allow for one clear lane of traffic 12 feet wide. 
(d)  The maximum spread of water in arterial streets at the ten-year design flow shall allow for two clear lanes of traffic 24 feet wide. 
(e)  Street classification (local, collector, arterial) shall be as defined in the city's comprehensive plan or otherwise determined by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 8-65) 
Sec. 14-864. - Drainage channels and structures. 
(a)  The developer shall install an underground storm drain on curb and gutter streets beginning at the point where the calculated stormwater runoff is of such a quantity that it exceeds the height specified in section 14-863 (see also table 2 in section 14-867). The developer shall construct the storm drain system from this point to an approved outlet. 
(b)  If the developer proposes to construct a channel, the city shall approve the right-of-way width and channel configuration. The developer shall design and construct all channels to terminate at an approved outlet. 
(Code 1971, § 8-66) 
Sec. 14-865. - Habitable structures. 
(a)  The developer shall provide adequate means for stormwater runoff in excess of the street and drainage system capacity to flow around habitable structures. See figures 1 and 2 in section 14-867. 
(1)  If adjacent topography rises away from the street, the developer shall provide a grading/drainage plan which shows that all building sites can provide a finished floor elevation at least one foot above the top of the curb using the highest point along the portion of such curb directly fronting the building site; or 
(2)  If adjacent topography falls away from the street, the developer shall provide a grading/drainage plan that shows that all building sites can provide a finished floor elevation at least one foot above the ground elevation along all sides of the building site. 
(b)  The developer shall design and construct all streets to minimize any fill required to bring building pads into compliance with the criteria in this section. 
(c)  The city, upon submittal of detailed engineering plans, may consider alternate methods of building protection to those in this section. 
(Code 1971, § 8-67) 
Sec. 14-866. - Improvements. 
(a)  Inlet and outlet structures. Headwalls, wingwalls, splash pads and riprap shall be provided at the inlet and outlet of all pipe systems. Design shall be appropriate for the individual situation and subject to city approval. 
(b)  Use of pipe or channel. If an underground drainage system is required and a 60-inch or smaller pipe will handle the design flow, pipe shall be used. If a 60-inch pipe is not adequate, the developer has the option to use concrete pipe or a natural and/or a lined open drainage channel. Lining materials, if used, shall be approved by the city. 
(c)  Line of flow. The developer shall allow watercourses to follow their natural lines of flow; provided, however, that rechanneling or rerouting of watercourses may be allowed where approved by the city and where the point at which the watercourse enters the tract and the point at which it leaves the tract are not changed. Upstream and downstream water surface elevations shall not be increased unless a study prepared by a registered professional engineer demonstrates that no potential damage due to flooding will be created. 
(d)  Bridges and box culverts. The developer shall design and construct bridges or box culverts at all street crossings over all drainageways and floodways in accordance with table 2 in section 14-867. 
(e)  Valley gutters. The developer shall provide concrete valley gutters if the gutter flow must be carried across intersections of curbed streets. The maximum valley depth shall be one inch, and the minimum width shall be six feet. 
(f)  Public easements required. All public drainage facilities shall be placed in public easements subject to approval by the city. The minimum easement width is 20 feet. 
(Code 1971, § 8-68) 
Sec. 14-867. - Design. 
(a)  Basis for storm discharge. The following methods of stormwater runoff calculation shall be used for the design of drainage improvements: 
(1)  For watershed areas of 200 acres or less, use the rational formula as shown in this subsection. Figure 1 and table 1 show average velocities to be used in calculating the time of concentration. 
(2)  For watershed areas of greater than 200 acres, the regional regression equations as described in the state department of highways hydraulic manual shall be used. 
THE RATIONAL FORMULA 
Q = CIA 
Where: 
Q = The maximum storm flow rate at a given point (in cubic feet per second). C = A runoff coefficient which varies with the topography, land use and moisture content of the soil at the time. The runoff coefficient shall be based on the ultimate use of the land. The runoff coefficient can be selected from the following major use classifications, or other coefficients may be used when supported in an approved drainage study:  
Paved areas ..... 0.95 
Shopping centers ..... 0.90 
Business centers ..... 0.80 
Industrial areas ..... 0.85 
Residential areas: 
Less than two lots/acre ..... 0.40 
Greater than two lots/acre, but less than four lots/acre ..... 0.50 
Greater than four lots/acre, but less than eight lots/acre ..... 0.60 
Greater than eight lots/acre ..... 0.75 
Apartments ..... 0.75 
Park and open space ..... 0.30 
I = The average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a period equal to the time of concentration of flow from the farthest point of the drainage area to the point under consideration.  
I = ;frac (t + d);e 
The state department of highways Hydraulic Manual shows that in the county: 
d = 8.0  
5 year 10 year 25 year 50 year b = 71 73 81 86 e = 0.773 0.748 0.740 0.733 t = time of concentration in minutes  
TIME OF CONCENTRATION 
t = D / V x 60 
Where: 
t = Time of concentration in minutes. The minimum time of concentration shall be ten minutes. D = Distance in feet from point of concentration to the hydraulically most distant part of the drainage basin under construction. V = Velocity in feet per second from figure 3 or table 1 or velocity calculated by an engineer for streets and/or storm sewers. A = The drainage area, in acres, tributary to the point under design calculated from the drainage map of the area. The drainage map shall be submitted with any drainage plans submitted for consideration by the city.  
Table 1 
AVERAGE VELOCITIES OF RUNOFF 
% Slope of Gutter Assumed 
Velocity(Ft/Sec)  0.5 1.5  1.0 2.2  2.0 3.1  3.0 3.8  4.0 4.3  5.0 4.9  6.0 5.3  8.0 6.1 10.0 6.9  
(b)  Storm frequency. Design storm frequencies for storm drainage improvements are shown in table 2. 
_____
Table 2 
DESIGN STORM FREQUENCY 
Type of Facility Description of Area to be Detained Minimum Design Frequency (Yrs.) Streets and storm sewers or side ditches combined* Residential, commercial and industrial Local, 10 
Collector, 10 
Arterial, 10 Culverts, bridges, channels and creeks Any type of area less than 200 acres 25 Any type of area greater than 200 acres 100  
* If, in a storm drain system, an inlet is located at a low point so that flow in excess of the storm drain capacity would be directed onto private property and such overflow could cause damage or serious inconvenience in the opinion of the city, the design frequency shall be 25 years. 
_____
(c)  Underground drainage facility design. The engineer shall calculate underground drainage facility (storm drain) capacity by Manning's Formula as follows: 
Q = 1.486 / n AR 2/3 S 1/2 
Where: 
Q = The discharge in cubic feet per second A = The cross sectional area of flow in square feet R = The hydraulic radius in feet = area/wetted perimeter S = The slope of the hydraulic gradient in feet per foot n = The coefficient of roughness  
The elevation of the hydraulic gradient of the storm sewer shall be a minimum of 1.5 feet below the elevation of the adjacent street gutter. The developer shall use storm drain pipe sized so that the average velocity in the pipe will not exceed 15 feet per second, and the outlet velocity will not exceed velocities shown in table 4 for the discharge conditions. 
(d)  Open channel design. The engineer shall design and construct open channel facilities based on frequencies shown in table 2 and calculated by Manning's Formula with roughness coefficients and velocities as shown in table 3. Side slopes of channels shall be no steeper than 3:1 in earth and 1:1 when lined with concrete. 
_____
Table 3 
COEFFICIENT OF ROUGHNESS 
Open Channels Maximum Permissible Velocity (ft/sec) Coefficient "n" Paved Concrete 15 0.011 to 0.020 Asphalt 15 0.013 to 0.017 Rubble or riprap 15 0.017 to 0.030 Earth Bare, sandy silt, weathered 2.0 0.020 Silt clay or soft shale 3.5 0.020 Clay 6.0 0.020 Soft sandstone 6.0 0.020 Clean gravelly soil 6.0 -0.030 to 0.150 1 Turf Shallow flow 6.0 0.06 to 0.06 Depth of flow over 1 foot 6.0 0.04 to 0.06  
1  Will vary with the straightness of alignment, smoothness of bed and side slopes and whether channel has light vegetation or is choked with weeds and brush. 
_____
(e)  Culvert design. The developer shall install enclosed culverts if a creek or ditch crosses proposed roadway improvements. The size of the culvert required shall be the larger size, checking both inlet and outlet flow control. Design of culverts shall include the determination of upstream backwater conditions as well as downstream velocities and flooding conditions. The developer shall not design or install culverts with discharge velocities that exceed those provided in table 4. 
Table 4 
CULVERT DISCHARGE - VELOCITY 
LIMITATIONS 
Culvert Discharging Onto Maximum Allowable 
Velocity (ft/sec) Earth 6 Sod earth 8 Paved or riprap apron 15 Shale 10 Rock 15  
(f)  Minimum design standards. The design requirements set forth in this section are minimum design standards. The city reserves the right to require additional precautions or treatments consistent with sound engineering practice and the protection of public health and safety, to provide for conditions not specifically covered in this section. Drainage requirements for developments adjacent to or draining into state highway right-of-way shall be subject to all requirements of the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1971, § 8-69) 
Secs. 14-868-14-895. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 

Sec. 14-896. - Compliance with state law. 
    It shall be unlawful to move any building in the city, which move would be prohibited by state law, and the penalty for such prohibited move shall be as provided in section 14-899. 
(Code 1971, § 8-16(g)) 
Sec. 14-897. - License and bond required. 
    No person, except a licensed housemover, shall move any building over or along any street or highway within the city limits. Every such person, before engaging in such occupation, shall obtain an annual license therefor, the fee for which license shall be on file in the city secretary's office. Such license shall not be granted until the person applying for the license shall have given a bond in the sum of $1,000.00 with two or more good and sufficient sureties, or one executed by an approved surety company doing business in the state. Such bond shall be approved by the city manager and shall be conditioned that the person will pay any and all damages which will occur to any tree, pavement, street or sidewalk; any awning, wire, cable, fire alarm, telegraph or other pole, provided such awnings, wires, cables and poles are in place in accordance with the ordinances governing such placement; or to any other thing injured by the housemover, whether such injury or damage be inflicted by the housemover or his agents, employees or workers. The bond shall be conditioned, also, that the housemover will save and indemnify and keep harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of such license. 
(Code 1971, § 8-16(a)) 
Sec. 14-898. - Issuance of license; permit. 
(a)  Upon the execution of the bond required in section 14-897 and its approval by the city manager, the building inspector shall inspect the equipment to be used by the housemover. Upon approval of the equipment and the payment of the license fee, a license shall be issued to the person applying therefor, as a licensed housemover. 
(b)  Such licensed housemover shall in each case, before moving any building, apply to the building inspector for permission to do so. In the application the building to be moved shall be described, its location stated, the place to which it is proposed to move the building described, and the time required for such removal shall be stated, together with a description of the street or other public property over which it is proposed to move the building. If the building inspector shall grant such permission, he shall issue a permit. The permit shall prescribe the route to be taken and shall limit the time for such removal, and such housemover shall immediately notify the chief of the fire department and any and all companies maintaining electric, telephone or telegraph wire or cable across or along any street included in the designated route along which the house is to be moved and the time when it is to be moved. 
(c)  Before any permit is issued to move any building in the city, the fee on file in the city secretary's office shall be paid for such permit, except this permit fee shall not be charged for the moving of a building or structure with dimensions less than eight feet in width and 14 feet in length. 
(Code 1971, § 8-16(b), (f)) 
Sec. 14-899. - Cutting and repairing of wires. 
(a)  At the time the application is made to the building inspector for a permit to move any house or structure within the city, the person desiring to move such house or structure shall arrange with the public utility companies concerned for the payment of all charges for cutting and repairing wires, cables and moving poles or other services rendered. 
(b)  After notification has been received by any such company, it shall be the duty of the company to furnish an agent or employee to cut and repair the wires maintained by the particular company which may come in contact with the house or structure being moved and which may be necessary to cut in order to permit the house or structure to be moved along the street. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any housemover to at any time cut or break any wire or cable across or along any street of the city carrying an electric current or intended for the purpose of carrying an electric current. If such person cuts or breaks any such wires or permits the wires to be cut or broken by anyone in his employ, such person shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, § 8-16(c)) 
Sec. 14-900. - Placing of red lights. 
    It shall be the duty of all housemovers to place red lights on or near any building which may be left in any street at nighttime and to provide red lights as may be required by the building inspector while the building or structure is being moved. 
(Code 1971, § 8-16(d)) 
Sec. 14-901. - Moving of heavy equipment. 
    No heavy motor-driven equipment or machinery such as draglines, shovels, tractors with lugs, road machinery, and similar devices shall be operated under their own power over the city streets, but shall be transported on trailer trucks or other vehicles equipped with rubber tires. 
(Code 1971, § 8-16(e)) 
Secs. 14-902-14-905. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 14-906. - Adopted. 
    The 2009 (IEBC), International Existing Building Code with appendix and amendments is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code for the City of Nacogdoches, except for such exceptions and additions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1617-2-13, adopted Feb. 5, 2013, amended the Code by adding a new § 14-766. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 14-906 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 14-907--14-920. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 14-921. - Adopted. 
    The 2009 (IPMC), International Property Maintenance Code with appendix and amendments is hereby adopted as the existing building code for the City of Nacogdoches, except for such exceptions and additions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1617-2-13, adopted Feb. 5, 2013, amended the Code by adding a new § 14-767. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 14-921 at the discretion of the editor. 
ARTICLE XIV. - PAVING AND PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 14-922. - Permit required. 
    A permit shall be required by the city prior to placement of any parking facility. An application for a permit shall include a site plan which addresses all requirements under this section. A site plan shall be included with the application, and shall contain at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Existing and/or proposed land use(s); 
(2)  Locations of structures, easements, and other site features or amenities as may be required for evaluation; 
(3)  Location of parking spaces, circulation isles and ingress/egress points; 
(4)  Description of paved surfaces proposed; 
(5)  Location, type, and size of existing and proposed landscaping; 
(6)  Location of on-site and perimeter drainage structures; 
(7)  Location of stormwater detention facilities and engineering plans for drainage and detention facilities as required; 
(8)  Location of accessible parking spaces, signage, grades, dimensions, and accessible routes to and from the parking area in compliance with the Texas accessibility standards as described in V.T.C.A, Texas Government Code ch. 469. 
(Ord. No. 1711-7-16 , § 2, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 14-923. - Permit fees. 
    The fee for a parking lot and paving permit shall be as follows: 
- First 14,000 square feet = $25.00 
- 14,001 to 20,000 square feet = $50.00 
- More than 20,000 square feet = $75.00 
(Ord. No. 1711-7-16 , § 2, 7-19-2016) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Charitable solicitations, ch. 26; emergency management, ch. 30; signs, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 94; hotel occupancy tax, § 94-141 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 98; utilities, ch. 106; vehicles for hire, ch. 110; franchise and business license and regulations for public transportation vehicles, § 110-56 et seq.; supplementary district regulations for commercial indoor amusements, § 118-308; supplementary district regulations for bed and breakfast establishments, § 118-309; supplementary district regulations for billiard parlor or pool hall, § 118-310; supplementary district regulations for ice or roller skating rink, § 118-314; supplementary district regulations for sexually oriented businesses, § 118-351 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to license and regulate businesses and occupations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 118. 

Sec. 18-26. - License and permit fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq., each holder of a state permit issued pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code shall pay to the city a fee equal to one-half the fee paid to the state for such permit. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq., each holder of a state license issued pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code shall pay to the city a fee equal to one-half the fee paid to the state for such license. 
(c)  All fees levied by this section shall be due and payable at the time at which the state license fee and permit fee is due. 
State Law reference- Local permit fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36. 
Secs. 18-27-18-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Food establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-56. - Adoption of laws and regulations. 
    All federal and state laws, rule and regulations applicable to the production, manufacture, distribution, disposition and consumption of meat products, milk and milk products, restaurants and any other food, food products or food handling not specifically adopted elsewhere within this article are adopted and made a part of this Code as if fully set out in this article. The city Food Sanitation Manual is adopted. Copies of such manual shall be on file in the office of the city secretary, available to all persons for inspection. 
(Code 1971, § 14-28) 
State Law reference- Food regulations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 433.001 et seq. 
Sec. 18-57. - Food service owner and manager training and certification. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved food source kitchen means a kitchen meeting minimum requirements of state and local jurisdiction. 
    Commissary means an approved food source facility which meets the minimum requirement of state and/or local jurisdiction. 
    Manager means the person in charge during the absence of the legal owner, to include assistant managers. 
    Mobile food unit means a self-contained, licensed, motorized vehicle or trailer, which is temporarily located where food items are cooked, processed or portioned for service, sales, and are sold to the general public. 
    Owner means the legal owner of any food service establishment. 
    Premises means a tract of land with buildings operating as a single developed unit. 
(b)  Training of food service owners and managers shall consist of a basic 15 hours of food service sanitation training and an annual refresher of three hours. 
(c)  The environmental health department will be available to assist any manager in establishing and conducting training of employees. 
(d)  The required training and certification shall be conducted on the following basis: 
(1)  The basic course-quarterly. 
(2)  Refresher course-twice yearly. 
(e)  Certification shall be required annually for all food service owners and managers. The certification shall attest to the completion of the required training. The certification shall also attest to the establishment by the management of on-the-job training of food service employees. 
(f)  There shall be affixed in a prominent place a conspicuous placard or decal attesting to the certification of the personnel of the establishment. 
(Code 1971, § 14-29; Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 2, 7-18-2017) 
State Law reference- Food service employees and programs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.031 et seq. 
Sec. 18-58. - Permit and application. 
(a)  No mobile food unit shall operate before first obtaining a permit from the City of Nacogdoches. 
(b)  Permit application. No person shall operate a mobile food unit in the City of Nacogdoches without a permit issued by the City of Nacogdoches. Every permit shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place where it can be read by the general public on the mobile food vendor's vehicle or trailer. A person shall make application for a permit to the city on forms furnished by the city health inspector. 
(c)  All mobile food units shall have a valid vehicle registration, motor vehicle operator's license, proof of vehicle liability insurance, and a Texas Sales Tax permit. Proof of these items will be required at the time of permit application and available at time of any city inspection. 
(d)  All fees required by this section shall remain on file in the city secretary's office. 
(e)  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete permit application, the city will determine whether or not to issue a mobile food vendor permit. The city may deny an application for a permit for any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failing to provide all of the information required by the city; 
(2)  The applicant's past record of ordinance violations: 
(3)  Safety record of the applicant or any driver based on such things as civil and criminal lawsuits and violations of health and life safety codes and ordinances; 
(4)  Providing false, misleading, or inaccurate information to the city; or 
(5)  Other valid grounds. 
(f)  Permits shall be issued for a time period not to exceed 180 days. 
(g)  A new permit is required to be submitted within 15 days of the following, whereupon the previous permit will be voided and the previous permit canceled: 
(1)  When ownership of the operating entity is changed; or 
(2)  The city determines that operations or management methods are no longer adequately described by the existing permit application. 
(h)  Permits are not transferrable. 
(i)  A permit may be revoked by the city for any violation of this section. 
(j)  A mobile food unit owner or operator has the right to appeal a determination made by the health inspector to the city manager by submitting a written appeal to the city secretary, with a copy to the health inspector, not more than five days after receiving notice of the suspension or denial of permit. The city manager or his or her designee will hear the appeal and issue a written finding not more than 30 days after the notice was delivered to the city secretary. The city manager's determination is final. 
(k)  City-owned property permit. 
(1)  In addition to the mobile vendor permit described in section 18-57 above, a mobile food unit operating in a public park must obtain a city-owned property permit. 
(2)  City-owned permit process. 
a.  A person wishing to operate in a public park must submit a completed application on a form provided by the city to the city manager or designee. 
b.  The public park permit shall be valid for a time not to exceed 180 days from the date of approval by the city manager or designee, unless revoked for violations of this chapter. 
c.  The city manager or designee shall have the authority to limit the total number of public park mobile food unit permits issued for each quarter. 
(3)  A valid public park permit must be displayed at all times the mobile food unit is located in a public park. 
(Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 2, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 18-59. - Mobile food unit zoning and location. 
(a)  Mobile food units inside the city limits shall only be stored and operated in areas zoned M, medical, B-2, general business, B-3, central business, I-1, light industrial, or I-2, heavy industrial, unless operating with a city property permit. 
(b)  Mobile food units may not be located within 200 feet of the property line of an open and operating fixed-location food service establishment. This buffer may be reduced upon receiving written permission from said establishments. 
(c)  Mobile food units shall not conduct sales at a stationary location: 
(1)  More than five consecutive days at a location. 
(2)  More than 16 hours per location per day. 
(3)  In public parking spaces, except in the B-3, central business district. No more than three public parking spaces may be utilized by the mobile food unit in the B-3, central business district. 
(4)  On a city-owned property, unless the mobile food unit is operating under section 18-59. 
(5)  Within 500 feet of the B-3, central business district, during events permitted through the city. 
(d)  Mobile food units shall locate on private property only with written permission to do so and must comply if asked to leave by the property owner or city official. A copy of the written permission to operate in a specific location, signed by the private property owner, shall be kept within the mobile food unit at all times. Additionally, this written permission must also contain a statement confirming the mobile food unit's customers access to a public restroom. The mobile food unit may not operate if a public restroom is not accessible. 
(e)  No mobile food units, their merchandise, advertising, or seating shall obscure traffic sight visibility or be located within the visibility triangle as described in section 118-426 of this Code. 
(f)  Mobile food units shall not operate in driveways or fire lanes. 
(g)  Mobile food units including seating may operate in parking spaces if the required parking for the permanent establishment located on the same premises remains in compliance with the parking requirements found in chapter 118 of this code. 
(h)  Mobile food units shall be removed from the premises and may not be parked longer than 16 hours. 
(i)  The mobile food unit will be subject to inspection by the city upon permit application and may be subject to random inspection and upon reissuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 2, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 18-60. - Mobile food unit operations. 
(a)  All mobile food units shall have a valid vehicle registration, motor vehicle operator's license, proof of vehicle liability insurance, and a Texas Sales Tax permit. 
(b)  Mobile food units shall operate from a commissary and shall report at least daily to such location for supplies and for all cleaning and servicing operations. A notarized letter identifying the mobile food unit, the commissary and confirming the mobile food unit is operating from that commissary is required at the time of permit application and at each renewal of the permit. The mobile food unit shall maintain a log documenting the date and time of each supply, cleaning, or servicing operation at the commissary or other fixed food establishment. Receipts from an approved source must also be kept. The log and receipts shall be kept in the mobile food unit, shall be signed by a responsible person, and shall be made available to the city upon request. 
(c)  Mobile food units selling only containerized beverages, fountain drinks, iced drinks or prepackaged foods are not required to operate from a commissary but must meet all other applicable provisions of this division. 
(d)  All mobile food units shall be equipped with a self-closing, lidded, trash receptacle. The trash receptacle must be placed outside next to the mobile food units for use by the patrons of the unit. The area around the mobile food units shall be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, and debris. 
(e)  Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. Water shall be from an internal tank, and electricity shall be from a generator or an electrical outlet via a portable cord that is in conformance with the electrical code as adopted by the City of Nacogdoches. 
(f)  Liquid waste shall be contained in a permanently installed retention tank located on the mobile food unit. 
(g)  Liquid waste shall be characterized as food service waste and shall meet the waste removal, manifesting, disposal, and treatment requirements of the city's sewer use ordinance prior to legal discharge. 
(h)  Except as otherwise limited by this Code of Ordinances, a mobile food unit may utilize outside seating consisting of a portable table and a seating capacity of no more than four. 
(i)  Mobile food units shall maintain the following fire prevention devices: 
(1)  All mobile food units selling food cooked in the mobile food unit shall keep at least one Class ABC fire extinguisher with a minimum 3A40BC rating, with visible current inspection (tagged), fully charged, and located within 30 feet of cooking equipment; 
(2)  All mobile food units producing grease-laden vapors (grills, fryers, etc.) shall keep, in addition to the extinguisher required above, a Class K rated portable fire extinguisher, with visible current inspection (tagged), fully charged, and located within 30 feet of cooking equipment. 
(3)  All mobile food units producing grease-laden particles within the mobile unit shall install an extinguishing vent hood (Type 1 or other, if approved by the City of Nacogdoches Fire Marshal or designee), which must be tested in the presence of the City of Nacogdoches Fire Marshal or designee before a permit may be issued; and 
(4)  All mobile food units using compressed gas (LP/propane cylinders, etc.) shall keep gas containers secured outside of the passenger area of the vending unit. Compressed gas cylinders shall be secured by one or more restraints to a fixed object or nested and secured by one or more restraints and cannot be located closer than ten feet from any trash or combustible material. All valves, hoses, and connections used shall be rated for use with petroleum gas. 
(Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 2, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 18-61. - Exemptions. 
    All events, activities, and festivals specifically approved by the city council and/or by the City of Nacogdoches festival permit process are exempt from these regulations but shall comply with appropriate health and life safety regulations of this Code of Ordinances. 
    All vendors operating at the Nacogdoches Farmer's Market are exempt from these regulations but shall comply with appropriate health and life safety regulations of this Code of Ordinances and all processes set forth by the Nacogdoches Farmer's Market Board of Directors. 
(Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 2, 7-18-2017) 
Secs. 18-62-18-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-86. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service or sales establishments within the city or its police jurisdiction who does not possess a valid permit issued to him by the health inspector. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Permits shall not be transferred from one person to another person or place. A valid permit shall be posted in every food service establishment. Permits for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a time not to exceed 14 days. 
(Code 1971, § 14-30) 
Sec. 18-87. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees charged annually for the issuance of a permit and inspections for the operation of any establishment described in section (a) of this section are as follows: 
Food establishment permit 5 or less employees ..... $50.00 
Food establishment permit 6-10 employees ..... 75.00 
Food establishment permit 11-20 employees ..... 100.00 
Food establishment permit 21-30 employees ..... 125.00 
Food establishment permit 31-40 employees ..... 150.00 
Food establishment permit 41-50 employees ..... 150.00 
Food establishment permit 51+ employees ..... 200.00 
Food sales permit 5 or less employees ..... 50.00 
Food sales permit 6-10 employees ..... 75.00 
Food sales permit 11-20 employees ..... 100.00 
Food sales permit 21-30 employees ..... 125.00 
Night club permit 5 or less employees ..... 150.00 
Night club permit 6-10 employees ..... 150.00 
Night club permit 11-20 employees ..... 200.00 
Nightclub permit over 20 employees ..... 200.00 
Roadside vendor permit ..... 100.00 
Temporary food permit ..... 75.00 
(b)  The fees charged annually for the issuance of a permit and inspections for the operation of any establishment described in subsection (a) of this section are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1971, § 14-30(1)a, (2); Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005) 
Secs. 18-88-18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS AND INSTITUTIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Hospitals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 222.001 et seq.; nursing and convalescent homes, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 242.001 et seq.; hotels and motels, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; boardinghouses and lodginghouses, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 341.066, 535.001 et seq.; hotel and boardinghouses, V.T.C.A., Occupation Code § 2155.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-116-18-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-141. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a lodging establishment or institution within the city or its police jurisdiction who does not possess a valid permit issued to him by the health inspector. Only a person who complies with the requirements of state law and this division shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Permits shall not be transferred from one person to another person or place. A valid permit shall be posted in every lodging establishment, hospital, convalescent home or nursing home. 
(Code 1971, § 14-30) 
Sec. 18-142. - Fees. 
(a)  Under this division, permit and inspection fees shall be required for convalescent or nursing homes, hospitals, hotels, motels, and bed and breakfasts. 
(b)  The fees charged annually for the issuance of a permit and inspections for the operation of any establishment described in subsection (a) of this section are as follows: 
Health care permit ..... $75.00 
Bed and breakfast permit ..... 50.00 
Daycare permit ..... 100.00 
Nursing home permit ..... 150.00 
Lodging permit ..... 150.00 
(Code 1971, § 14-30(1)a, (1)b, (2); Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005) 
Secs. 18-143-18-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Swimming pools, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 341.064, 343.011. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-171-18-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-196. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public or semipublic pool within the city or its police jurisdiction who does not possess a valid permit issued to him by the health inspector. Only a person who complies with the requirements of state law and this Code shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. Permits shall not be transferred from one person to another person or place. A valid permit shall be posted at every public or semipublic pool. 
(Code 1971, § 14-30) 
Sec. 18-197. - Fees. 
    The fees charged annually for the issuance of a permit and inspections for the operation of any public or semipublic pool is $100.00. 
(Code 1971, § 14-30(2); Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005) 
Secs. 18-198-18-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ITINERANT VENDORS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate hawkers and peddlers, art. II, § 22[12]. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license businesses and occupations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; pawnbrokers, V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.001 et seq.; location, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.0035. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-226. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms, and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined herein shall have the meaning assigned to them in the City of Nacogdoches Building and Zoning Codes and Ordinances. 
    Charitable purpose means any philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including but not limited to the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugees or disabled persons; for the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; for the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic organization; or the benefit or any educational institution. Solicitation of such funds is covered under chapter 26 of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
    Itinerant vendor means any person, as well as his/her agents and employees, who (i) while not engaged in interstate commerce, solicits, sells or offers for sale any goods, merchandise, or service, or (ii) exhibits goods or merchandise for sale or for the purpose of taking orders from the public for the sale thereof, by: 
(1)  The display, exhibit, sale or offer for sale of such goods or merchandise upon or from a truck or other vehicle on the city streets; or 
(2)  Going from house to house or from place to place in the city; or 
(3)  Remaining on any one property for a period less than one hour. 
    The definition of itinerant vendor does not include a mobile food unit as defined and regulated in Sections 18-57 through 18-61. 
    Open-air vendor means a person as well as his/her agents and employees who (i) solicits, sells or offers for sale any goods, merchandise, or service to the public, or (ii) exhibits goods or merchandise for sale or for the purpose of taking orders from the public for the sale thereof, and who: 
(1)  Does not solicit, sell or offer for sale goods, merchandise, or service or exhibit goods, or merchandise for sale or for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof; 
a.  From within a facility for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the chief building official of the city, or 
b.  On the same property where such person solicits, sells or offers for sale the same or similar goods, merchandise, or service from within a facility for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the chief building official of the city; and 
(2)  Remains on any one property for a period of one hour or more soliciting, selling or offering, or exhibiting for order or sale goods, merchandise or service. 
    Public place means any property open or devoted to public use. 
    Temporary means any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental, or lease of premises for at least one month in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
    Transient means such business of any such itinerant vendor as may be operated or conducted by a person or by his agents or employees, who resides away from the city or who has fixed places of business in places other than the city, or who has his headquarters in places other than the city, or who moves stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of one month. 
    Vendor means a person engaging in either itinerant or open air vending as those are defined in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 15-1; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 3, 7-18-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-227. - Article cumulative. 
    The provisions of this article are cumulative of all city ordinances. Tent permits, building permits, electrical permits, food establishment permits, alcoholic beverage license, and all other permits required by ordinance or other law for specific activities must be applied for separately in accordance with the applicable ordinance or law. 
(Code 1971, § 15-16; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-228. - Exemptions from coverage. 
    The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  An itinerant or open-air vendor who conducts activities on the property of another by express, prior invitation of the owner. The invitation shall be in written form and shall be carried on the vendor while engaging in business activities. The invitation exemption applies only to temporary vendors solicited to sell goods, services or products of the same type as businesses located on or within the same property for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days. 
(2)  A vendor who sells or exhibits for sale commodities, goods, merchandise or services on a wholesale basis to a person engaged in the business of buying, selling and dealing in the same within the city. 
(3)  Minors conducting charitable fund-raising activities, which represent a youth organization and comply with other ordinances regulating such activities. 
(4)  Solicitation of funds or contributions of any kind by any organization or association from its own members. 
(5)  Solicitations for a charitable purpose. Solicitations that are represented to be for charitable purposes but are in fact actual solicitations for goods and services for vendor profit (hidden sales) are nonexempt and will be considered unlawful conduct. 
(6)  Solicitation of funds or contributions of any kind by a person, when such solicitation occurs on premises owned or controlled by the person soliciting or with prior written permission of the person who owns or controls the premises. 
(7)  Vendors of homegrown farm produce, poultry, stock or other food or agricultural products in their natural state. 
(8)  Vendors of newspapers. 
(9)  Other solicitations as regulated by Ordinances 62-9-71, 340-12-78, and 736-2-88 [chapter 26]. 
(Code 1971, § 15-17; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 3, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 18-229. - Penalties and license forfeiture. 
    The violation of any provisions of this article shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. Any criminal violation of this article shall result in a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per offense. In the event of forfeiture of license, no refund will be given and no license shall be issued for the remaining period of the license year to the applicant or any individual listed on the registration statement. 
(Code 1971, § 15-18; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-230. - Inspections. 
    A representative of the city, including but not limited to the inspection services department and police department, shall have the authority to enforce this article as well as to inspect at a reasonable time, without advance notice, a business under a registration certificate to determine whether the permit holder's business is the same as that represented in the registration statement. 
(Code 1971, § 15-11; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-231. - Hours. 
    The hours of activity for vendors that fall under the guidelines of this article shall be 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1971, § 15-9; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-232. - Unlawful conduct. 
    Unlawful conduct may be grounds for revocation or denial of registration certificate and identification badge. It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to: 
(1)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor without a valid registration certificate. 
(2)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor without a valid identification badge. 
(3)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor without visibly displaying the issued identification badge. 
(4)  Alter or reproduce a registration certificate or identification badge issued by the city secretary or his/her designee. 
(5)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor within the city different than described in the registration statement without first obtaining a registration certificate authorizing such activity. 
(6)  Provide false, inaccurate or misleading information in the registration statement. 
(7)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor from a location within the city not listed in the registration statement. 
(8)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor with merchandise, goods, food, or services not listed and described in the registration statement. 
(9)  Sell, assign or transfer, or any attempt to do so, a registration certificate or identification badge. 
(10)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor on any public sidewalk, public street right-of-way, or other public property within the city, without written authorization from the city. 
(11)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(12)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor on a vacant lot or parking lot without written permission from the owner or authorized agent. 
(13)  Continue to conduct the business of an itinerant vendor after conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the city. 
(14)  Employ, contract or otherwise associate or enlist unregistered vendors as representatives. 
(15)  Unlawfully permit another to sell merchandise, goods, food, or services while displaying a registration certificate or identification badge issued to the original applicant. 
(16)  Fail to supply requested information regarding sales tax permit. 
(17)  Sell merchandise, goods or services subject to Texas Sales Tax without a valid state sales tax permit. 
(18)  Impede the free use of sidewalks and streets. All traffic and parking regulations shall be observed. 
(19)  Allow rubbish or litter to accumulate in or around the area of business of the itinerant vendor. 
(20)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor with persons in motor vehicles located on the public right-of-way. 
(21)  Conduct business of an itinerant vendor in such a way that restricts or interferes with business of abutting property owner; materially increases traffic congestion or delay; constitutes a hazard to traffic, life or property; is located in the sight triangle; or is an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police or sanitation vehicles. 
(22)  Conduct the business of an itinerant vendor without first complying with the laws of the State of Texas and all of the relevant city ordinances including but not limited to: Health inspection, building codes, fire inspection, restrictions on signs, restrictions on sale of fireworks, and inspection and testing of weighing and measuring devices. 
(23)  Fail to allow an inspection of an itinerant vendor business. If inspection is denied, then a citation, in accordance with applicable law, can be issued. 
(24)  Fail to maintain current and accurate information required on the registration statement or application on file with the city. 
(25)  Fail to perform an act required, or perform an act prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1971, § 15-12; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 3, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 18-233. - Use of public property restricted. 
    No open air or itinerant vendor shall: 
(1)  Have exclusive right to any location on public property or in the public streets or rights-of-way. 
(2)  Be permitted a stationary location on public property, public streets or rights-of-way. 
(3)  Be permitted to operate in any congested area where his/her operations cause harm to the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
(Code 1971, § 15-13; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
Sec. 18-234. - Distribution of certain samples. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, for advertising purposes, drugs, patent medicines, chemicals, washing powders, soaps and other cleansing articles or samples thereof unless such are delivered directly to an adult person. 
(b)  Satisfactory evidence showing possession of any of the articles mentioned in subsection (a) of this section by a child under 12 years of age, together with satisfactory evidence that any of such articles have been distributed, shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 3-3) 
Sec. 18-235. - Open air vendors-Unlawful conduct. 
    Open air vendors must not: 
(1)  Locate in an area where there is less than two all-weather, off-street parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of display area on the site; or 
(2)  Locate in such a manner that will impede or interrupt the normal ingress and egress of traffic from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-236. - Validity of open-air vendor license. 
    All open-air vendor licenses issued under this division shall be valid from the date shown thereon for a period of 15 consecutive calendar days, unless sooner revoked as provided in this article. An open-air vendor operating from any property for more than 15 consecutive days in any six-month period must provide a permanent structure equipped with adequate sanitary and hand-washing facilities and in compliance with all applicable codes. 
    A person may not engage in any activity of an open-air vendor described herein, from more than one property within the city limits within any six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Secs. 18-237-18-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE 

Sec. 18-261. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to employ or cause to engage in any vendor activity regulated by this division without first obtaining a registration certificate and an identification badge from the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity of an open-air vendor described herein without having applied for and obtained an open-air vendor license and identification badge issued by the city. 
(c)  No license shall be required of any person while such person is a registered participant in an official, city-sponsored event or approved festival. 
(Code 1971, § 15-2; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-262. - Registration statement. 
(a)  Any person desiring a registration certificate or open-air vendor license required by this article shall file a written registration statement with the city. The registration statement shall be completed, under oath, on a form provided by the city and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  Permanent address and telephone number (local if available also). 
(3)  Driver's license number and state of issuance. If driver's license is not available, other picture identification shall be provided. 
(4)  Name of individual, firm, company, organization or entity represented, if any, and the permanent address and telephone number (local if available also). 
(5)  The last four communities in which business was conducted. 
(6)  If represented by a corporation incorporated under the laws of a state other than Texas, the corporation shall provide a certified copy of its certificate of authority to do business in the State of Texas. 
(7)  Permanent home address (local if available), telephone number and driver's license number and state of issuance, for each individual listed on the registration statement. 
(8)  Each individual whose name is listed by the applicant shall present his/her driver's license or other identification in person to the city secretary his/her designee for verification of information. 
(9)  A recent 2x2 photograph of each individual listed on the registration statement. 
(10)  Description of the business and related activities to be conducted. 
(11)  Description of goods and/or services to be offered. 
(12)  Location from which business will be conducted. 
(13)  Each person listed on the registration statement shall verify under oath on the statement whether he/she has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(14)  Each person listed on the registration statement must verify under oath and explain the nature of each and every conviction, other than convictions for misdemeanor traffic law offenses, give the state where the conviction occurred and year of conviction. 
(15)  A certificate or letter from the company or organization for whom the applicant works, stating the applicant is an employee and or agent of the organization. 
(16)  A certified copy of the sales tax permit issued by the Texas State Comptroller. 
(b)  No open air vendor license required shall be issued by the city until the open air vendor makes the required registration statement in writing on forms to be furnished by the city. The required registration statement must be accompanied by all of the information described in subsection (a) of this section along with the following: 
(1)  Written documentation from the owner of the property upon which the open-air vendor proposes to locate any portion of his/her operation, including, but not limited to, the display areas and the parking areas. The written documentation must 
a.  Grant the vendor permission to locate on said property, 
b.  State the purpose thereof, the dates of permitted operation, hours of operation, and 
c.  State that the owner of the property on which the open air vendor is to be located remains in compliance with all applicable codes, including, but not limited to, building and zoning codes, despite the addition of the open air vendor. 
(2)  A site plan, which must 
a.  Include a description of the number of existing all-weather, off-street parking spaces and the number of remaining spaces available for parking if the open-air vendor operates on site; 
b.  If all-weather, off-street parking spaces are not located on the same property on which a person engages in any activity of an open air vendor, show where the off-street parking area is located, which property must be contiguous to the property, and within 200 feet of the vendor, on which a person engages in one or more activities of an open air vendor; 
c.  Include a statement indicating whether or not the applicant will be utilizing a temporary structure, including, but not limited to, sheds, canopies, tents, vehicles, trailers, etc., in soliciting, selling, or offering for sale any goods or merchandise; a brief description, including dimensions of any proposed structure; square feet of existing improvements and floor area; and its proposed location; 
d.  Show where the minimum sanitary and hand-washing facilities available to the employees and the public are located; 
e.  Include a traffic plan depicting the means of ingress and egress so that vehicles enter and exit the site in a forward motion and showing that no traffic will remain standing in a restricted area, i.e., fire lane, sight triangle; and 
f.  Indicate the hours of operation. 
(Code 1971, § 15-3; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 1739-7-17 , § 4, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 18-263. - Fee. 
    Every registration statement shall be accompanied by a registration fee according to the following schedule to compensate the city for the administrative costs of this article. 
(1)  Itinerant merchant license . Simultaneously with the filing of the application for an itinerant merchant license, the applicant shall file with the city a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $25.00. 
(2)  Open air vendor license . Simultaneously with the filing of the application for an open air vendor license, the applicant shall file with the city a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $100.00. 
(Code 1971, § 15-5; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-264. - Bond. 
    The applicant for a registration certificate required under this division shall furnish a bond, payable to the city, of not less than $1,000.00 as principal to pay for wrongful, fraudulent, or illegal conduct while engaging in itinerant vendor activities in the city. The bond must be signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state. If the applicant is a person engaging in any itinerant vendor activity through one or more agents or employees, such person shall be required to enter into only one bond in the sum of $1,000.00, which shall cover the activities of all his agents or employees. 
(Code 1971, § 15-8) 
Sec. 18-265. - Processing of application-Time for issuance. 
    Upon receipt of the registration statement and all required supporting documents, the application shall be processed as expeditiously as possible. In all cases the city shall attempt to process all applications within ten working days. 
(Code 1971, § 15-4; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-266. - Identification badges. 
    Appropriate identification badges shall be issued by the city to each individual listed in the application. The card shall also contain the disclaimer: THE CITY OF NACOGDOCHES, TEXAS DOES NOT ENDORSE THESE ACTIVITIES. 
    The city shall issue up to five identification badges per application. After five identification badges have been issued, each additional badge will be $25.00. 
    The holder shall display the identification badge so that it is in plain view. 
    The identification badge and registration certificate shall contain the number of the license, the date issued, the nature of business authorized, the place where business may be carried on, and the name of the person authorized to carry on the same. 
(Code 1971, § 15-6; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-267. - Term. 
    All registration certificates and identification badges expire December 31 of the year issued. 
(Code 1971, § 15-7; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-268. - Transferability. 
    The registration certificate and/or identification badge is not transferable. Revised registration statements shall be required for the addition of new vendors with the appropriate information provided for each individual. New identification badges will be required for each added individual. 
(Code 1971, § 15-10; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-269. - Denial or revocation of registration certificate. 
    Registration certificate or license may be denied or revoked if: 
(1)  Within the past year any violation relating to the business conducted under the registration certificate or license applied for, has been committed by any individual who would operate under the registration statement. 
(2)  False, inaccurate or misleading information is contained in the registration statement. 
(3)  The applicant fails to comply with the provisions contained in this article. 
(4)  Any material deviation from the approved site plan. 
(5)  Conducting a vending activity in such a manner to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(6)  Failure of the open air vendor or the owner of the property on which it operates to remain in compliance with all applicable codes, despite the addition of the open air vendor, i.e. to maintain required parking spaces with the additional parking required of the open air vendor and with the loss of spaces due to the location of the open air vendor or its facilities on the property. 
(Code 1971, § 15-14; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004) 
Sec. 18-270. - Appeal of denial or revocation. 
    Applicant may appeal any denial or revocation of a registration certificate or identification badge to the city council by submitting a letter to the city manager's office within 48 hours of receipt of notice of the action complained of. A hearing of the denial or revocation will be scheduled promptly at a regular city council meeting. The applicant may appear in person or by an authorized representative to contest the denial or revocation. The city council will render its decision at the meeting during which the appeal is considered. The decision made by the city council is final and conclusive and shall be considered an exhaustion of administrative remedies. 
(Code 1971, § 15-15; Ord. No. 1364-6-04, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 18-271-18-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - KENNELS AND PET SHOPS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 

Sec. 18-296. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Kennel means any place or premises wherein any person boards, breeds, buys, lets for hire, trains for a fee, trades or sells dogs or cats. This term shall not be construed to include an owner who sells a single dog or cat one year or older or an owner who sells a single litter of dogs or cats in any one calendar year which belongs to such owner as a private individual. 
    Pet shop means any establishment where dogs and cats are bought, sold or traded. The term includes all establishments selling dogs or cats exclusively or buying, selling or trading dogs or cats along with other animals or fowls. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-297. - Facilities generally. 
(a)  Structural strength. Housing facilities for dogs or cats in a pet shop or kennel shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, to contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals. 
(b)  Water and electrical power. Reliable and adequate electric power, if required to comply with other sections of this article, and adequate potable water shall be available. 
(c)  Storage. Supplies of food and bedding shall be stored in facilities which adequately protect such supplies against infestation or contamination by vermin. Refrigeration shall be provided for supplies of perishable food. 
(d)  Waste disposal. Provision shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals and debris. Disposal facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestation, odors and disease hazards. 
(e)  Washrooms and sinks. Facilities, such as washrooms, basins or sinks, shall be provided to maintain cleanliness among animal caretakers. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-2) 
Sec. 18-298. - Indoor facilities. 
(a)  Heating. Indoor housing facilities for dogs or cats in a kennel or pet shop shall be sufficiently heated when necessary to protect the dogs or cats from cold and to provide for their health and comfort. The ambient temperature shall not be allowed to fall below 50 degrees Fahrenheit for dogs and cats not acclimated to lower temperatures. 
(b)  Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities for dogs or cats shall be adequately ventilated to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Such facilities shall be provided with fresh air either by means of windows, doors, vents or air conditioning and shall be ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation. Auxiliary ventilation, such as exhaust fans and vents or air conditioning, shall be provided when the ambient temperature is 85 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. 
(c)  Lighting. Indoor housing facilities for dogs or cats shall have ample light, by natural or artificial means or both, of good quality and well distributed. Such lighting shall provide uniformly distributed illumination of sufficient light intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning during the entire working period. Primary enclosures shall be so placed as to protect the dogs or cats from excessive illumination. 
(d)  Interior surfaces. The interior building surfaces of indoor housing facilities shall be constructed and maintained so that they are substantially impervious to moisture and may be readily sanitized. 
(e)  Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water from indoor housing facilities. If drains are used, they shall be properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors therefrom. If closed drainage systems are used, they shall be equipped with traps and so installed as to prevent any backup of sewage onto the floor of the room. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-3) 
Sec. 18-299. - Outdoor facilities. 
(a)  Shelter from sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to all dogs and cats kept outdoors at a kennel or pet shop to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun. 
(b)  Shelter from rain or snow. Dogs and cats kept outdoors shall be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain or snow. 
(c)  Shelter from cold weather. Shelter shall be provided for all dogs and cats kept outdoors when the atmospheric temperature falls below 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Sufficient clean bedding material or other means of protection from the weather elements shall be provided when the ambient temperature falls below that temperature to which a dog or cat is acclimated. 
(d)  Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-4) 
Sec. 18-300. - Primary enclosures. 
    All primary enclosures for dogs and cats at a kennel or pet shop shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Requirements for primary enclosures for dogs and cats. Requirements for primary enclosures for dogs and cats shall be as follows: 
a.  Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the dogs and cats from injury, to contain them, and to keep predators out. 
b.  Primary enclosures shall be constructed and maintained as to enable the dogs and cats to remain dry and clean. 
c.  Primary enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so that the dogs and cats contained therein have convenient access to clean food and water as required in this article. 
d.  The floors of the primary enclosures shall be constructed so as to protect the dogs' and cats' feet and legs from injury. 
(2)  Additional requirements for primary enclosures housing cats. Additional requirements for primary enclosures housing cats shall be as follows: 
a.  In all enclosures having a solid floor, a receptacle containing sufficient clean litter shall be provided to contain excreta. 
b.  Each primary enclosure shall be provided with a solid resting surface which, in the aggregate, shall be of adequate size to comfortably hold all occupants of the primary enclosure at the same time. Such resting surface shall be elevated in a primary enclosure housing two or more cats. 
(3)  Space requirements. Space requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  Dogs and cats. Primary enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each dog and cat to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit and lie in a comfortable, normal position. 
b.  Dogs. Space requirements for dogs shall be as follows: 
1.  In addition to subsection (3)a of this section, each dog housed in any primary enclosure shall be provided a minimum square footage of floor space equal to the mathematical square of the sum of the length of the dog in inches, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, plus six inches, expressed in square feet. Not more than 12 adult nonconditioned dogs shall be housed in the same primary enclosure. 
2.  If doghouses with chains are used as primary enclosures for dogs kept outdoors, the chains used shall be so placed or attached that they cannot become entangled with the chains of other dogs or any other objects. Such chains shall be of a type commonly used for the size of the dog involved and shall be attached to the dog by means of a fitted collar. Such chains shall be at least three times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, and shall allow the dog convenient access to the doghouse. 
c.  Cats. In addition to subsection (3)a of this section, each adult cat shall be housed in a minimum of 21/2 square feet of floor space. Not more than 12 adult nonconditioned cats shall be housed in the same primary enclosure. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-5) 
Sec. 18-301. - Feeding. 
(a)  Dogs and cats at a kennel or pet shop shall be fed at least once each day except as otherwise might be required to provide adequate veterinary care. The food shall be free from contamination and shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the dog or cat. 
(b)  Food receptacles shall be accessible to all dogs or cats and shall be located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Feeding pans shall be durable and kept clean. The food receptacles shall be sanitized at least once every two weeks. Disposable food receptacles may be used for the feeding of dry food, and they shall be sanitized regularly to prevent molding, deterioration or caking of feed. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-6) 
Sec. 18-302. - Watering. 
    If potable water is not accessible to the dogs and cats at all times at a kennel or pet shop, potable liquids shall be offered to such animals at least twice daily for periods of not less than one hour, except as might otherwise be required to provide adequate veterinary care. Watering receptacles shall be kept clean and shall be sanitized at least once every two weeks. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-7) 
Sec. 18-303. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Cleaning of primary enclosures. Excreta shall be removed from primary enclosures at a kennel or pet shop as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the dogs or cats contained therein and to reduce disease hazards and odors. When a hosing or flushing method is used for cleaning a primary enclosure commonly known as a cage, any dog contained therein shall be removed from such enclosure during the cleaning process, and adequate measures shall be taken to protect the animals in other such enclosures from being contaminated with water and other wastes. 
(b)  Sanitation of primary enclosures. Sanitation of primary enclosures shall be as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the introduction of nonconditioned dogs or cats into empty primary enclosures previously occupied, such enclosures shall be sanitized in the manner provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Primary enclosures for dogs or cats shall be sanitized often enough to prevent an accumulation of debris or excreta or a disease hazard; provided, however, that such enclosures shall be sanitized at least once every two weeks in the manner provided in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(3)  Cages, rooms and hard-surfaced pens or runs shall be sanitized by washing them with hot water 180 degrees Fahrenheit and soap or detergent, as in a mechanical cage washer, or by washing all soiled surfaces with a detergent solution followed by a safe and effective disinfectant or by cleaning all soiled surfaces with live steam. Pens or runs using gravel, sand or dirt shall be sanitized by removing the soiled gravel, sand or dirt and replacing it as necessary. 
(c)  Housekeeping. Premises, including building and grounds, shall be kept clean and in good repair in order to protect the animals from injury and to facilitate the prescribed husbandry practices set forth in this article. Premises shall remain free from accumulations of trash. 
(d)  Pest control. An effective program for the control of insects, ectoparasites, and avian and mammalian pests shall be established and maintained. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-8) 
Sec. 18-304. - Employees. 
    A sufficient number of employees at a kennel or pet shop shall be utilized to maintain the prescribed level of husbandry practices set forth in this article. Such practices shall be under the supervision of an animal caretaker who has a background in animal husbandry or care. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-9) 
Sec. 18-305. - Classification and separation. 
    Animals housed in the same primary enclosure at a kennel or pet shop shall be maintained in compatible groups, with the following additional restrictions: 
(1)  Females in season (estrus) shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes. 
(2)  Any dog or cat exhibiting a vicious disposition shall be housed individually in a primary enclosure. 
(3)  Puppies or kittens shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with adult dogs or cats other than their dams, except when permanently maintained in breeding colonies. 
(4)  Dogs shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with cats, nor shall dogs or cats be housed in the same primary enclosure with any other species of animals. 
(5)  Dogs or cats under quarantine or treatment for a communicable disease shall be separated from other dogs or cats and other susceptible species of animals in such a manner as to minimize dissemination of such disease. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-10) 
Sec. 18-306. - Veterinary care. 
(a)  Programs of disease control and prevention, euthanasia, and adequate veterinary care shall be established and maintained at a kennel or pet shop under the supervision and assistance of a doctor of veterinary medicine. 
(b)  Each dog and cat shall be observed daily by the animal caretaker in charge or by someone under his direct supervision. Sick or diseased, injured, lame or blind dogs or cats shall be provided with veterinary care or humanely disposed of, unless such action is inconsistent with the research purposes for which such animal was obtained and is being held; provided, however, that this subsection shall not affect compliance with any state or local law requiring the holding, for a specified period, of animals suspected of being diseased. 
(c)  Research facilities shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The program of adequate veterinary care at a research facility shall include the appropriate use of anesthetic, analgesic or tranquilizing drugs, when such use would be proper in the opinion of the attending veterinarian at the research facility. The use of these three classes of drugs shall be in accordance with the currently accepted veterinary medical practice as cited in appropriate professional journals or reference guides which shall produce in the individual subject animal a high level of tranquilization, anesthesia or analgesia consistent with the protocol or design of the experiment. 
(2)  It shall be incumbent upon each research facility, through its animal care committee and/or attending veterinarian, to provide guidelines and consultation to research personnel with respect to the type and amount of tranquilizers, anesthetics or analgesics recommended as being appropriate for each species of animal used by that institution. 
(3)  The use of these three classes of drugs shall effectively minimize the pain and discomfort of the animals while under experimentation. 
(Code 1971, § 161/2-11) 
Secs. 18-307-18-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Massage therapy, V.T.C.A., Occupation Code § 455.001 et seq.; limitation on local regulation of massage therapists, V.T.C.A., Occupation Code § 455.005. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city. 
    Health inspector means the health inspector of the city. 
    Massage means the rubbing, kneading, tapping, compression, vibration, application of friction, or percussion of the human body or parts of it by hand or with an instrument or apparatus. 
    Massage establishment means a business establishment where massagers practice massage. 
    Massager means an individual who administers massages for compensation. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-337. - Penalty; defense. 
(a)  A person who violates any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the actor was a licensed physical therapist, a licensed athletic trainer, a licensed cosmetologist, or a licensed barber, performing functions authorized under the license held, or that the actor was a licensed physician or chiropractor or an individual working under the direct supervision of a licensed physician or chiropractor while engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the administration of massage was for recognized therapeutic purposes in a hospital, nursing home, or a similar health care facility. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-16) 
Sec. 18-338. - Inspection of licensed premises. 
(a)  Acceptance of a license issued under this article shall constitute an express agreement and consent on the part of the licensee that the chief of police or the health inspector shall at all times have the right and privilege of freely entering upon licensed premises for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this article. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty authorized by section 18-337, refusing, preventing or impeding any such inspection shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-11) 
Sec. 18-339. - List of employees. 
    The manager or person in charge of a massage establishment shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all employees, both on duty and off duty, and such list shall be shown to any peace officer upon request. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-12) 
Sec. 18-340. - Hours of operation. 
    No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-9) 
Sec. 18-341. - Living and sleeping quarters prohibited. 
    No massage establishment shall be operated or conducted in connection, either directly or indirectly, with any place used for living or sleeping quarters. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-10) 
Sec. 18-342. - Sanitary requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the massage establishment at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic, and bathing devices or parts thereof that come in contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization before initial use, and any such instruments and devices or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron, shall be sterilized before being used upon another. All towels and linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be furnished for the use of another, until thoroughly laundered. 
(b)  All massagers shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering massage manipulations to each patron accommodated. 
(c)  No person suffering from a communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. 
(d)  No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when, to the knowledge of the owner, person in control, or an employee, such person is suffering from a communicable disease. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-13) 
Sec. 18-343. - Clothing. 
    Massagers and other persons employed by or working in a massage establishment shall, at all times when in the massage establishment, wear clothing which cannot be seen through and which covers the torso and extends at least to the knee. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-15) 
Secs. 18-344-18-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-371. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without first having obtained a license from the city permit office in accordance with this article. It is unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment after such license has been revoked or during a period for which such license has been suspended. Such license shall be issued only upon the payment of the fee specified in this division and upon the approval in writing of the city health inspector. Such license shall expire on December 31 each year. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-2) 
Sec. 18-372. - Investigation of applicant. 
    After an application has been made for issuance of an original license or a renewal of an existing license to operate a massage establishment, the chief of police shall determine whether the applicant has been finally convicted in any court of theft, fornication, sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy house, keeping an assignation house, engaging in prostitution or engaging in assignation, or any offense denounced by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.01 et seq. or whether such establishment employs any person who has been finally convicted in any court of any such offense and shall advise the city permit office. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-4) 
Sec. 18-373. - Names and medical certificates of employees. 
    At the time of making application for the license required by this division, the applicant shall furnish to the city permit office the names and addresses of all employees of the massage establishment, and every such employee shall be required to secure from the health inspector a medical certificate certifying that such employee has been examined and that such examination discloses the fact that such person employed or to be employed by the establishment is free from any infectious or communicable disease. The medical certificate shall be renewed annually by the health inspector. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-5) 
Sec. 18-374. - Fee. 
    The annual license fee for each massage establishment shall be on file in the city secretary's office. If the license is obtained between January 1 and June 30 of any year, the full amount of the fee shall be paid. If the license is obtained between July 1 and December 31 of any year, the fee shall be one-half of such amount. No refund of license fees shall be made. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-6) 
Sec. 18-375. - Refusal to issue or renew. 
    The city permit office shall refuse to issue or renew any license required by this division to any applicant who has been finally convicted of any of the offenses set out in section 18-372 or to any applicant who employs in such establishment any person who has been finally convicted of any such offense. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-7) 
Sec. 18-376. - Display. 
    The license issued under this division shall be posted and kept in some conspicuous place in the massage establishment. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-3) 
Sec. 18-377. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The license issued pursuant to this division shall be revoked upon final conviction of the holder of such license for any of the offenses set out in section 18-372. 
(b)  The license issued pursuant to this division shall be suspended for a period of not less than 30 days and not more than 90 days upon final conviction in any court of the holder of such license for a violation of any penal statute of this state. 
(c)  Any license issued pursuant to this division shall be suspended for a period of 90 days upon the final conviction in any court of any employee of such massage establishment for any offense set out in section 18-372 or a violation of any section of this article. 
(d)  Written notice of such revocation or suspension shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of such license at the holder's last known business address. 
(Code 1971, § 171/2-8) 
Secs. 18-378-18-405. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-406. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, video discs or reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video discs or videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers, as its principal business, accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video discs or videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Building official means the chief building official of the city or his designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person or who agrees or offers to privately perform seminude modeling or a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for fee, tip or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business. 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business. 
(3)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any other form of consideration. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, an anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, an anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola of the female breast. 
    Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family or manufactured home zoning district as defined in the zoning ordinance in chapter 118. 
    Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple-family, or manufactured home park, manufactured home subdivision and campground use as defined in the zoning ordinance in chapter 118. 
    Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region or areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the employees of the establishment is in a state of nudity or is seminude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in the definitions of the terms "adult arcade," "adult bookstore or adult video store" and "adult cabaret" in this section. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent as the floor area exists on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-407. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city's citizens and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations. These regulations prevent concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city and prevent the establishment of these types of businesses near sensitive areas. This article has neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  The city council finds that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. Numerous studies, reports and findings concerning the harmful effects of sexually oriented businesses on surrounding land uses and neighborhoods have been produced. 
(c)  It is the intent of the city council that the regulations are promulgated pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-1; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 18-408. - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-3) 
Sec. 18-409. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A conviction for violating section 18-411 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(b)  A conviction for violating a section of this article other than section 18-411 is punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state, a college, a junior college, or a university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution that each such item of descriptive, printed film or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(e)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or otherwise violates this section is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-20) 
Sec. 18-410. - Amendments. 
    Section 18-411 may be amended only after compliance with the procedure required to amend a zoning ordinance. Other sections of this article may be amended by vote of the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-21; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 18-411. - Location restrictions. 
    The location of sexually oriented businesses is allowed in the industrial zoning districts, subject to the distance requirements of sections 118-353 through 118-357 and the licensing requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-13(a)) 
Sec. 18-412. - Additional requirements for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-14) 
Sec. 18-413. - Additional requirements for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-15) 
Sec. 18-414. - Additional requirements for adult theaters and motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view of persons of the opposite sex. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager, operator, assistant manager, assistant operator, ticket seller, ticket taker, usher or any other person connected with or employed by any motion picture theater or drive-in motion picture theater to show or exhibit at a motion picture theater or drive-in motion picture theater in the city or to aid or assist in such showing or exhibition any motion picture, film, slide or other exhibit which is visible from any public street or highway in which the pubic area, bare buttocks or bare female breasts of the human body are shown. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-16) 
Sec. 18-415. - Additional requirements for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel, as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. The term "rent" or subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-17) 
Sec. 18-416. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of the floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior or the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The building official may waive the diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the building official. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owner and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owner and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agent and employee present in the premises to ensure that the viewing area remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this subsection. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owner and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agent and employee present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises a film, video disc or videocassette, or other video reproduction, which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more projection stations and the location of all projection screens and sound fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various dimensions of all areas of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The building official may waive the diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a projection station or projection screen may be made without the prior approval of the building official. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owner and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each projection station at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(5)  The exterior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that screens are not visible from any public thoroughfare or from adjacent property. Additional screening may be required if deemed necessary by the building official. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owner and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agent and employee present in the premises to ensure that the viewing and lobby areas remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  A person having a duty set out in this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-18) 
Sec. 18-417. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or video disc or videocassette, the cover or which depicts in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-19) 
State Law reference- Display of sexually explicit material to minors, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.24. 
Sec. 18-418. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant for a license required under this article or a licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, building inspection department, and planning department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-7) 
Secs. 18-419-18-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-446. - Required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the building official. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 118-416 pertaining to films and videos shall submit a diagram meeting those requirements. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to this article, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20-percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 118-448, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-4) 
Sec. 18-447. - Fees. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-6) 
Sec. 18-448. - Issuance. 
    The building official shall approve the issuance of a sexually oriented business license by the assessor and to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a section of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. 
(5)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or is residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, planning and zoning department and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this division has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(9)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any section of this article. 
(10)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
1.  Prostitution; 
2.  Promotion of prostitution; 
3.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
4.  Compelling prostitution; 
5.  Obscene display or distribution; 
6.  Obscenity; 
7.  Employment harmful of a minor; 
8.  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
9.  Sexual performance by a child; 
10.  Possession of child pornography; 
b.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
1.  Public lewdness; 
2.  Indecent exposure; 
3.  Indecency with a child; 
4.  Sexual exploitation by a mental health service provider; 
c.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
d.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
e.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the offenses described in this subsection for which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(11)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required in this section has elapsed. 
(12)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-5) 
Sec. 18-449. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each license issued pursuant to this division shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-446. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the building official denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the building official finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-8) 
Sec. 18-450. - Suspension. 
    The building official shall suspend a license issued pursuant to this division for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article. 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-9) 
Sec. 18-451. - Revocation. 
(a)  The building official shall revoke a license issued pursuant to this division if a cause of suspension as set out in section 18-450 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The building official shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material required during the application process. 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances in the premises. 
(3)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in this division for which the time period required has not elapsed. 
(5)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in this division, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the offense was committed. 
(6)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01. This does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(7)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  When the building official revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the building official finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have lapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under section 118-448, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under that section has elapsed. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-10) 
Sec. 18-452. - Appeal. 
    If the building official denies the issuance of a license pursuant to this division or suspends or revokes a license, he shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the building official to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the building official in suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a final decision. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-11; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 18-453. - Transferability. 
    A person issued a license under this division shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1971, § 241/4-12) 
Secs. 18-454-18-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ALARM SYSTEMS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1276-2-02, §§ 1-14, adopted Feb. 19, 2002 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as Art. X, §§ 18-481-18-496 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18-481. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
    This article governs alarm systems intended to summon law enforcement and/or fire response, and requires registration, establishes fees, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension of police response or revocation of registration. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 1, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-482. - Definitions. 
    In this article the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the chief of police to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
    Alarm installation company means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. 
    Alarm dispatch request means a notification to a law enforcement or fire agency that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
    Alarm registration (or permits ) means authorization granted by the alarm administrator to an alarm user to operate an alarm system. 
    Alarm site means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
    Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon law enforcement or fire response, including local alarm systems. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site. 
    Alarm user means any person, who (which) has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service from an alarm installation company or monitoring company for an alarm system, or who (which) owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under contract. 
    Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
    Arming station means a device that allows control of an alarm system. 
    Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to a law enforcement, public safety or emergency services agency requesting dispatch. 
    Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when a monitoring company (designated by the alarm user) for the alarm site notifies the responding agency that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring law enforcement or fire department response after an alarm dispatch request. 
    Conversion means the transaction or process by which one alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing and/or monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system previously serviced and/or monitored by another alarm company. 
    Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement response. 
    False alarm means an alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement agency or fire department, when the responding law enforcement officer or fire personnel finds no evidence of fire, or smoke, a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site. 
    Fire alarm means any audible and or monitored alarm signal that requires a response by fire personnel in the event of detected fire, smoke and/or heat. 
    Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
    Law enforcement authority means the chief of police or other designated representative of the Nacogdoches Police Department. 
    Local alarm system means any alarm system, which is not monitored, that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site. 
    Monitoring means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for the purpose of summoning law enforcement to the alarm site. 
    Monitoring company means a person in the business of providing monitoring services. 
    One plus duress alarm means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering at an arming station a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235) 
    Panic alarm means an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
    Responder means an individual capable of reaching the alarm site within 30 minutes and having access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system. 
    SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the ANSI-American National Standard Institute approved Security Industry Association-SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for false alarm Reduction". 
    Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
    Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by telephonic or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. 
    Zones means division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 2, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-483. - Registration required; application; fee; transferability; false statements. 
(a)  No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system, existing or new installation at its alarm site without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is required for each alarm site. 
(b)  The fee for an alarm registration or an alarm registration renewal is set forth below and shall be paid by the alarm user. No refund of a registration or registration renewal fee will be made. The initial alarm registration fee must be submitted to the alarm administrator within five days after the alarm system installation or alarm system takeover. All existing alarm systems must be permitted within 90 days of the effective date [March 18, 2002] of this article. 
(1)  Registration fees-$30.00. The registration fee will be waived for all alarm users that register their alarm system or systems within 90 days of the effective date [March 18, 2002]. The first registration fee of residential alarm users of the age of 65 years or older will be waived. 
(2)  Renewal fees-$30.00 if the alarm user fails to renew on or prior to expiration date or if the alarm user has been cited of a violation and fined in the previous year. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant unless the applicant has: 
(1)  Failed to pay a fine assessed under section 18-489; or 
(2)  Had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
(d)  Each alarm registration application must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete address (including apt/suite number), and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential (includes apartment, condo, mobile home, etc.) or commercial; 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system (i.e. burglary, holdup, duress, panic alarms or other) and for each classification whether such alarm is audible or silent; 
(4)  Mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site; 
(5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site; 
(6)  Names and telephone numbers of at least three individuals who are able and have agreed to: (a) receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time; (b) respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes at any time; and (c) upon request can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if necessary; 
(7)  Type of business conducted at a commercial alarm site; 
(8)  Signed certification from the alarm user stating the following: 
a.  The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the alarm system, whichever is applicable; 
b.  The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm installation company or companies performing the alarm system installation, conversion or takeover and of the alarm installation company responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system; 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the monitoring company if different from the alarm installation company; 
d.  That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, have been left with the applicant by the alarm installation company; and 
e.  That the alarm installation company has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms. 
(9)  That law enforcement response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. 
(e)  Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration. 
(f)  An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any of the information listed on the alarm registration application within five business days of such change. 
(g)  All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before an alarm registration may be issued or renewed. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 3, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-484. - Alarm registration duration and renewal. 
    An alarm registration shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application on or prior to the expiration date. Any user that has been charged with any violation and fined during the proceeding year will be required to submit a $30.00 reinstatement fee. All applications for renewal submitted after the expiration date will require a $30.00 reinstatement fee It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew within ten days of expiration will be classified as use of a nonregistered alarm system and citations and penalties shall be assessed without waiver. A $20.00 late fee may be assessed if the renewal is more than 30 days late. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 3.1, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-485. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  An alarm user shall: 
(1)  Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms; 
(2)  Make every reasonable effort to have a responder to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes when requested by the law enforcement agency in order to: 
a.  Deactivate an alarm system; 
b.  Provide access to the alarm site; and/or 
c.  Provide alternative security for the alarm site. 
(3)  Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(b)  An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated. 
(c)  An alarm user shall have a licensed alarm installation company inspect the alarm system after two false alarms in a one-year period. The alarm administrator may waive a required inspection if it determines that a false alarm(s) could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system. After four false alarms within a one-year period, the alarm user must have a licensed alarm installation company modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate. [See Appendix A for Installers False Alarm Prevention Checklist] 
(d)  An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers. 
(e)  An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
(f)  All alarm users shall agree with their alarm installation company and/or monitoring company to go through an "acclimation period" for the first seven days after installation of an alarm system during which time the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company will have no obligation to and will not respond to any alarm Signal from the alarm site and will not make an alarm dispatch request to law enforcement, even if the alarm signal is the result of an actual alarm event. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 4, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-486. - Duties of alarm installation company and monitoring company. 
(a)  The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of their alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and to avoid false alarms. 
(b)  Upon the effective date [March 18, 2002] of this article, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress alarms prior to enactment of this ordinance. However, upon the effective date [March 18, 2002] of this article, when a takeover or conversion occurs or if an alarm user requests an alarm system inspection or modification pursuant to subsection 18-485(c) of this article, an alarm installation company must remove the one plus duress alarm capability from such alarm systems. 
(c)  Upon the effective date [March 18, 2002] of this article, alarm installation companies shall not install a device to activate a holdup alarm, which is a single action, nonrecessed button. 
(d)  Ninety days after enactment of this article, and conditioned upon reasonable availability, the alarm installation companies shall, on new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. Fire alarms shall meet NFPA standards. 
(e)  An alarm company shall not use automatic voice dialers. 
(f)  After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an alarm installation company employee shall review with the alarm user the customer false alarm prevention checklist (Appendix B) or an equivalent checklist approved by the alarm administrator. 
(g)  The monitoring company shall not make an alarm dispatch request of a law enforcement agency in response to a burglar alarm signal, excluding panic, duress and holdup signals, during the first seven days following an alarm system installation. The alarm administrator may grant an alarm user's request for an exemption from this waiting period based upon a determination that special circumstances substantiate the need for the exemption. 
(h)  A monitoring company shall: 
(1)  Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator; 
(2)  Verify every alarm signal, except a duress, fire or holdup alarm activation before requesting a law enforcement or fire response to an alarm system signal; 
(3)  Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the city in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; 
(4)  Communicate cancellations to the city in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; 
(5)  Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the duress, holdup or panic alarm; 
(6)  Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back, floor, etc.) about the location on all alarm signals related to the alarm dispatch request; 
(7)  Communicate type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter); 
(8)  Provide an alarm user registration number when requesting law enforcement and/or fire dispatch; 
(9)  After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the law enforcement agency if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or the responder is on the way to the alarm site; 
(10)  Attempt to contact the alarm user or responder within 24 hours via mail, fax, telephone or other electronic means when an alarm dispatch request is made; and 
(11)  Upon the effective date [March 18, 2002] of this article, monitoring companies must maintain for a period of at least one year from the date of the alarm dispatch request, records relating to alarm dispatch requests. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s) activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of an attempt to verify. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for individually named alarm users. If the request is made within 60 days of an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three business days of receiving the request. If the records are requested between 60 days to one year after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within 30 days of receiving the request. 
(i)  An alarm installation company and/or monitoring company that purchases alarm system accounts from another person shall notify the alarm administrator of such purchase and provide details as may be reasonably requested by the alarm administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 5, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-487. - License or licensing. 
    All alarm installation companies and monitoring companies working with security related alarms systems shall maintain a license by the Texas Commission on Private Security. All alarm installation companies working with fire related alarm shall maintain a license by the Texas State Fire Marshall. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 5.1, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-488. - Duties and authority of the alarm administrator. 
(a)  The alarm administrator shall: 
(1)  Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; and 
(2)  Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. 
(b)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record such information on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the information listed below. 
(1)  Identification of the registration number for the alarm site; 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site; 
(3)  Date and time alarm dispatch request was received, including the name of the monitoring company and the monitoring operator name or number; 
(4)  Date and time of law enforcement officer arrival at the alarm site; 
(5)  Zone and zone description, if available; 
(6)  Weather conditions; 
(7)  Name of alarm user's representative at alarm site, if any; 
(8)  Identification of the responsible alarm installation company or monitoring company; 
(9)  Whether law enforcement officer was unable to locate the address of the alarm site; and 
(10)  Cause of alarm signal, if known. 
(c)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the notification to the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of law enforcement response to the false alarm; 
(2)  The identification number of the responding law enforcement officer; and 
(3)  A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and resulting fines. 
(d)  The alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company responsible for the repair or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. 
(e)  The alarm administrator may create and implement an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid generating false alarms. 
(f)  The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a holdup alarm that is a single action, nonrecessed button, if a false holdup alarm has occurred. 
(g)  The alarm administrator will make a copy of this article and/or an ordinance summary sheet available to the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 6, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-489. - Fines. 
(a)  An alarm user shall be subject to fines, depending on the number of false alarms within a 12-month period based upon the following schedule: 
(1)  False alarm fines 
Number of false burglary or intrusion alarms ..... Fines 
1-5 ..... $0.00 
6 ..... 50.00 
7 and after ..... 50.00 ; 
Number of false panic, duress, robbery, or fire alarms ..... Fines 
1-2 ..... $0.00 
3 ..... 100.00 
4 and after ..... 100.00 
(b)  In addition, any person operating a nonregistered alarm system will be subject to a fine of $50.00 for each false alarm in addition to any other fines. The alarm administrator may waive this additional fine for a nonregistered system if the alarm user submits an application for alarm registration within ten days after of notification of such violation. 
(c)  An alarm user may have the option of attending an alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying one prescribed fine. 
(d)  If cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of fines, and no fines will be assessed. 
(e)  Notice of the right of appeal under this article will be included with any fines. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 7, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-490. - Notification. 
    The alarm administrator or the responding officer shall notify the alarm user in writing after each false alarm. The notification shall include: the amount of the fine for the false alarm, notice as to whether the alarm user is eligible to attend an alarm user awareness class to waive a fine if a fine is issued, the fact that response will be suspended after the seventh false alarm if the alarm user permit is suspended, excluding fire, duress, holdup and panic alarms, and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user. 
    The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company in writing after alarm response has been suspended, except to duress, holdup and panic alarms. This notice of suspension will also include the amount of the fine for each false alarm and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 8, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-491. - Suspension of response. 
(a)  The alarm administrator may suspend law enforcement response to an alarm site by revoking the alarm registration if it is determined that: 
(1)  The alarm user has seven or more false alarms in a 12-month period excluding duress, holdup or panic alarms; 
(2)  There is a statement of a material fact known to be false in the application for a registration; 
(3)  The alarm user has failed to make timely payment of a fine assessed under section 18-489 or fee assessed under section 18-483; or 
(4)  The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an alarm installation company, that complies with the requirements of this article, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) and/or additional training has been conducted by the alarm installation company. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he/she operates an alarm system during the period in which his alarm registration is revoked and is subject to enforcement and penalties set in sections 18-489 and 18-494. A monitoring company commits an offense if it continues alarm dispatch requests to an alarm site after notification by the alarm administrator that the registration has been revoked and may be subject to enforcement and penalties set forth in section 18-494. 
(c)  Unless there is separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the law enforcement authority will refuse law enforcement response to an alarm dispatch request at an alarm site for which the alarm registration is revoked. 
(d)  If the alarm registration is reinstated pursuant to section 18-493, the alarm administrator may again suspend law enforcement response to the alarm site by again revoking the alarm registration if it is determined that two false alarms have occurred within 30 days after the reinstatement date. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 9, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-492. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the alarm administrator assesses a fine or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm registration, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal to either the affected applicant or alarm user and the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company. 
(b)  The alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may appeal an assessment of a fine or the revocation of an alarm registration to the alarm administrator by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal within 15 business days after receipt of the fine or notice of revocation. 
(c)  The alarm user or the alarm installation company or monitoring company may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator to the chief of police as follows: 
(1)  The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or the monitoring company may file a written request for a review by paying an appeal fee of one half of the required fine and setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 20 business days after the date of notification of the decision from the alarm administrator. Appeal fees will be returned to the appealing alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company if the appeal is upheld. 
(2)  The chief of police shall conduct a formal hearing within 30 days of the receipt of the request and consider the evidence by any interested person(s). The chief of police shall make its decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing. The chief of police must render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The chief of police shall affirm or reverse the decision of the alarm administrator. 
(d)  Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator revoking an alarm registration or requiring payment of a fine, until the chief of police has completed its review. If a request for appeal is not made within the 20-business day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. 
(e)  Alarm administrator or chief of police may adjust the count of false alarms based on: 
(1)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of God; 
(2)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone company; 
(3)  Evidence that a power outage lasting longer than four hours caused a false alarm; 
(4)  Evidence that the alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; 
(5)  Evidence that the law enforcement officer response was not completed in a timely fashion; and/or 
(6)  In determining the number of false alarms, multiple alarms occurring in any 24-hour period shall be counted as one false alarm; to allow the alarm user time to take corrective action unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user. 
(f)  With respect to fines of an alarm installation company or monitoring company the alarm administrator or law enforcement authority may take into consideration whether the alarm company had engaged in a consistent pattern of violations. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 10, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-493. - Reinstatement. 
(a)  A person whose alarm registration has been revoked may, at the discretion of the alarm administrator or the chief of police, have the alarm registration reinstated by the alarm administrator or the chief of police if the person: 
(1)  Submits a new application and pays a $30.00 reinstatement fee; 
(2)  Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding citations and fines; and 
(3)  Submits a certification from an alarm installation company, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company; 
(b)  In addition, the alarm administrator may require one or more of the following as a condition to reinstatement: 
(1)  Proof that an employee of the alarm installation company or monitoring company caused the false alarm; 
(2)  A certificate showing that the alarm user has successfully completed the alarm user awareness class as provided under subsection 18-488(e); 
(3)  Upgrade the alarm control panel to meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01; 
(4)  A written statement from an independent inspector designated by the chief of police that the alarm system has been inspected and is in good working order; 
(5)  Confirmation that all motion detectors are "dual technology" type; 
(6)  Confirmation that the alarm system requires two independent zones to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring company; 
(7)  Confirmation that the alarm system requires two independent detectors to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the monitoring company; 
(8)  Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by a listen-in device; 
(9)  Certification that the monitoring company will not request an alarm dispatch unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by a camera device; or 
(10)  Certification that the monitoring company will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for law enforcement is confirmed by a person at the alarm site. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 11, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-494. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Enforcement of this article may be by civil action as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 12, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-495. - Confidentiality. 
    In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications and applications for appeals shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city and by any third-party administrator or employees of a third-party administrator with access to such information. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 13, 2-19-2002) 
Sec. 18-496. - Government immunity. 
    Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that law enforcement response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 1276-2-02, § 14, 2-19-2002) 
Appendix A: 
INSTALLER FALSE ALARM PREVENTION PROGRAM CHECKLIST 
Yes No __________1. If a duress feature was installed, I thoroughly explained it and I did not program the system so that the duress code is only one digit different than the normal code. __________2. I checked that the control panel has been programmed so that: __________a. it will not transmit more than one (1) alarm signal from the same zone until manually restored at the premises; __________b. it will delay at least fifteen seconds before initiating dialing on intrusion alarm signals; __________c. it has adequate delay time on entry/exit doors (delay of 45 seconds or more is recommended); and __________d. a cancel code can be entered by the customer to cancel accidental alarms. __________3. I checked that police and fire panic buttons cause a siren or speaker to sound and that medical panic buttons cause an audible signal. __________4. I checked that the arming station(s) emit sound to inform occupants when an entry/exit door sensor has been triggered. __________5. I installed and tested standby/backup power. __________6. I reviewed the "Customer false alarm Prevention Checklist" with the customer. __________7. I determined whether the customer had special telephone features, such as call waiting or DSL, and took appropriate steps to allow proper control panel dialing and monitoring center verification. (Such as *70 for call waiting, etc.) __________8. I checked the control panel was properly grounded to the manufacturer's specifications. __________9. I checked that all door and window contacts were properly selected, installed and tested. I considered loose fitting doors and windows, whether wide gap contacts were needed, and steel doors and windows. I followed the manufacturer's installation instructions. __________10. I checked all glass breakage sensors were properly selected, installed and tested. I gave consideration to pets, on-site noises and the general environment. I followed the manufacturer's installation instructions. __________11. All motion type detectors were properly selected, properly installed and tested. I gave consideration to pets, sunlight, other heat sources, and harsh environments. I followed the manufacturer's installation instructions.  
Please explain if you answered "No" to any of the above items: _____ 
_____
_____ 
      Installation Technician          Printed Name   
       Signature/Date   Appendix B: 
CUSTOMER FALSE ALARM PREVENTION CHECKLIST 
Yes No __________1. I have been made aware of the applicable alarm ordinance and I will comply with its requirements __________2. I understand it is my responsibility to prevent false alarms, and I understand it is critical and my responsibility to assure that all users of the system (such as residents, employees, guests, cleaning people, and repair people) are trained on the proper use of the system. __________3. I understand that there is a 7-day no dispatch period for intrusion alarms during which time the alarm company will have no obligation to and will not respond to any alarm signal from an alarm site and will not make an alarm dispatch request to law enforcement, even if the alarm signal is the result of an actual alarm event. __________4. I have been trained in the proper operation of the system and have been given an operating sheet summarizing the proper use of the system, as well as the security system operating manual. __________5. I know how to turn off motion detectors while leaving other sensors on. (Residential Only) __________6. I know how to test the system, including the communication link with the monitoring center. __________7. I understand that my entry time is ________ and my exit time is ________. __________8. I have the alarm company phone number to request repair service or to ask questions about the alarm system. __________9. I know how to cancel an accidental alarm activation and have the system cancellation code or code word. __________10. I understand that indoor pets can cause false alarms and I will contact my alarm company to adjust the system if I acquire any additional indoor pets. __________11. I understand that the main control panel and transformer are located in ___________. __________12. I have received an alarm sheet, which describes how the alarm company will communicate with me in the event of various alarm signals. __________13. I understand the importance of:  keeping my emergency contact information updated and I know how to do this;  immediately advising the alarm company if my phone number changes (including area code changes); and  immediately advising the alarm company of any other changes to my telephone service such as call waiting or a fax line. __________14. I will advise the alarm company if I do any remodeling (such as painting, moving walls, doors or windows). __________15. I understand that certain building defects (such as loose fitting doors or windows, rodents, inadequate power, and roof leaks) can cause false alarms. I will correct these defects as I become aware of them. __________16. The alarm company has given me written false alarm prevention techniques to help me prevent falsealarms.  
Comments: _____ 
_____
_____
_____
ALARM COMPANY 
_____ CUSTOMER 
       Print Name(s)   By: _____ 
       Signature(s)/Date   (Ord. No. 1276-2-02, Exh. A, B, 2-19-2002) 
ARTICLE XI. - CRAFTED PRECIOUS METAL DEALER REPORTING 

Sec. 18-497. - Reporting. 
(a)  [Definitions.] That for the purposes of this article the following definitions are adopted: 
    Commission means the Finance Commission of Texas. 
    Commissioner means the consumer credit commissioner. 
    Crafted precious metal means jewelry, silverware, an art object, or another object, made wholly or partly from precious metal, other than a coin, a bar, a commemorative medallion, or scrap or a broken item selling at five percent of more than the scrap value of the item. 
    Dealer means a person registered with the Commission to engage in the business of purchasing and selling crafted precious metal, including purchases or sales made through the mail. The term includes without limitation crafted precious metals dealers conducting business from a temporary location for a period of less than one year. 
    Local law enforcement means the City of Nacogdoches Police Department acting through its chief of police and persons the chief may designate to perform the chief's duties under this article. 
    Precious metal means gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium, or an alloy of those metals. 
    Web-based database means an electronic database approved by local law enforcement that is capable of transmitting information and responding to input on the internet. 
(b)  Applicability. This article is applicable only to crafted precious metal that has been sold or used for personal, family, or household purposes. 
(c)  Exceptions. This article does not apply to uses or transactions of precious metals made as exceptions under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code §§ 1956.053 through 1956.060, as amended. 
(d)  Operational requirement. Within 48 hours of each transaction, a dealer must submit an electronic copy of the transaction report form required under Texas Administrative Code, § 85.2001 report form and any images used under such rule to a web-based database approved by local law enforcement. 
(e)  Transaction report forms. The transaction report form is that required by Texas Administrative Code, § 85.2001, as amended. 
(f)  Penalty. Violation of any provision of this article is a class C misdemeanor with a fine of up to $500.00. Violation of different sections of this article are separate offenses. Each day a violation occurs is a separation violation. 
(g)  Civil remedies. This article may be enforced through civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction and the remedies of temporary restraining order, temporary and permanent injunctions against violation of the article are available. 
(Ord. No. 1654-1-14, §§ 1-8, 1-7-2014) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to appropriate private property for cemeteries, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(15). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Animals restricted. 
    All animals, with the exception of assistance animals as defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resource Code § 121.002 and animal-drawn conveyances franchised by the city, are prohibited from all city-owned cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-1, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.A., 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.A., adopted June 18, 2013, changed the title of §22-1 from "Animals prohibited" to "Animals restricted." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 
Sec. 22-2. - Admittance to grounds. 
(a)  Visitors will be admitted to the grounds of city-owned cemeteries between sunrise and sunset. All visitors are expected to respect the solemnity of the place and strictly observe the rules which have been established to secure quiet and good order at all times within the grounds. 
(b)  All persons are prohibited marring any monument or landmark, or in any way defacing the grounds of the cemetery. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to expel from the cemetery or cause the arrest of any person disturbing the sanctity of the place by noisy, boisterous, or other improper conduct. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-2, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.B., 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 22-3. - Maintenance. 
    The superintendent will use reasonable care in engaging competent and experienced workmen, and in seeing that they do their work with customary carefulness, but the city cemetery distinctly disclaims any responsibility or liability for accident or damage to markers, monuments, or mausoleums resulting from the ordinary hazards of cemetery work. The city cemetery does not assume any liability for accident or damage to persons or property due to defects of machinery, implements, tools, and equipment used in its work. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-3, 10-17-2000) 
Sec. 22-4. - Rules. 
    Various rules and regulations for city-owned cemeteries are recorded in the deed, real property, or official public records of Nacogdoches County, Texas. Public notice is here given of such rules and regulations which remain valid and in full force and effect to the extent they have not been previously or are not hereby amended or repealed. Additional rules by the city council or city staff as such may be amended are on file at the city offices. 
(Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.C., 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.C., adopted June 18, 2013, repealed § 22-4 in its entirety and enacted a new § 22-4 to read as set out herein. Former § 22-4 pertained to miscellaneous and derived from Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-5, adopted Oct. 17, 2000. 
Secs. 22-5-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-31. - Interments and disinterments. 
(a)  The property contained in city-owned cemeteries shall be used for cemetery purposes only. 
(b)  All interments in lots for which deeds have been issued shall be restricted to members of the family and relatives of the owners thereof, unless special permission for interment has been obtained from the city management. 
(c)  In all cases of interments in lots, a written permission from the owner of the lot or his legal heir or duly authorized representative must be filed with the city cemetery department before such interment will be permitted. 
(d)  No grave on any lot shall be opened, filled, or sodded except by employees of the cemetery or contract services under the direction of the cemetery department. 
(e)  The term "double burial" means the separate interment of two persons one above the other in the same space. A double burial in one space is allowed in family plot areas for an additional charge at the then-current rate. This request shall require prior city approval. The first burial in such space shall have been to such greater than usual depth as to allow the second burial to occur at the standard depth below the surface of the ground. The name and date of the deceased is to be placed above the first name for that space on the companion marker. No foot markers will be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-5, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.D., 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 22-32. - Lots. 
(a)  The price of all lots in city-owned cemeteries will include maintenance and care and no lot will be sold without maintenance. The city will perpetually care for and maintain all roads, walks, grass, vegetation, grounds, shrubbery, and improvements in the cemetery, but lot owners are to care for and maintain all grave markers, monuments, and mausoleums placed or erected on their lots. 
(b)  No sale, transfer, or assignment of title of any lot shall be valid without the written consent of the city. All sales, transfers and assignments shall be accomplished through the city. 
(c)  The grade of lots, once established, cannot be charged without consent of the city. 
(d)  All boundary markers set by the city must remain undisturbed. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to remove from any lot anything that conflicts with the rules and regulations, and to remove at its discretion any unsightly decoration. 
(f)  No lot will be regarded as sold until it is fully paid for, and interment will not be permitted on any lot until it is fully paid for and an ownership certificate issued. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-6, 10-17-2000) 
Sec. 22-33. - Planting in cemetery. 
(a)  All graves will be planted with grass by the city and no other planting will be allowed on the graves. 
(b)  All trees, shrubs or plants in the cemetery will be set out and cared for by the city and no other plantings shall be placed on lots. No person shall have the right to plant anything in the cemetery, and the city may at any time, without consulting any person, remove anything planted in the cemetery, and in so doing will not be liable for damages. Likewise, the city may remove any decoration or anything else it deems unsightly which it finds in the cemetery, and such removal will be without liability to the city. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Curbs, coping, concrete urns, trellises, glass jars, boxes, shelves, toys, wire screens, arbors, and articles of similar description or kind will not be permitted or allowed to be placed in the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-7, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.E., 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 22-34. - Monuments. 
(a)  Upon designated plots in city-owned cemeteries, the city may allow the erection of monuments and mausoleum structures. 
(b)  All markers, monuments, mausoleums, or other monumental structures, if allowed in the cemetery, shall be constructed of a quality of granite, marble, or bronze approved by the city and of the length, width, and height to comply with the general plans of the city in the cemetery. The city reserves the right to prohibit the erection of any monumental structure which does not conform to its rules and regulations, and to remove such structures from the cemetery without liability, if they are constructed or erected in violation to its rules and regulations. 
(c)  All markers and the foundation for same on all lots, save and except those that may be designated by the city as lots upon which monuments, mausoleums, or other monumental structures may be constructed, shall be restricted and are restricted to grass markers, that is, markers at ground level. Grass markers used at the head or foot of each grave must be one foot by two feet by four inches thick, and must be placed so as not to be above ground level. 
(d)  The use of a minimum of two-piece concrete box or vault in burials shall be required. 
(e)  Only markers obtained from the Veterans Administration will be allowed at the foot of a grave if a head stone is in place. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-8, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.F., 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 22-35. - Upright marker section. 
(a)  The upright marker section in city-owned cemeteries is comprised of four-grave family-size lots. It is permissible to use two markers, or one marker for all four spaces. Where it is planned to use two markers, the base of these markers should not be longer than 84 inches in order to conform to spacing between markers. The markers, including base, shall not be more than 36 inches above ground level. All information, names, and dates shall be on the marker, as no foot stone will be allowed. 
(b)  In using one marker (with four panels) on a lot, this marker shall be placed so as to center the lot at the head of the graves. Where two markers are placed at the head of graves, there must be two feet clearance between markers for maintenance purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-9, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.G., 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 22-36. - Family plots. 
    The family plots in city-owned cemeteries are five-grave lots, and may have one family ledger marker and each grave an individual marker. The ledger marker must be two feet by four feet by four inches thick and is to be placed at the head of and in the center of the lot. People planning to allow other family members who have a different surname to use the lot should place both names on the family ledger stone. Each grave will be marked with an individual stone at the foot of the grave. These stones must be one foot by two feet by four inches thick. On family lots, it is not required that ledger stones be placed. If none is desired, each grave can have a one-foot by two-foot marker placed at head of each grave. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-10, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.H., 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 22-37. - Flat marker section. 
(a)  All of these markers, except those specified as upright, are grass type or flat markers and are to be set so that, when mowing, the machine can pass over them. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  A person can buy one or more single-grave spaces. Markers for this section are grass markers placed at ground level, sized one foot by two feet by four inches, and are placed at the head of each grave. No other markers and no variation in the size are allowed. 
(d)  Family plots contain two, three, four or five adjoining single spaces in the same lot and may have one family ledger marker plus an individual marker for each grave. All markers in this section shall be grass markers placed at ground level. 
(e)  The ledger marker must be two feet by four feet by four inches and centered at the head of the lot. Purchasers planning to allow members of the family with a different surname to use the lot shall place both names on the family ledger stone. Ledger stones are not required in family plots. 
(f)  For those plots using ledger stones, each grave will be marked with an individual stone at the foot of the grave. These stones must be one foot by two feet by four inches. 
(g)  If no ledger stone is desired, each grave may have a one foot by two feet by four inches thick marker placed at the head of each grave. 
(h)  Family plots consisting of two spaces may have a companion marker, which shall be a grass marker placed at ground level, sized two feet by four feet by four inches thick and placed in the center of the two spaces at the head of the lot. No foot markers will be allowed with the use of the companion marker. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-11, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.I., 6-18-2013) 
Secs. 22-38-22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUNSET MEMORIAL PARK 

Sec. 22-56. - Name; purpose. 
    The name of this cemetery will be Sunset Memorial Park. The cemetery is more fully described on a plat recorded on file at the city cemetery office. The purpose of the city in establishing and maintaining this cemetery is to eliminate the undesirable, obsolete features usually found in old cemeteries, and to beautify this property and perpetually maintain it, so that it will give all who visit it the feeling of peacefulness and rest that a beautiful and modern park should suggest and to honor those interred into the park. Sunset Memorial Park is a perpetual care cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-18, 10-17-2000) 
Sec. 22-57. - Space prices-Sunset Memorial Park. 
(a)  Space and lot prices in various blocks and sections for Sunset Memorial Park shall be periodically set and amended by the city council by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Spaces and lots shall not be sold or accumulated for speculative purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.J., 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.J., adopted June 18, 2013, repealed § 22-57 in its entirety and enacted a new § 22-57 to read as set out herein. Former § 22-57 pertained to lot prices and derived from Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-19, adopted Oct. 17, 2000. 
Secs. 22-58-22-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PINE GROVE CEMETERY 

Sec. 22-76. - Name; purpose. 
    The name of this cemetery will be Pine Grove Cemetery. The cemetery is more fully described on a plat recorded on file at the city cemetery office. The purpose of the city in establishing and maintaining this cemetery is to eliminate the undesirable, obsolete features usually found in old cemeteries, and to beautify this property and maintain it, so that it will give all who visit it the feeling of peacefulness and rest that a beautiful and modern park should suggest and to honor those interred into the park. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-26, 10-17-2000) 
Sec. 22-77. - Space prices-Pine Grove Cemetery. 
(a)  Space and Lot prices in various Blocks and Sections for Pine Grove Cemetery shall be periodically set and amended by the City Council by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Spaces and Lots shall not be sold or accumulated for speculative purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.K., 6-18-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1632-6-13, § 2.K., adopted June 18, 2013, repealed § 22-77 in its entirety and enacted a new § 22-77 to read as set out herein. Former § 22-77 pertained to lot prices and derived from Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-27, adopted Oct. 17, 2000. 
Secs. 22-78-22-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OAK GROVE CEMETERY 

Sec. 22-96. - Name; purpose. 
    The name of this cemetery will be Oak Grove Cemetery. The cemetery is more fully described on a plat recorded on file at the city cemetery office. The purpose of the city in establishing and maintaining this cemetery is to eliminate the undesirable, obsolete features usually found in old cemeteries, and to beautify this historic property and maintain it to give all visitors the feeling of peacefulness and rest that a beautiful historic park should suggest and to honor those interred into the park. 
(Ord. No. 1232-10-00, § 9-33, 10-17-2000) 
Chapter 26 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Solicitation for public safety organizations, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1803.001 et seq.; solicitation for veterans' organization, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1804.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable purpose means philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic organization; or the benefit of any educational institution. The term "charitable purpose" shall not be construed to include the direct benefit of the individual making the solicitation or the benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law. 
    Individual means only a natural person. 
    Solicit funds or solicitation of funds means any request for the donation of money, property, or anything of value, or the pledge of a future donation of money, property, or anything of value; or the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of value or not, including but not limited to goods, books, pamphlets, tickets, publications or subscriptions to publications, or brochures, upon the representation, express or implied, that the proceeds of such sale will be used for a charitable purpose as such term is defined in this section. Expressly excluded from the meaning of "solicit funds" or "solicitation of funds" is any offer of membership in any organization and any solicitation of funds for any purpose either by a governmental agency or political subdivision. The means of solicitation of funds covered by this definition are limited to a solicitation communicated in the physical presence of any individual or by telephone call placed and received within the corporate city limits. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Exemptions. 
    The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by any organization or association from its members shall be exempted from the operation of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-9) 
Sec. 26-3. - Penalties. 
    Violation of any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-14. However, an offense related to any section of this chapter which also constitutes an offense pursuant to state law shall be punishable in accordance with the applicable state law. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-11) 
Sec. 26-4. - Unlawful solicitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or employee, to solicit funds for charitable purposes within the corporate city limits unless such person shall have first obtained a certificate of registration from the city secretary, as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any individual, as the agent or employee of another, to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the city unless his principal or employer has received a certificate of registration, as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any individual, as the agent or employee of another, to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the city without a facsimile copy of the certificate of registration in his possession. Such facsimile copy of the certificate of registration shall be shown upon request to all persons solicited and to any city police officer. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to solicit for charitable purposes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. in the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or employee, to solicit funds for charitable purposes within the corporate city limits after the expiration of any certificate of registration issued as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the person registering or the agents or employees thereof to solicit funds in the city for a charitable purpose other than that set out in the registration statement upon which the certificate of registration was issued. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person who shall solicit funds for charitable purposes in the city to represent, in connection with such solicitation of funds, that the issuance of a certificate of registration by the city constitutes an endorsement or approval of the purposes of such solicitation of funds by the city or any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person issued a certificate of registration under article II of this chapter to fail to file any financial statement required to be filed with the city secretary. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-2) 
Sec. 26-5. - Solicitation from occupant of motor vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds for charitable or welfare purposes from an occupant of any motor vehicle which is on a public street or on a street, roadway or parking area of any city park, whether or not the person soliciting funds is or is not on a public street or other public property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, aid, solicit, encourage, or direct a minor to engage in conduct prohibited by this section. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-10) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 102. 
Secs. 26-6-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 26-31. - Filing and contents of registration statement. 
    Every person desiring to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the city shall file with the city secretary a registration statement, on forms provided by the city secretary, containing the following: 
(1)  The name of the person registering and desiring to solicit funds for charitable purposes. 
(2)  Whether the person registering is an individual, partnership, corporation or association, and: 
a.  If an individual, his business or residence address and telephone number. 
b.  If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of the partnership. 
c.  If a corporation, whether it is organized under the laws of this state or is a foreign corporation, and its mailing address, business location, and telephone number and names of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
d.  If an association, the association's principal business address and telephone number, along with the names of the association's officers and directors or trustees. If the association is part of a multistate organization or association, the mailing address and business location of its principal headquarters shall also be given. 
(3)  A brief description of the charitable purpose for which the funds are to be solicited, and an explanation of the intended use of the funds toward that purpose. 
(4)  The names of all individuals authorized to incur expenses related to the solicitation or to disburse any proceeds of the solicitations. 
(5)  The name, mailing address and telephone number of the individual who will have organizational responsibility for the solicitation of funds. 
(6)  The time period within which the solicitation of funds is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion, not to exceed four months. 
(7)  A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished. 
(8)  The total amount of funds proposed to be raised. 
(9)  A projected schedule of salaries, wages, fees, commissions, expenses and costs that the person registering reasonably believes will be expended and paid in connection with the solicitation of funds or in connection with their disbursement, and an estimated percentage of the total projected collections which the costs of solicitation will comprise. These figures shall cover the entire time period during which the solicitation is to be made. 
(10)  A statement to the effect that if a certificate of registration is granted, such certificate will not be used as or represented to be an endorsement by the city or any of its officers or employees. 
(11)  The signature of an individual on behalf of the person registering. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-3) 
Sec. 26-32. - Fee. 
(a)  Every registration statement required under this article, except as exempted in this chapter, shall be accompanied by a registration fee, which is on file in the city secretary's office, to compensate the city for the cost of administering this chapter. Such fee will be nonrefundable, irrespective of whether a certificate of registration is issued. 
(b)  Any public or private school sanctioned group shall be exempt from the requirement to provide the registration fee. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-4) 
Sec. 26-33. - Issuance of certificate of registration. 
    Within ten working days of the receipt of the registration statement as provided in this article, the city secretary shall either issue a certificate of registration, as provided in section 26-34, or notify the person registering that the registration statement does not comply with the requirements of section 26-31 and specifically point out what information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a certificate of registration can be issued. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-5) 
Sec. 26-34. - Form. 
    The city secretary shall prescribe the form of the certificate of registration issued pursuant to this article, which shall include a statement that "The issuance of this Certificate of Registration is not an endorsement by the City of Nacogdoches or any of its departments, officers or employees." 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-6) 
Sec. 26-35. - Expiration. 
    Each certificate of registration issued by the city secretary pursuant to this article shall expire at the termination of the solicitation period specified in the registration statement or four months from the date of issuance, whichever is less. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-7(a)) 
Sec. 26-36. - Public disclosure. 
    All registration statements and closing statements filed with the city secretary pursuant to this article, whether or not a certificate of registration has been issued, shall be public records and shall be available for inspection by members of the public during the city secretary's regular business hours. Copies may be obtained at the fees prescribed by law for copies of city records. 
(Code 1971, § 91/2-8) 
Chapter 28 - TAXICABS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Chauffeur's license shall be obtained by each taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver from the chief of police before operation of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle in the city. 
    Chief of police shall refer to the chief of police or his designated officer. 
    Driver shall include every person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle, whether as owner or agent, servant or employee of the owner. 
    Franchise or license to operate shall mean an authority issued by the city council after a finding that the public convenience and necessity so require it, which may be issued to an owner or owners of taxicab, limousine or shuttle services. The term "franchise" shall apply to an owner or operator of taxicab, limousine or shuttle services which authorizes such owner or operator to engage in the business of transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle. The term "license," when used alone, shall apply to the authorization made to the franchise holder, which is a license to operate one or more taxicabs, limousines or shuttles, and although a franchise may be held by an owner and taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator for a designated number of licenses to operate a specified number of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles, an application must be made by the franchise holder for placing more taxicabs, limousines or shuttles within his license to operate. The term "franchise" shall mean the award of a certificate of public convenience and necessity within a franchise is tantamount to an amendment of the franchise by granting additional licenses for additional taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
    Limousine shall mean a luxury sedan with a manufacture's rated seating capacity of not more than 15 passengers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city, having a driver furnished as part of the service, and which operates on a pre-arranged basis only whereby such pre-arrangement is made not less than one hour in advance of the time transportation is to begin. Expressly excluded from this definition are limousines used exclusively in connection with funeral services and free shuttle services offered by hotels, motels and area attractions. 
    Manifest shall mean a daily record prepared by a taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver of all trips made by said driver showing time and place of origin, designation, number of passengers, driver's name, date, hours of operation, total miles and the amount of fare of each trip. The manifest for taxicab drivers shall also include the taxi number, meter number, paid miles, units, trips and extras. 
    Owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or society who has the control, direction, maintenance and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles on or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as owner or otherwise, except "drivers" as hereinafter defined. 
    Public convenience and necessity shall mean a public convenience which is fitting and suited to public need and a public necessity which embraces a great and urgent public convenience. This term as applied to a proposed service by an applicant shall mean that the applicant is fit, able, and willing to perform transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and that public convenience and necessity require the service proposed by such applicant. 
    Taxi meter shall mean a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically/electronically the distance driven and waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
    Taxi stand shall mean and include the taxi depot at which place the taxicabs shall be housed or parked, and at which place the telephone calls and requests for service shall be made, and at which place a dispatcher shall control the movements of the taxicabs to the points of request for such service. This term shall likewise be synonymous with taxi terminal and shall mean and embrace that space and area of land and buildings off of the streets of the city and upon private property, and shall be and constitute the main office of the owner and taxicab operator. 
    Taxicab shall mean every automobile or motor propelled vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city not over a defined or fixed route, and irrespective of whether or not the operations extend beyond the city limits of the city, at rates for distance traveled, or for wait time, or for both, or at rates per hour, per week or per month, which such vehicles is routed to destinations under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or such person or persons hiring the same; provided however, that the term "taxicab" shall not apply to motor buses operated within the city under a franchise from the city over a fixed or definite route, nor shall such term apply to motor buses regularly operated in the city along with fixed routes to and from points outside the incorporated limits of the city, nor shall such term apply to motor vehicles regularly engaged in interstate commerce, nor shall such term apply to limousines or shuttles as defined in this section. 
    Taxicab, limousine or shuttle license shall mean the approval under the terms of article III of this chapter of the vehicle to be operated as a taxicab, limousine or shuttle and shall be obtained from the chief of police before operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle in the city. 
    Shuttle shall mean a sedan or van with a manufacture's rated seating capacity of not more than 15 passengers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city, having a driver furnished as part of the service, and which operates on a pre-arranged basis only whereby such pre-arrangement is made not less than one hour in advance of the time transportation is to begin. Expressly excluded from this definition are shuttles used exclusively in connection with free shuttle services offered by hotels, motels and area attractions. 
    Waiting time shall mean such time as may be consumed or lost at the special instance and request of a passenger after such passenger has first entered the taxicab to make a trip and before reaching his final destination; and no charge shall be made against a passenger for any other time lost on account of any other delay whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 28-2. - Persons authorized to operate taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxicab, limousine or shuttle to be driven or operated within the city by a person except the owner of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle, or the authorized agent or employee of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-3. - Operators to comply with traffic laws. 
    All automobiles or vehicles used in connection with a taxicab, limousine or shuttle service shall be operated in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, this Code and other ordinances of the city, and such future amendments thereof, relating to or regulating the operation of motor vehicles upon streets or highways. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-4. - Owner, operator responsible for negligence of driver. 
    The owner or operator is responsible for the acts of negligence of any driver of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle who shall drive such taxicab, limousine or shuttle with the knowledge or with the consent of such owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-5. - City officers, employees not to accept favors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to accept directly or indirectly any gifts, discounts or gratuities from any holder of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle permit or driver of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle or from any person engaged in the repair of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-6. - Duties of city council generally. 
(a)  To make reasonable orders respecting character, extent, quality and standard of service. 
(b)  To recommend such rates as are not in conflict with the express provisions hereof and to make reasonable orders respecting the same. 
(c)  To prescribe, via original franchise, the number of vehicles to be operated by such grantee, applying thereto the principles of public necessity and convenience. Subsequent requests by grantee for additional vehicles shall be approved by the city manager and are subject to appeal to city council if denied. 
(d)  To require examination and recommend the advisability of the licensing of all drivers or operators of any vehicle operated or maintained by such grantee under the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 28-7. - Chief of police to recommend regulations to council. 
    The chief of police shall recommend to the city council reasonable rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to facilitate the service to be rendered to the public under a franchise, which when approved by the city council by appropriate measures, shall become binding upon the grantee of a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-8. - Taxi stands. 
(a)  Taxi franchise owners with five or fewer taxicabs operating in the city limits are not required to maintain an off-street taxi stand or terminal. If operated as a home occupation, the franchise shall not be operated in such a way as to violate the terms of a home occupation, as defined in section 118-1 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Taxi franchise owners with more than five taxicabs operating inside the city limits shall maintain within the city limits an off-street taxi stand or terminal of sufficient size to accommodate all of the franchise owner's taxicabs. The franchise owner shall have such taxi stand open to the general public from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and shall be available via telephone 24 hours per day. 
(c)  The location and type of building must be in compliance with zoning regulations. The form and type of taxi stand shall be of such a nature as best meets public convenience and necessity and affords a safe, sanitary and lawful operation of transportation by taxicabs. The site, location and type of proposed buildings and the sanitary conditions of the taxi stand shall be reflected in an application to the chief of police. The equipment, site and place of a taxi stand must be found by the chief of police to best meet public convenience and necessity prior to an authorization to a franchise holder to operate such taxi stand. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1585-12-11, 12-20-2011; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 28-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, repealed § 28-9 in its entirety. Former § 28-9 pertained to subtaxi stands and derived from Ord. No. 1484-3-08, adopted March 4, 2008. 
Sec. 28-10. - Receipt, discharge of passengers. 
    No driver of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street, but shall drive to the right-hand sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers; provided however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit such vehicles from so discharging or receiving passengers on the left-hand side of the street or sidewalk where left-hand parking is permitted within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-11. - Transporting undesirables; procuring. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle to knowingly transport any passenger to the abode of a commercialized prostitute or to knowingly transport any known criminal, narcotic peddler, prostitute or bootlegger in the commission of a crime or the infraction of the law in any manner or to act as a contact man for unlawful establishments of any character. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-12. - Disposition of property left in cab. 
    It shall be the duty of every taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver to immediately return to the owner, if known, any luggage, merchandise or other property left in his taxicab, limousine or vehicle. If the owner is not known, said driver shall, immediately upon return to his terminal, turn over to the operator of the terminal any property left in his vehicle with a complete report of when it was left in his vehicle. Such articles shall be tagged and if not called for within 72 hours shall be turned over to the chief of police with all available information as to the probable owner. If such articles remain unclaimed, the chief of police shall dispose of such property in accordance with applicable city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-13. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful to transport alcoholic beverages, not owned and in the exclusive possession and control of a fare paying passenger, in the taxicab, limousine or shuttle or for any taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver to have on his person any alcoholic beverage while driving and operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-14. - Smoking prohibited in taxicabs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver or passenger of any taxicab to smoke tobacco products of any kind while the taxicab is occupied. The owner of every taxicab will post in a prominent location in the taxicab, visible to every occupant, a "No Smoking" sign composed of letters of no less than one inch in height. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-15. - Complaints. 
    All taxicabs, limousines or shuttle franchises operated in the city will post in a prominent location in the vehicle, visible to every occupant, a sign composed of letters of no less than one inch in height stating "All complaints regarding the operation of this vehicle shall be directed to the Nacogdoches Police Department." 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-16. - Maximum seating. 
    It shall be unlawful to carry more passengers than any vehicle is equipped to transport. The number of passengers permitted in a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be determined by the vehicle make and design. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-17. - Maximum year model and mileage limit for vehicles. 
    No inspection permit shall be issued for any vehicle older than eight years or with mileage exceeding 300,000 miles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-17.1. - Taxicab required to have lighted dome sign on top of same. 
    All taxicabs in the city shall have a lighted dome sign on top thereof just above the windshield, which sign shall have the word "TAXI" thereon. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-17.2. - Rates. 
(a)  The rate of fare for one passenger shall be $2.50 for the first .10 mile and $ 0.225 for each .10 mile or fraction thereof traveled thereafter. The rate for additional passengers shall be $1.00 per passenger, not to exceed the vehicle's maximum seating capacity, with a minimum trip fare of $5.00. 
(b)  For each one minute of waiting time consumed by the taxicab at the instance of the passenger, the rate shall be $0.35. 
(c)  Whenever a taxicab is engaged on an hourly basis, whether for one or more passengers, the rate of fare shall be $25.00 for each hour. For each quarter hour in excess of each completed hour, the rate shall be $6.25 for each quarter hour the taxicab is so engaged. 
(d)  Due to the increasing prices of fuel, a surcharge will be allowed at a rate of $1.00 per fare when gasoline prices go over $3.50 per gallon. Once it is determined that the price of fuel has surpassed the price of $3.50 the police department will, on a monthly basis, advise the franchised cab companies to implement the fuel surcharge. The police department will base the price of fuel on the lowest price of two local distributors at the beginning of each month once it is determined that the price is above $3.50 per gallon. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-18. - Display of rates. 
    A card showing the rates charged by a taxicab shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the inside of each taxicab and on the back of the front seat at all times. 
    This section will not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-19. - Receipt for fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab upon receiving full payment of a fare to refuse to give a receipt therefore upon request of any passenger making said payment. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-20. - Refusal to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the same or to hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-21. - Delinquent ad valorem taxes. 
    No operator of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles shall engage in the transportation of persons by taxicab, limousine or shuttle at any time when the ad valorem taxes assessed against such taxi stand, taxicab, limousine, shuttle or such equipment shall be delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-22. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXIMETER 

Sec. 28-23. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be operated or advertised for public hire in the city unless it is equipped with a taximeter, which taximeter shall be used as provided in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, driving or in charge of any taxicab for hire in the city to drive or operate such taxicab, or to use or advertise in connection therewith the word taxi, taxicab or cab, or in soliciting trade from the public, to represent or exhibit such vehicle as a taxi, taxicab or cab, unless each vehicle be equipped with a taximeter. 
(c)  The taximeter requirements stated herein shall not be applicable to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-24. - To be used in determining fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, driving or in charge of a taxicab to operate or drive such taxicab unless a taximeter is used in determining the fare to be charged, and no other or different fare shall be charged than the fare recorded on the reading face of such taximeter for such trip and no other rates or methods of measuring the distance or time charges shall be allowed except as expressly permitted by this division. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-20 08) 
Sec. 28-25. - Size, design, specifications: 
    Every taxicab shall use a taximeter which shall conform to the following specifications: 
(1)  The taximeter shall be a mechanical/electric instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically/electronically calculated for the distance traveled, for waiting time, if any, and extra passengers, if any, and upon which such charge or charges shall be indicated by means of clearly legible figures which are electrically lighted each time the taximeter flag is thrown from non-earning to earning position. 
(2)  Every taximeter must register upon visual counters the following items: 
a.  Total miles (unless shown by accurate registration on the speedometer tested in good working order on the taxicab). 
b.  Paid miles. 
c.  Number of trips. 
(2)  Each taximeter must be driven from the taxicab transmission to the taximeter head. 
(3)  No taximeter shall be in such condition as to be more than five percent incorrect to the prejudice of any passenger. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-20 08) 
Sec. 28-26. - Case to be sealed; cover and gear intact. 
    No person shall use or permit to be used or driven for hire a taxicab equipped with a taximeter the case of which is unsealed and not having its cover and gear in tact. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-27. - Tests and inspections generally. 
    All taximeters used in the city shall be kept in good repair and functioning accurately. The city may require each taximeter tested for accuracy by the appropriate responsible state agency and/or by any private company capable of performing such test. Proof of accuracy from such test shall be submitted to the chief of police. The actual cost of the test shall be borne by the owner or operator of the taxicab. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-28. - Changing flag to "vacant" position. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver to call to the attention of passengers to the amount registered on the taximeter, and the taximeter flag shall not be changed to "vacant" position until after the fare is paid. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-29. - Unauthorized display of signal. 
    No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter, while carrying a passenger or passengers, or while under employment, shall display the signal affixed to such taximeter in such position as to denote the vehicle is not employed, or in such position as to denote that the taxicab is employed at a rate of or different from that which the use of the taxicab legally justified under the provisions of this division. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-30. - Multiple passengers. 
    The first passenger employing a taxicab shall be entitled to its exclusive use until delivered to his destination by the most practical direct route and no other passenger may be carried unless the passenger or passengers first engaged the taxicab shall consent to additional passengers not with his or her party. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE AND BUSINESS LICENSE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-31. - Declaration of public convenience and necessity prerequisite for issuance. 
    No business license to operate a taxicab, limousine or shuttle and/or franchise shall be issued by the city council, until the city council shall first, after a hearing, declare by certificate that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed service for which application for license or franchise is made; provided, however, that such declaration of public convenience and necessity shall not be necessary in the following instances: 
(1)  For the annual renewal of the same number of licenses in force. 
(2)  For the renewal of licenses to the applicant for the number of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles for which the city council shall have, at any time prior to the application for such renewal, made a declaration of public conveniences and necessity; provided, however, that said taxicabs, limousines or shuttles shall have been duly licensed and operated by such applicant during the previous year for which such renewal is sought. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-32. - Criteria for determination of public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of taxicab, limousine or shuttle services for which application may be made, the city council shall take into consideration: 
(1)  Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require such proposed taxicab, limousine or shuttle service within the city. 
(2)  Kind and type of equipment or vehicles and color scheme to be used by the applicant. 
(3)  Increased traffic congestion on the streets of the city which may result from licensing taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
(4)  Whether the safe use of the streets of the city by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be unduly endangered by the granting of such license. 
(5)  Whether the applicant is fit, able and willing to perform transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle. 
(6)  Other relevant facts as the city council may deem advisable or necessary which may throw light on public necessity and convenience. 
(b)  No application will be granted and no finding shall be made of public convenience and necessity unless and until there is a finding that such applicant is fit, able and willing to perform transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle as provided by this chapter and that there is public demand and need for the type of service proposed. 
(c)  A refusal on the part of the holders of franchises to meet public convenience and necessity shall constitute just cause for a finding of additional need of public convenience and necessity and thereby authorize the city council to issue additional franchises and additional certificates of public convenience and necessity, over and above those granted pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 28-33. - Notice to holders of certificates. 
    When an application is filed purporting to reflect fitness, willingness and ability, as well as a need for transportation service by taxicabs, limousines or shuttles in the city, the city secretary shall provide copies to the holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity, being the franchised taxicab, limousine or shuttle operators in the city, giving and granting to the franchised operators of such services an opportunity to reply both on the question of convenience and necessity, prior to and at the hearing to be held by the city council, as provided for in section 28-35. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-34. - Notice of application, hearing. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise, the city secretary shall cause a notice to be published in the daily newspaper of the city, and the cost of publishing shall be advanced in full by the applicant. Said notice shall set out the facts that an application has been filed for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle service, the name of the applicant, the kind of equipment, and all other pertinent data from such application which the city secretary may deem necessary. Such publication shall constitute a notice to all holders of existing taxicab, limousine or shuttle licenses and to the public that a public hearing will be held by the city council at a public place in the city, and at a designated time given in such notice, which designated time shall not be less than five days nor more than 15 days after the date of the publication of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-35. - Hearing on application. 
    All holders of existing taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchises or any other citizens shall be entitled to file any complaints or protests that such party may have to the issuance of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise. At the time of the holding of the investigation and hearing with reference to whether public convenience and necessity require operation of such vehicle or vehicles covered in the application for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise, city council shall consider all complaints and protests and in conducting the hearing shall have the right to call such witnesses as they see fit. In all such hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear, cogent and convincing evidence that the public convenience and necessity require such operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which such application has been made and that the applicant is fit, able and willing to perform such transportation of persons and property by taxicab, limousine or shuttle as proposed in such application. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 28-36. - Notice to applicants. 
(a)  If the city council finds from the investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the vehicles for which a taxicab, limousine or shuttle license is desired, they shall notify the applicant thereof of their findings. Within five days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the chief of police any and all relevant information which may be required. 
(b)  If the city council finds from such investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which a taxicab, limousine or shuttle license is desired, they shall forthwith notify the applicant of their finding. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-37. - Issuance of certificate. 
    If the city council finds that there is a need of transportation by taxicabs, limousines or shuttles that is not being furnished by the franchised operators of such services and the insurance policy required by this article has been filed and deposited with the chief of police and that such vehicle or vehicles comply with and the applicant has complied with all relevant provisions of this Code and relevant ordinances of the city and all of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police to more effectively carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter and such ordinances, they shall issue a written certificate to the city secretary, not more than ten days after their findings have been declared, certifying that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such taxicab(s), limousine(s) or shuttle(s) or any less number thereof which the applicant desires and proposes to operate, and that the applicant is entitled to have such vehicle or vehicles licensed as taxicabs, limousines or shuttles and franchises to operate taxicabs, limousines or shuttles upon complying with all or other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-38. - Sale, transfer of certificate. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise may be sold and transferred without the written approval of the city expressed by a resolution. No resolution shall be drafted approving the sale and transfer of a certificate of public convenience and necessity for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise without a hearing first held before the city council, followed by a finding of the city council that the person proposing to purchase such franchise is fit, able and willing to carry on the transportation of persons by taxicab, limousine or shuttle in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. In the event that the person seeking to purchase a franchise is a person holding a franchise and a certificate of public convenience and necessity, and being a then licensed operator of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles in the city, then and in that event, the applicant asking authority to purchase shall be deemed to have introduced a prima facie case of fitness, willingness and ability. 
(Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE 

Sec. 28-39. - Required. 
    No person shall be permitted to engage in the transportation of persons for hire in the operation of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles in the city unless a franchise to permit such operation of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles is first obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-40. - Applicant. 
    It shall be the duty of the city secretary to receive all applications for franchises to operate taxicab, limousine or shuttle services. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-41. - Liability and casualty insurance. 
(a)  No franchise shall be issued under this article, nor shall such franchise be valid after issuance, nor shall any transportation service be operated unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance meeting the requirements of Texas law for automobile liability insurance, providing for payment of damages to property, injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the operator and/or vehicle driver would be liable on account of liability imposed by law, regardless of whether the vehicle was being driven by the operator or driver. 
(b)  The maximum amount of recovery in a policy of insurance required by this article shall not be less than the state minimum. 
(c)  Every insurance policy or contract of insurance required under this section shall contain a provision that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured, and every such policy shall contain a provision making the city an additional insured under such policy or contract of insurance. 
(d)  Every insurance policy or contract of insurance required under this section shall contain a provision for the insurer to give not less than 30 days written notice to the city and to the named insured before any cancellation or termination of any such policy or contract of insurance shall automatically revoke and terminate the permit unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(e)  A certificate of insurance showing compliance with insurance required under this section shall be filed with the chief of police, and no permit granted under this section shall be valid unless and until such certificate shall have been so tendered. Such certificate shall be replaced when it expires. 
(f)  Any operator shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against all liability arising out of the operator's permitted activities hereunder. 
(g)  All policies or contracts of insurance shall be approved by the city and shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-42. - Street rental charge. 
    An annual street rental charge is hereby levied upon the owner and operator of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles operating within the city limits in the sum of $25.00 per taxicab, limousine or shuttle for which the franchise is granted or held. The holder of a franchise or the operator of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be required to pay to the city at the office of the city secretary, in lawful money of the United States, such amount or amounts, which remittance shall be made annually on or before the first day of each February, for the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-43. - Duration. 
    Any franchise granted to operators of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles shall continue for a period of five years, unless sooner revoked by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-44. - Organization of business. 
    In the performance of his duties and privilege under this chapter, the grantee of a franchise may provide for the conduct of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle service by operating the same through divisions, or units, under trade names or trademarks, or through operating companies, provided each such operation shall first be approved by the city council by resolution duly adopted, and provided no such operation shall diminish the obligation of the revenue accruing to the city under this grant. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-45. - Assignment, subletting. 
    No person granted a franchise shall assign or sublet his franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-46. - Payment of taxes, levies, etc. 
    Any grantee of a franchise shall promptly pay all lawful ad valorem taxes, and such other levies and assessments, if any, that may be lawfully imposed upon it. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-47. - Amendments. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to modify, amend, alter, change or eliminate any of the provisions of the franchise, during the life of the same, for the following purposes: 
(a)  To eliminate or delete from the same such conditions as then prove obsolete or impractical. 
(b)  To impose such additional conditions upon the grantee as may be just and reasonable, such conditions to be those as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of insuring adequate service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-48. - Suspension or termination of franchise/business license. 
    The franchise and business license granted under this chapter shall be subject to suspension and/or termination for: 
(1)  Neglect, failure or refusal of such owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator to comply with the terms of such franchise of this chapter. 
(2)  Failure of a taxicab franchise owner to operate taxicab(s) at least five days per week. This requirement does not apply to limousine or shuttle operations. 
    In the event of complaint or upon its own motion the city council may set a public hearing, giving the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator at least seven days' notice of the hearing and the given nature of the complaint or concern. 
    Should the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator be found at such hearing to have violated the term of this chapter or its franchise or business license, the city council may, by written notice to the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator, suspend for a period of time or revoke the rights of the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator under such franchise or business license or admonish such owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator. 
    Notice shall be effective when sent certified mail return receipt required, properly addressed and postage paid to the recipient. Notice of the decision of the city council upon the hearing shall be sent within five business days of such hearing. Appeal of such suspension, revocation or admonition shall be to the State District Court of Nacogdoches County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 28-49-28-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VEHICLE LICENSE 

Sec. 28-54. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the city limits unless there has been obtained by the owner of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle a vehicle license issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-55. - Application. 
    Any applicant, except those provided in subsections (1) and (2) of section 28-31 for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle vehicle license shall make proper application therefore on blanks to be furnished by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-56. - Inspections. 
    Before any taxicab, limousine or shuttle vehicle license is issued by the city, such taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be inspected by the chief of police to determine that it: 
(1)  Displays a current state vehicle inspection sticker, and 
(2)  Is clean, and 
(3)  That all equipment workings and the like required by this chapter, the franchise or the operator of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle, and state or federal law is present and in operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-57. - Inspection fees. 
    An inspection fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection of each vehicle. The payment shall be due at the time of the vehicle inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-58. - Revocation, suspension. 
    Upon complaint filed by any person with the chief of police, or upon his own motion, the chief of police, after five days' notice of the grounds of such complaint to the owner or operator of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle against whom a complaint is made, may hear evidence with reference to such complaint and after such hearing, the chief of police may revoke or suspend the vehicle license of such owner or operator of any particular taxicab, limousine or shuttle service for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-59. - Appeals from revocation, suspension. 
    After the chief of police has heard the complaint for the revocation or suspension of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle vehicle license of any owner or operator of such vehicle, he shall make his findings and declare the same and either the owner or operator of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle or the complainant shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten days and such appeal shall be perfected by a letter delivered to the city manager, stating that an appeal from the ruling of the chief of police is desired to the city council as a whole. If an appeal from the decision of the chief of police is perfected as above provided, the decision shall be suspended until passed upon by the city council. Upon receiving such appeal, the city council, as soon as practicable thereafter, shall hear such appeal and shall either sustain, modify or reverse the decision of the chief of police. If no appeal is taken from the ruling of the chief of police in the time as provided above, the ruling of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 28-60-28-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-73. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Every person operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle business or service in the city shall employ as a driver only persons who are physically and mentally fit and able to operate a motor vehicle for hire, and it shall be the duty of the owner of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle service or business, as well as the driver, to furnish to the chief of police a physician's certificate stating that the driver, who seeks a chauffeur's license to operate a taxicab, limousine or shuttle is physically and mentally fit to operate such taxicab, limousine or shuttle. 
(b)  Every person who drives a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be covered either personally or through the franchise owner or operator with automobile liability insurance meeting the minimum requirements of Texas law. 
(c)  It shall be the full responsibility of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator to select and employ drivers who are qualified for taxicab, limousine or shuttle service, who can read and write the English language, and who are familiar with the streets and addresses in the city. 
(d)  Every operator of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle business or service is charged with a knowledge of the police and court records of all drivers in his employ and no such operator shall employ or retain in his employ any person, as a taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver, who frequently violates laws governing motor vehicle operations or violates law which directly relate to the occupation of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-74. - State license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the city unless he is duly licensed by the State of Texas for the transportation of passengers, having on his person at all times while operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle, an appropriate and valid Texas driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-08) 
Sec. 28-75. - Maximum hours in day driver may operate. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle licensed under this article to permit any driver to operate such taxicab, limousine or shuttle for more than 12 hours within a 24-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-76. - Driver's daily manifest. 
(a)  Each person or company operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle business shall provide its drivers with forms for maintaining a daily manifest. The form must include appropriate spaces for recording: 
(1)  Taxi number, driver's name, date, hours of operation, meter number, total miles, paid miles, units, trips and extras; 
(2)  Time, place, origin and destination of each trip; 
(3)  Number of passengers and amount of fare and other charges; and, 
(4)  Other information required by the city council to facilitate the implementation of this article. 
(b)  Each driver shall complete a manifest on a separate form for each tour of duty. The driver shall provide the information required by the form and shall record the information with regard to trips at the end of each trip. The driver shall return completed manifest forms to the owner of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle business upon completion of each tour of duty. 
(c)  The owner or operator of every taxicab, limousine or shuttle business will keep such daily manifest forms in a permanent and orderly fashion and make such records available to the city council or designated city officials at their request, and keep such forms for five years. 
    Limousine and shuttle drivers shall be exempt from having to meet the requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
DIVISION 2. - CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE 

Sec. 28-77. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the city limits without having first obtained from the chief of police a "City of Nacogdoches chauffeur's license." 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-78. - Application. 
    To obtain a chauffeur's license, each person shall make a written application therefore to the chief of police, upon the form provided therefore by the city, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name, age and specific address of the applicant. 
(2)  The full name of the person or owner for whom the applicant proposes to be employed. 
(3)  The length of local residence of the applicant in the city, county, state and the United States and whether or not he/she is a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  Proof of liability insurance either through the applicant or the taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator shall be attached to the application. 
(5)  The experience that applicant has had in rendering such service. 
(6)  Whether applicant has been convicted of a felony, and full information concerning same; likewise, if applicant has a police record with any conviction of a misdemeanor and full information concerning the same. 
(7)  Whether applicant has been convicted of a violation of the law in the operation of motor vehicles, and if so, full information concerning the same. 
(8)  A true photocopy of the front and back of the state driver's license issued to the applicant. 
(9)  Two color passport size photos shall be attached to the application. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-79. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall make or cause to make such investigations of the character, criminal history (only to the extent allowed by law), experience and qualifications of the applicant for a chauffeur's license as may be deemed consistent, judicious and allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-80. - Determination of applicant's fitness, appeals. 
(a)  Based on the application and his investigation, and within 30 days of receipt of the complete application and all driver's license and criminal history information required by the chief of police, the chief of police shall determine whether or not any applicant for a chauffeur's license is fit and proper to drive and operate a taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the corporate limits of the city in a manner consistent with the welfare of the citizenry. Falsification, material omission or material misrepresentation of or on the application shall be nonexclusive grounds for denial of such application. 
(b)  If the chief of police has made his decision as to whether or not the applicant for a chauffeur's license is fit and proper to drive a taxicab, limousine or shuttle, and declared same, either the applicant for such license or any citizen of the city, shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten days, which appeal shall be perfected by delivering in writing five copies of same to the city council, stating that an appeal from the decision of the chief of police is desired. The city council shall, within a period of not more than 15 days after receiving such notice of appeal, grant a hearing thereon, and after the hearing of such appeal shall, within a period of five days, sustain or reverse the decision of the chief of police. If no appeal is taken from the findings made by the chief of police within the time provided above, the decision of the chief of police shall be final; otherwise the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-81. - Fee. 
    A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for each chauffeur's license issued by the city. No chauffeur's license shall be issued until said fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-82. - Issuance. 
    After the applicant for a chauffeur's license has complied with all requirements of the relevant provisions of this article and the approval of the chief of police, a chauffeur's license shall be issued to him. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-83. - Expiration. 
    Any chauffeur's license issued by the city shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-84. - Renewal. 
    A license under the provisions of this division may be renewed annually without filing a new application by payment of a $5.00 license fee. Renewal may be refused for any reason the original application could have been rejected. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-85. - Nontransferable. 
    Any chauffeur's license that is issued by the city shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-86. - Identification card. 
(a)  Issuance. Each applicant for a chauffeur's license shall, at the time of the actual issuance of said license, be issued an identification card. 
(b)  Contents. The identification card shall be postcard size, and shall contain the full description, residence address and fingerprints of the applicant. 
(c)  Possession. The identification card shall be carried on the person of the applicant and presented for identification purposes on demand of any passenger or police officer. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-87. - Suspension, appeals. 
    The chief of police, upon making any of the findings justifying a revocation of a chauffeur's license, may temporarily suspend such chauffeur's license. Upon such suspension, the holder of such chauffeur's license shall have the right to appeal to the city council as provided in section 28-59. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 28-88. - Revocation. 
    Any chauffeur's license may be revoked by the chief of police after a hearing is first held by the chief of police resulting in finding that the driver of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle was guilty of any of the following: 
(1)  Making any false statement or material omission or material misrepresentation in his application for a chauffeur's license. 
(2)  Knowingly engaging in the sale of intoxicating liquors, directly or indirectly. 
(3)  Knowingly engaging in the transportation of any known criminal, narcotic peddler, prostitute, or bootlegger, in the commission of a crime, or in the infraction of the law in any manner. 
(4)  Acting in any manner as a contact man for bootlegging or a contact man for any unlawful establishments of any character. 
(5)  Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver as determined under the guidelines adopted by the city for such analysis. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 28-89. - Revocation, appeal. 
    Upon revocation of any chauffeur's license by the chief of police, the holder of such chauffeur's license shall have the right to appeal such revocation to the city council as provided for in section 28-59. 
(Ord. No. 1484-3-08, 3-4-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Participation in countywide program. 
    The chair of the city council is authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as such program may affect the city. 
(Code 1971, § 10-3; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 30-2. - Obstructing enforcement; impersonating officials; penalties for violation of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for violations of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Code 1971, § 10-11) 
State Law reference- Impersonating a public servant, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 37.11. 
Sec. 30-3. - Oath required. 
    Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility pursuant to this chapter shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the constitution of the United States, the laws of the state and the city ordinances. 
(Code 1971, § 10-12) 
Sec. 30-4. - Exemptions from liability. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and neither the city and the agents and representatives of the city nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(Code 1971, § 10-9) 
Sec. 30-5. - Emergency provisions to supersede other provisions. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1971, § 10-7) 
Sec. 30-6. - Conflict with state, federal and military statutes or orders. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or lawful order or with any military order, rule, or regulation. 
(Code 1971, § 10-8) 
Sec. 30-7. - Expenditure of funds; obligating city without authorization. 
(a)  No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior specific approval of the city council. 
(b)  The emergency management director shall have the right, in times of declared emergency, to expend public funds necessary for an expedient return to a safe and nonemergency situation. Such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meetings. 
(Code 1971, § 10-10; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 30-8. - False simulation of signal. 
    Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 10-6) 
Secs. 30-9-30-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-36-30-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR 

Sec. 30-61. - Created. 
(a)  There exists the city office of emergency management director, which shall be held by the chair of the city council in accordance with state law. 
(b)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 30-63. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Code 1971, § 10-1; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 30-62. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The powers and duties of the emergency management director shall include an ongoing survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this chapter, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1971, § 10-2; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 30-63. - Specific duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel; 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the city's emergency management organization; 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations; 
(4)  The marshalling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for in section 30-62, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any city department to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan; 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan; 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy; 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts; 
(8)  The supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city; and 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Code 1971, § 10-4) 
Secs. 30-64-30-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 30-91. - Composition. 
    The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the city officers and employees so designated by the emergency management director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups designated by the director. 
(Code 1971, § 10-5(a)) 
Sec. 30-92. - Functions and duties. 
    The functions and duties of the emergency management organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign tasks, duties and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out this chapter. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. 
(Code 1971, § 10-5(a)) 
Sec. 30-93. - Identification. 
    All members of the operational emergency management organization of the city shall be issued proper identification as defined in the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1971, § 10-5(b)) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; rabies control, §§ 6-12, 6-13; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; unsafe structures, § 14-756 et seq.; unsafe swimming pools, § 14-821 et seq.; moving of buildings and heavy equipment, § 14-896 et seq.; recovery costs for hazardous materials cleanup, § 38-126 et seq.; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; historical preservation, ch. 50; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; parks and recreation, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; vehicular transportation of dangerous materials, § 102-351 et seq.; utilities, ch. 106; waterways, ch. 114; zoning, ch. 118; performance standards for toxic and noxious matter, § 118-506; performance standards for fire or explosive hazard material, § 118-508. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS AND OTHER OFFENSIVE ACCUMULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Unsightly, unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 

Sec. 34-26. - Nuisance declared. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to allow weeds to grow or grass to be over 12 inches in height upon the premises or to allow trash or rubbish to accumulate thereon or within an adjoining alley, easement, right-of-way or other public way to such an extent as is reasonably calculated to create a fire hazard or to become injurious to the health of the citizens. Either act is declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1971, § 13-32; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-32, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1702-10-15 , 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 34-27. - Uncultivated weeds or plants in rank profusion. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises real property, occupied or unoccupied, to have weeds or plants that are not cultivated growing upon the premises or grass growing to a greater height than 12 inches on an average or to grow in rank profusion thereon or within an adjoining alley, easement, right-of-way or other public way. Any such premises upon which any weeds are permitted to grow or grass is above such height or in rank profusion. Allowing such shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
(Code 1971, § 13-33(a); Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-33(a), 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1702-10-15 , 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 34-28. - Determination of nuisance; abatement order. 
    Whenever weeds are allowed to grow or trash or rubbish is allowed to accumulate upon any premises within the city, as prohibited in section 34-26, the city sanitary officer shall determine whether or not such accumulation of rubbish and trash or the growth of grass, plants or weeds thereon or both constitutes a public nuisance. If the city sanitary officer so finds, he shall declare that the growth of grass, plants or weeds or accumulation of trash and rubbish upon such premises or both constitutes a public nuisance. He shall order the nuisance to be removed by the owner, occupant, lessee or person in charge of such premises, within seven days from the date of such order and notice as provided in section 34-29. 
(Code 1971, § 13-34; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-34, 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-29. - Notice. 
(a)  The notice required in section 34-28 must be given: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained, by: 
a.  Publication at least once; 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)  If the notice is mailed to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(c)  In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, the city without notice may take any action permitted by sections 34-32 and 34-33 and assess its expenses as provided by section 34-33. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006(b)-(d). 
Sec. 34-30. - Duty to cut growth. 
    It shall be the duty of any owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises to remove or cause to be cut all weeds, grass, or plants that are not cultivated as often as may be necessary to comply with section 34-27. However, the removal and cutting of the weeds, grass, or plants that are cultivated at least once in every three weeks during the period between June 1 and October 1 shall be deemed to be in compliance with section 34-27. 
(Code 1971, § 13-33(b); Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-33(b), 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-31. - Effect of noncompliance. 
    If the owner or occupant of the property does not comply with the requirements under this article within seven days of notice of a violation, the city may: 
(1)  Do the work or make the improvements required; and 
(2)  Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006(a). 
Sec. 34-32. - Abatement by city. 
    If the owner of the premises upon which is located a public nuisance, as prohibited by section 34-26, cannot be found or served with notice and there does not appear to be any person on such premises or if the nuisance is not abated within seven days of the notice, the nuisance shall be abated by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 13-35; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-35, 2-6-2001) 
Sec. 34-33. - Assessment of costs against owner. 
(a)  The city council may assess expenses incurred under sections 34-31 and 34-32 against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made. 
(b)  To obtain a lien against the property, the mayor, city health inspector or city official designated by the mayor must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk. The lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk. 
(c)  The lien obtained by the city council is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the city. 
(d)  The lien is inferior only to the following: 
(1)  Tax liens; and 
(2)  Liens for street improvements. 
(e)  The city council may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due. 
(f)  The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements. 
(g)  The remedy provided by this section is in addition to the remedy provided by section 1-14. 
(h)  The city council may foreclose a lien on property under this article in a proceeding relating to the property brought under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.91 et seq. 
(Code 1971, §§ 13-35, 13-36; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, §§ 13-35, 13-36, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to assess costs against owner, art. II, § 22[3]. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
Secs. 34-34-34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNHEALTHY OR UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 46. 

Sec. 34-61. - Condition of premises generally. 
    No person shall permit any premises owned or controlled by him to be or remain in such condition as to invite the creation of a nuisance or other abuse prejudicial to the public health or comfort. 
(Code 1971, § 14-12) 
Sec. 34-62. - Breeding places for mosquitoes. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises to cause or permit any pool, hole, tank, can or other receptacle containing water therein to stand with water for more than two days so that mosquitoes may breed therein. However, this section shall not apply to standing water in cisterns and shallow wells, but all persons using, maintaining and operating cisterns or shallow wells shall at all times keep the cisterns or shallow wells screened over the top and other places where openings may be maintained. 
(Code 1971, § 14-13) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prevent and summarily abate and remove all nuisances, art. II, § 2. 
Sec. 34-63. - Nuisances enumerated. 
    The following are declared to be nuisances and are prohibited: 
(1)  The placing or maintaining of such materials as tin cans or rubbish of any sort that might constitute a breeding place for mosquitoes or flies or offer a hiding place or protection for rodents. 
(2)  The transportation of manure, night soil, or other organic filth except in tight-covered wagons or containers which prevent leakage or access to flies and the dissemination of odors. 
(3)  Stagnant water on private premises likely to afford breeding places for mosquitoes within the city limits or within the distance of 1,000 feet therefrom. 
(4)  Hide houses, bone boiling or rendering establishments or tallow soap works, or other trades deleteriously affecting public health. 
(5)  Any foul, unpleasant odor and/or atmospheric contamination or pollution caused by a company, organization or private citizen as a result of any process, action or condition. 
(6)  The owner of real property in the City of Nacogdoches: 
a.  Keeping, storing, or accumulating refuse on premises in a neighborhood, unless the refuse is entirely contained in a closed receptacle; 
b.  Keeping, storing, or accumulating rubbish, including newspapers, abandoned vehicles, refrigerators, stoves, furniture, tires, and cans, on premises in a neighborhood or within 300 feet of a public street for ten days or more, unless the rubbish or object is completely enclosed in a building or is not visible from a public street; and 
c.  Maintaining premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor mosquitoes, rodents, vermin, or disease-carrying pests. 
(7)  The nuisances in this section affect the public health, sanitation and fire safety and may be punished by fines of up to $2,000.00 per day with each day being a separate offense. 
(Code 1971, § 14-8(e)-(h), (k); Ord. No. 1639-8-13, §§ II., III., 8-6-2013) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to define nuisances, art. II, § 22[1]. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to define nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 215.072, 217.042, 341.903, 401.002. 
Secs. 34-64-34-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-91-34-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNKED VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 

Sec. 34-116. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old. 
    Junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; or 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; 
(2)  Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled or discarded; or 
(3)  Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
a.  Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
b.  Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Code 1971, § 16-26) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.071, 683.077(b). 
Sec. 34-117. - Enforcement officer. 
(a)  The enforcement officer is that person designated by the chief of police to administer this division. The enforcement officer shall be a full-time regularly salaried city employee. 
(b)  The enforcement officer authorized to administer the procedures in this division may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(Code 1971, § 16-26) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 34-118. - Offense. 
(a)  A person commits an offense under this division if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 34-119. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(c)  The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction. 
(Code 1971, § 16-27(b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(d), (e). 
Sec. 34-119. - Public nuisance declared. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and 
(7)  Is a public nuisance. 
(b)  The location or presence of any junked vehicle on any lot, tract or parcel of land or any portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, private or public land or public right-of-way, within the city is prohibited and deemed a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain such a public nuisance or to permit or allow the nuisance to exist on his property or by him on the property of another. 
(Code 1971, § 16-27(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072. 
Sec. 34-120. - Inapplicability of division. 
    This division does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is: 
(1)  Completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Code 1971, § 16-27(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.077. 
Sec. 34-121. - Order to abate. 
    Whenever any such public nuisance exists in the city in violation of this division, notice of such violation shall be given, as applicable, to the owner of such vehicle or the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such vehicle is situated or to all such persons as provided in this section. A copy of the notice shall be served as follows: 
(1)  For such nuisance on private property, not less than ten days' notice stating the nature and location of the public nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated within ten days after the notice was mailed, and that a request for a hearing must be made in writing to the city manager before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lienholders of record and to the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered. 
(2)  For a nuisance on public property or public rights-of-way, not less than ten days' notice stating the nature and location of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten days, and that a request for a hearing must be made in writing to the city manager before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lienholders of record and to the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(Code 1971, § 16-28(1), (2)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.075. 
Sec. 34-122. - Hearing. 
(a)  The city council shall conduct hearings under the procedures adopted under this division. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under section 34-121, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice. 
(c)  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(d)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
(1)  Description; 
(2)  Vehicle identification number; and 
(3)  License plate number. 
(Code 1971, § 16-30(a); Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.076. 
Sec. 34-123. - Hearing procedure. 
    The city manager shall place a matter under this division on the agenda of the city council, shall give notice to the protestant, if applicable, of the time and place of the meeting of the city council, and shall state in such notice that the city council will make a determination as to whether the protestant's vehicle constitutes a nuisance under this division and shall invite the protestant to appear in person or by an attorney and present the reasons for his protest. If, after hearing the evidence and making such investigation as the council deems necessary, the council shall determine that the vehicle in question constitutes a nuisance, the council may order the vehicle removed from the premises as provided in section 34-124. 
(Code 1971, § 16-30(a); Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 34-124. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  If the owner or occupant of the premises or premises adjacent or the owner of the junked vehicle fails, neglects or refuses to either file notice of protest or to comply with the terms of any notice issued under section 34-121 or to abate the nuisance noticed, within ten days after service of such notice by personal service or mailing, after the hearing as provided in section 34-123, the city enforcement officer shall abate such public nuisance by removing the junked vehicle from its location and impounding the vehicle. 
(b)  All expenses incurred in the abatement of such nuisance and costs of preserving such vehicle prior to final disposition shall be charged against the owner of the junked vehicle or the owner or occupant of the premises or premises adjacent to the site of the nuisance. The city shall have a privileged lien on such junked vehicle, together with ten-percent interest on the delinquent amount from the date of impounding such vehicle. 
(c)  No junked vehicle removed under this division shall be reconstructed or made operable after being removed by the city enforcement officer. 
(Code 1971, § 16-29) 
Sec. 34-125. - Notice to state. 
    The city enforcement officer shall give notice to the state department of highways and public transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of disposition of any junked vehicle or vehicle part under this division. The notice must identify the vehicle or vehicle part. 
(Code 1971, § 16-30(b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074(b)(3), (f). 
Secs. 34-126-34-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE AND VIBRATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1573-5-11, § 1, adopted May 17, 2011, changed the title of Art. V from "Noise" to "Noise and vibrations". 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate noise, art. II, § 22[10]. 

Sec. 34-151. - Prohibited acts. 
    A person commits an offense if he makes or causes to be made loud and disturbing noise or vibration in the city that is offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of persons in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1573-5-11, § 2, 5-17-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1573-5-11, § 2, adopted May 17, 2011, amended § 34-151 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 34-151 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1971, § 19-14(a). 
Sec. 34-152. - Violations. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud disturbing noises and vibrations and are presumed to be offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the city in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning as required by law; the sounding of any such device unnecessarily or for an unreasonable period of time; or use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, tape or disc player, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, whether operated from a fixed location or stationary or moving vehicle, at such volume or at such hour or producing such vibrations as disturbs the peace, quiet, comfort, repose, health or safety of persons of ordinary sensibilities. Further, the operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or such device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at such disturbing volume in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or place in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, use as political advertising. The use, operation or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for commercial or political purposes or on city-owned property used as a polling place if used for the purpose of making a political speech or electioneering for or against any candidate, measure or political party. A person operates a vehicle with a loudspeaker if the person drives the vehicle, uses the loudspeaker, or operates sound equipment in connection with the loudspeaker, as described in V.T.C.A., Election Code § 61.004. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Loud and raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets or property or on private property at any time or place which injures, endangers or disturbs the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued loud and raucous noise, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of persons of ordinary sensibilities in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of such persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud and raucous or explosive noises which disturb reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(7)  Vehicle sound equipment. The use, operation or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, stereo, tape, or disc player, digital device, loud speaker, or any other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is either (1) audible or causing vibration more than 30 feet from the vehicle or (2) unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, or comfort of another person. 
(8)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and raucous or excessive noise in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers. 
(9)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(10)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any loud and raucous noise on any street or public way adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while such is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which materially interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs, injures or endangers patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed on any such street indicating that the street is a school, hospital or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers. The loud and raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibility. 
(12)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(13)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(14)  Automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles. The use of any automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, or loaded, or operated in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary noises (such as spinning or squealing tires, grating, grinding, rattling, engine braking or other noises) shall be deemed a violation of this article. Emergency response vehicles are exempt from this article. 
(Code 1971, § 19-14(b); Ord. No. 1456-4-07, 4-17-2007; Ord. No. 1573-5-11, §§ 3-7, 5-17-2011; Ord. No. 1662-3-14, § 3, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 34-153. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the sections of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, § 19-14(c)) 
Sec. 34-154. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any section of this article and which disturbs reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities or which endangers or injures the comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of such persons shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1971, § 19-14(d)) 
Sec. 34-155. - Speech or other communication violations. 
(a)  If conduct that would otherwise violate this article consists of speech or other communication or of gathering with others to hear or observe such speech or communication or of gathering with others to picket or otherwise express in a nonviolent manner a position on social, economic, political, or religious questions, the actor must be ordered to move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation prior to his arrest if he has not yet intentionally harmed the interest of others which those seek to protect. 
(b)  The order required by this section may be given by a peace officer, a firefighter, a person with authority to control the use of the premises, or any person directly affected by the violation. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  In circumstances in which this section requires an order, no order was given; 
(2)  An order, if given, was manifestly unreasonable in scope; or 
(3)  An order, if given, was promptly obeyed. 
(Code 1971, § 19-14(e)) 
Sec. 34-156. - Presumption. 
    Whenever a vehicle is involved in a violation of any portion of section 34-151 or 34-152 of this chapter, and the identity of the operator of the vehicle is not ascertained, it may be presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who committed the violation, either personally or through an agent or employee. Proof of ownership may be made by a computer-generated record of registration of the vehicle with the Texas Department of Transportation showing the name of the person to whom state licenses were issued. This proof is prima facie evidence of the ownership of the vehicle by the person to whom the certificate of registration was issued. This presumption may be rebutted by the affidavit of the registered owner of the vehicle as to the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the violation or by other clear and convincing evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1573-5-11, § 8, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 34-157. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  An employee of a governmental agency engaged in the employee's official duty; 
(2)  A person at a stadium, sports field, or ballpark during an event; 
(3)  A person at a parade, festival, street event or outdoor music event or other celebration of a political subdivision, school, or bona fide religious organization; 
(4)  A person ringing a bell or other on-site call to religious activity; 
(5)  Protests or demonstrations permitted under this Code of Ordinances; 
(6)  A person operating an emergency vehicle or emergency warning siren; 
(7)  A person operating an audible warning device on a vehicle or train as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1573-5-11, § 8, 5-17-2011; Ord. No. 1629-5-13, § 2, 5-21-2013) 
Secs. 34-158-34-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- The city has advised that Ord. No. 1353-2-05, §§ 1-8, adopted Feb. 15, 2005, supersedes Art. VI, §§ 34-181-34-186, 34-216-34-219, 34-246-34-254 and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1971, §§ 8-91-8-97; Ord. No. 1197-4-00, § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 2000. 
Cross reference- Signs, ch. 78. 

Sec. 34-181. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement, orientation, distribution patterns, and fixture types of outdoor lighting. The intent of this section is to encourage lighting that provides safety, utility, and security; also to prevent glare on public roadways, protect the privacy of residents, and reduce atmospheric light pollution. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 1, 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 34-182. - Conformance with applicable codes. 
    All outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this article, the most currently adopted building code, the National Electrical Code, and the sign ordinance of the jurisdiction as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 2, 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 34-183. - Approved materials and methods of construction or installation/operation. 
    The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material, or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed by this article, provided any such alternate has been approved. The responsible authority having jurisdiction may approve any such proposed alternate providing any of the following is met: 
(1)  Provides at least approximate equivalence to that applicable specific requirements of this article. 
(2)  Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this article; or 
(3)  Has been designed or approved by a registered professional engineer and content and function promotes the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 3, 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 34-184. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates, certain word and phrases used in this chapter shall mean the following: 
    Installed means the attachment, or assembly fixed in place, whether or not connected to a power source, of any outdoor light fixture. 
    Outdoor light fixture means outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to search, spot, and flood lights for: 
(1)  Buildings and structures; 
(2)  Recreational areas; 
(3)  Parking lot lighting; 
(4)  Landscape lighting; 
(5)  Billboards and other signs (advertising or other); 
(6)  Street lighting; 
(7)  Product display area lighting; 
(8)  Building overhangs and open canopies. 
    Person means any individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or any commercial entity including but not limited to firm, business, partnership, joint venture or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 4(4.1-4.3), 2-15-2005) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-185. - Shielding. 
    All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall have shielding as required by Table 5 of this section. 
(1)  "Fully shielded" means outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. 
(2)  "Partially shielded" means outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no more than ten percent of the light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. 
Table 5 Shielding Requirements 
Fixture lamp type Shielded Low/high pressure sodium, mercury vapor metal halide and fluorescent over 50 watts Fully Incandescent over 160 watts Fully Incandescent 160 watts or less Fully Fossil fuel None Any light source of 50 watts or less None Other sources As approved by building official  
Exemptions. 
The following uses shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
a.  Roadway and airport lighting and lighting activated by motion sensor devices. 
b.  Temporary circus, fair, or carnival. 
c.  Civic uses (lighting of flags, church steeples, statues). 
d.  Construction or emergency lighting, provided such lighting is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency necessitating said lighting. 
e.  Temporary lighting. 
f.  Lighting associated with agricultural pursuits. 
g.  Lighting associated with governmental operations. 
h.  Educational activities and sporting events. 
i.  Approved fireworks. 
j.  Residential dwellings located in R-1, R-2, R-3, & PD zoned districts. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 5(5.1, 5.2), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 34-186. - Submission of plans and evidence of compliance with article-Subdivision plats. 
(a)  Submission contents. The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of this jurisdiction in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit (as part of the application for permit) evidence that the proposed work will comply with this article. The submission may contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the laws of this jurisdiction upon application for the required permit: 
(1)  Plans indicating the location on the premises, number of fixtures, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices; 
(2)  Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices and the description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings (including sections where required); 
(3)  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or similar showing the angle of cut off or light emissions. 
(b)  Additional submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the plans examiner to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this article will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures, or lamps proposed, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
(c)  Subdivision plat certification. If any subdivision proposes to have installed street or other common or public area outdoor lighting, the final plat shall contain a statement certifying that the applicable provisions of the Nacogdoches Outdoor Lighting Ordinance will be adhered to. 
(d)  Lamp or fixture substitution. Should any outdoor light fixture or the type of light source therein be changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction for his approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this article, which must be received prior to substitution. 
(e)  All exterior lights and illuminated signs shall be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable light at [and glare across,] the property lines and disability glare at any location on or off the property. The "maintained horizontal illuminance recommendations" set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES) shall be observed. The authority having jurisdiction shall make final determinations of all compliance issues. 
(f)  Uplighting is prohibited. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward. The lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare and/or light trespass. The lighting must also be, as much as physically possible, contained to the target area. Internally lighted signs are acceptable. 
(g)  All building lighting for security or aesthetics will be full cut-off or a shielded type, not allowing any upward distribution of light. Floodlighting is discouraged, and if used, must be shielded to prevent: 
(1)  Disability glare for drivers or pedestrians, 
(2)  Light trespass beyond the property line, and 
(3)  Light above a 90 degree, horizontal plane. (Wallpack type fixtures are not acceptable, if visible from public areas or R.O.W.) 
Adjacent to residential property, no direct light source will be visible at the property line at ground level or above. 
(h)  All nonessential lighting should be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security. ("Nonessential" can apply but not limited to: display, aesthetic, parking and sign lighting). 
(i)  Glare into residential properties. No use or operation in any district shall be located or conducted so as to produce glare, or either direct or indirect illumination across the bounding property line from a source of illumination into a residentially zoned property, nor shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. For the purposes of this section, a nuisance shall be defined as more than two-tenths (0.2) of one foot-candle of light measured at the residential property line. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 6(6.1-6.9), 2-15-2005) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 90. 
Sec. 34-187. - Special uses. 
(a)  Recreational facilities. Any light source permitted by this article may be used for lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, tennis courts, auto race tracks, horse race tracks or show areas, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Lighting for parking lots and other areas surrounding the playing field, court, or track shall comply with this article for lighting. 
(2)  All fixtures used for event lighting should be designed, so as to minimize up-light, spill-light, and glare. 
(3)  All events are encouraged to be scheduled so as to complete all activity before or as near to 12:00 a.m. if possible. 
(b)  Parking lots. Spill-over lighting. All lighting facilities shall be so arranged as to reflect the illumination away from any adjacent property. Such lighting facilities shall provide illumination within parking areas not to exceed a maintained average of one foot-candle at ground level, and shall distribute not more than two-tenths of one foot-candle of light upon any adjacent residential property. 
(c)  Lighting as a nuisance or safety hazard. All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not intrude on residential property or create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or other public way. 
(d)  Lighting fixtures installed prior to the adoption of this article are exempt and no section of this article is intended to require retrofit of existing lighting fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 7(7.1-7.4), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 34-188. - Appeals. 
    Any person substantially aggrieved by any decision of the authority having jurisdiction made in administration of the Code has the right and responsibilities of appeal to the construction code board of this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1353-2-05, § 8, 2-15-2005) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings and condemnation of structures which increase fire hazard, art. II, § 22[19]; authority of city relating to fire escapes and exits, art. II, § 22[21]; authority of city to establish fire department, art. II, § 22[24]. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; burning of garbage, refuse and waste, § 82-5. 
State Law reference- Flammable liquids, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 753.001 et seq.; fire safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Reward for conviction of arsonists. 
    The city shall pay a reward of $1,000.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of arson within the corporate city limits. The office of the fire marshal shall cause to be printed placards to this effect, eight inches by 12 inches in size, and at least 12 of them shall be placed in wooden frames under glass in 12 different public buildings. 
(Code 1971, § 12-3) 
Secs. 38-2-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 141.001-143.001 et seq., 342.011. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 38-31-38-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE MARSHAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 

Sec. 38-56. - Office created. 
    The office of fire marshal is created in the city, which office shall be under the supervision and direction of the fire chief. Any action or responsibility of the fire marshal may be performed by his designee. 
(Code 1971, § 12-19; Ord. No. 1685-11-14, § 1, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 38-57. - Appointment. 
    The fire marshal shall be appointed by the fire chief with the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 12-21; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1685-11-14, § 1, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 38-58. - Qualifications. 
    The fire marshal shall be qualified for the duties of his office. 
(Code 1971, § 12-22) 
Sec. 38-59. - Removal. 
    The fire marshal shall be removed by the city manager only for good cause. 
(Code 1971, § 12-23) 
Sec. 38-60. - Authority to enter premises where fire has occurred. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority, at all times of the day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by this chapter, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred and other buildings and premises adjoining or near such building or premises, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1971, § 12-25) 
Sec. 38-61. - Privacy of investigations; separation of witnesses. 
    Every investigation held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1971, § 12-26) 
Sec. 38-62. - Testimony relating to fires. 
    The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to any matter under investigation by the fire marshal, and shall cause the testimony to be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1971, § 12-27) 
Sec. 38-63. - Authority to administer oaths. 
    The fire marshal is authorized and empowered to administer an oath or affirmation to any person appearing as witness before him. 
(Code 1971, § 12-28) 
Sec. 38-64. - Authority to summon witnesses, require production of evidence. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by this chapter, a subject of inquiry and investigation by the fire marshal and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 12-29) 
Sec. 38-65. - Misconduct of witnesses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any witness, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation by the fire marshal, to refuse to be sworn; to refuse to appear or testify; to disobey any lawful order of the fire marshal; to fail or refuse to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination; or to be guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of investigation or inquiry. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1971, § 12-30) 
Secs. 38-66-38-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 38-91. - Adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain Code known as the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code including Appendix B, C, D, E, I, L, and M published by the International Fire Code Institute and the International Conference of Building Officials, being particularly the 2015 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by this article, of which code and standards have been and are now filed in the office of the city secretary and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this article will shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 12-14; Ord. No. 1265-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1430-7-06, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1617-2-13, 2-5-2013; Ord. No. 1760-1-18 , §§ I, II, 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 38-92. - Definitions. 
(a)  Where the term "fire prevention department" is used in the fire prevention code adopted in section 38-91, it shall be held to mean the fire marshal's office of the city. 
(b)  Where the term "fire official" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the fire marshal. 
(Code 1971, § 12-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-93. - Amendments to code. 
    The fire prevention code adopted in this article is amended so that the following shall apply: 
Section 101.1 Title shall be amended as follows: 
These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Nacogdoches, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 109.4 Violation Penalties shall be amended as follows: 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed TWO THOUSAND and NO/100 ($2,000.00) DOLLARS for each offense, and each and every day any such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
Section 111.4 Failure to Comply shall be amended as follows: 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine not to exceed TWO THOUSAND AND NO/100 ($2,000.00) DOLLARS for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 302.1 Definition shall have added the following: 
Land clearing operation - The uprooting, cutting, or clearing of vegetation in connection with conversion for the construction of buildings, rights-of-way, residential, commercial, or industrial development, or the clearing of vegetation to enhance property value, access, or production. It does not include the maintenance burning of on-site property wastes such as fallen limbs, branches, or leaves, or other wastes from routine property clean-up activities, nor does it include burning following clearing for ecological restoration. 
Section 307 Open Burning, Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces shall read as follows: 
307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in accordance with this section. 
307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. The on-site or off-site burning of trees, brush, grass, leaves, branch trimmings or other plant growth which is not the product of a land clearing operation is deemed offensive and objectionable. 
307.1.2 Prohibited Materials. Household waste, garbage, electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics, non-wood construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, tires and items containing natural or synthetic rubber must not be burned. 
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, land clearing operation or a bonfire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
307.2.1 Authorization. Where required by state or local law or regulations, open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from the state or local air and water quality management authority, provided that all conditions specified in the authorization are followed. 
307.2.2 Weather and Timing. Burning shall be commenced and conducted only when wind direction and other meteorological conditions are such that smoke and other pollutants will not cause adverse effects to any public road, landing strip, navigable water, or off-site structure containing sensitive receptor(s): 
1.  The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one hour after sunrise. Burning shall be completed on the same day not later than one hour before sunset, and shall be attended by a responsible party at all times during the active burn phase when the fire is progressing. In cases where residual fires and/or smoldering objects continue to emit smoke after this time, such areas shall be extinguished if the smoke from these areas has the potential to create a nuisance or traffic hazard condition. In no case shall the extent of the burn area be allowed to increase after this time. 
2.  Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind speed is predicted to be less than six miles per hour (mph) or greater than 23 mph during the burn period. 
3.  Burning shall not be conducted during periods of actual or predicted persistent low-level atmospheric temperature inversions. 
4.  If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow onto or across a road or highway, it is the responsibility of the person initiating the burn to post flag-persons on affected roads. 
307.3 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation or violates this section. 
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet from any structure or less than 50 feet from any property line, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet of any structure or to within 50 feet of any property line. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet from a structure. 
2.  The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet where the pile size is 3 feet or less in diameter and 2 feet or less in height. 
307.4.1 Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a barbecue pit. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
307.4.2 Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet of a structure or combustible material except for portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings. 
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
307.6 Responsibility. The authority to conduct outdoor burning under this regulation does not exempt or excuse any person responsible from the consequences, damages, or injuries resulting from the burning and does not exempt or excuse anyone from complying with all other applicable laws or ordinances, regulations, and orders of governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the burning is otherwise conducted in compliance with this regulation. 
Section 903.2.7 Group M shall be amended as follows: 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m 2 ). 
2.  A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m 2 )." 
Section 2304.3.2 shall be amended as follows: 
Dispensing devices shall comply with section 2306.7. Dispensing devices operated by the insertion of coins or currency shall not be used. 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above ground storage tanks are prohibited is amended to read as follows: 
(a)  The limits referred to in section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the fire prevention code in which the storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside aboveground storage tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: 
500 feet from public and private schools, residences, and structures designated under historic overlay zoning. 
(b)  The limits referred to in section 5706.5.1.1 in which bulk plants for flammable and combustible liquids are prohibited are hereby established as follows: all areas within the city limits. 
Section 6104.2 Maximum capacities within established limits shall be amended as follows: 
District limits prohibiting the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall be established as follows: all areas within the city limits except by special permission granted by the city council. 
Appendix L Requirements for Fire Fighter Air Replenishment Systems shall be amended as follows: 
Section L101 add new Section L101.2 to read as follows: 
Section L101.2 Required Location. In new buildings, fill stations shall be required when any of the following conditions occur: 
1.  Any new building more than 6 stories in height. 
2.  Any new building with more 2 or more floors below grade. 
3.  Any new building 500,000 square feet or more in size. 
(Code 1971, § 12-16; Ord. No. 1339-11-03, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 1433-9-06, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1562-12-10, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 1637-6-13, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1665-5-14, 5-6-2014; Ord. No. 1760-1-18 , §§ I, II, 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 38-94. - Enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code adopted in this article shall be enforced by the office of fire marshal, which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1971, § 12-33) 
Sec. 38-95. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article or who shall fail to comply with the fire prevention code or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made under the fire prevention code or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under the fire prevention code or any certificate or permit issued under such code, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, and upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1971, § 12-34; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 38-96. - Appeals. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article do not apply or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the fire prevention code or any of the regulations under such code has been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted, the owner of such building or structure or his duly authorized agent may appeal the decision of the fire official to the board of adjustments and appeals. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 15 days after the decision is rendered by the fire official. Appeals shall be on forms provided by the fire official. 
(b)  Unsafe or dangerous building. If a building or structure or operation is, in the opinion of the fire official, unsafe or dangerous, the fire official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter period. 
(Code 1971, § 12-24) 
Secs. 38-97-38-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RECOVERY COSTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 

Sec. 38-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous materials means any substance or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, and includes but is not limited to such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives. 
(Code 1971, § 12-42) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-127. - Liability for costs. 
    Any party who accidentally, negligently, or intentionally causes or is responsible for a spill of hazardous materials affecting property within the city shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the fire department and the other departments and agencies which assist it to abate such an event. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1971, § 12-41) 
Sec. 38-128. - Costs to include out-of-pocket expenses. 
    For purposes of this article, costs incurred by the fire department or other city departments shall include but shall not be limited to all actual out-of-pocket expenses attributable to the abatement or cleanup of any hazardous materials incident, including costs of equipment operations; costs of materials utilized; costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full-time city employment; overtime costs; and any other incidental costs incurred by the city as a result of the incident. 
(Code 1971, § 12-43) 
Sec. 38-129. - Exemptions from costs. 
    The authority to recover costs under this article shall not include actual fire suppression, rescue, medical, etc., services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department and other city departments and are unrelated to a particular hazardous materials incident. 
(Code 1971, § 12-44) 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 106; waterways, ch. 114; zoning, ch. 118; supplementary district regulations for floodplain areas, § 118-305. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 

Sec. 42-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Nacogdoches, Texas does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Nacogdoches are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains, which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future floodblight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Secs. 42-5-42-15. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 

Secs. 42-16-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-26. - Title. 
    This article shall constitute and be known and may be cited as "Floodplain Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-27. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    APEX means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year-also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) -See flood elevation study. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway -See regulatory floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure, and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area -See area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)) , includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in [NFIP] Sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Secs. 42-28-42-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-91. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    The article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-92. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Nacogdoches County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated May 20, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated May 20, 2010, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-93. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-94. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-95. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-96. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be; (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-97. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Secs. 42-98-42-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-121. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The city manager or his appointed designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-122. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter; 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required; 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained; 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with article III, section 42-92, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-123. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of article V., section 42-152(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with article IV., 42-122(1); 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-124. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of appeals, as established by the city, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in 42-123(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (article I, section 42-3). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in Article IV, subsections 42-124(a)-(i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Secs. 42-125-42-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42.151. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-152. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) article III, section 42-92, (ii) article IV, subsection 42-122(8), or (iii) article V, subsection 42-153(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in article IV, subsection 42-123(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated one foot above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City of Nacogdoches FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of article IV, subsection 42-123(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-153. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with article I, sections 42-2, 42-3, and 42-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of article 3, 42-93; article IV, section 42-123; and the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to article III, section 42-92 or article IV, subsection 42-122(8) of this chapter. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-154. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in article III, section 42-92, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in article IV, section 42-123 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 42-155. - Floodways. 
    Floodways: located within areas of special flood hazard established in article III, 42-92, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If Article V, subsection 42-155(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article V. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 1539-4-10, 4-6-2010) 
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to promulgate regulations for health and sanitation, art. II, § 22[3], [4]. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; unhealthy or unsightly conditions, § 34-61 et seq.; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Public health generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 1.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Health inspector means the city health inspector. 
    Isolation means the removal of a person from his own residence or temporary place of abode to such place as the health inspector may direct, and detention in such place from which the public is excluded or detention in such person's own residence or temporary place of abode under conditions approved by the health inspector so that the public is excluded therefrom and safeguarded from such communicable disease. 
    Owner means any person controlling any premises in the city by lease, rental agreement or otherwise. 
(Code 1971, § 14-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-2. - Swimming or bathing in polluted water. 
    No body of water, whether it is a natural or an artificial body of water in the city, which contains sewage, waste or other contaminating or polluting ingredients rendering the water hazardous to health shall be used for swimming or bathing purposes by any person. 
(Code 1971, § 14-118) 
Secs. 46-3-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Health inspector and city manager to suppress diseases and abate nuisances; appeals. 
(a)  To protect public health and sanitation, the health inspector and city manager are empowered to employ the most efficient and practical means for the immediate suppression of disease or the abatement of nuisances. 
(b)  Any person who shall deem himself aggrieved by any order or ruling of the health inspector or city manager relating to matters within the scope of this chapter shall have the privilege of appealing from such order or ruling to the city council by filing a written protest within ten days from the order or ruling. 
(Code 1971, § 14-3; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 46-32-46-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HEALTH INSPECTOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local public health organization, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq. 

Sec. 46-61. - Administration of health laws; membership on health code advisory committee. 
(a)  The health officer shall administer the health laws of the state sanitary code. 
(b)  The health officer, upon appointment, shall automatically become a member of the City of Nacogdoches Health Code Advisory Committee and will serve on said board for the term of appointment as health officer. 
(Code 1971, § 14-2; Ord. No. 1349-1-04, 1-20-2004) 
State Law reference- Public health board, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.034. 
Sec. 46-62. - Gathering data; public information. 
    It shall be the duty of the health inspector to secure information and data concerning the control of disease and conditions affecting and endangering the public health and to make such information available as may be practicable or of value to the people of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 14-4) 
Sec. 46-63. - Advice to and cooperation with sanitary superintendent. 
    It shall be the duty of the health inspector to advise and work in harmony with the city sanitary superintendent and his assistants in the performance of their duties, which may require the enforcement of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to public health. 
(Code 1971, § 14-5) 
Sec. 46-64. - Investigations and inspections. 
    The health inspector shall, when required by the city council, investigate, consult or advise in regard to conditions affecting public health. When required to inspect any public hospital, asylum, prison, school, hotel, cafe, boardinghouse, or other institution, he shall do so promptly. If an emergency exists, he shall, in conjunction with the city manager, take proper steps to protect the public health and make a report immediately to the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 14-6; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 46-65. - Assistance. 
    The city council is authorized to employ such assistance for the health inspector as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1971, § 14-7; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 46-66. - Investigation of nuisances, sources of pollution and accumulations of deleterious materials; order of abatement or removal. 
(a)  The health inspector, upon receiving information of the existence of any public nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material deleterious to public health within his jurisdiction, shall immediately investigate. Upon finding the existence of any public nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material deleterious to public health to exist, may issue an order in writing to the proper party for the abatement or removal of the public nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material. All expenses for the abatement or removal of any nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material deleterious to public health shall be paid by the person responsible for it. 
(b)  When any nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material deleterious to public health is found on private property, any city officer having jurisdiction shall notify the owner or the occupant thereof to remove or abate such nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material at his expense within such time as the officer shall direct. If the owner or occupant neglects or refuses to remove or abate any nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material deleterious to public health, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-14 and shall pay such expense and cost that is incurred for such removal or abatement. 
(Code 1971, § 14-9) 
Sec. 46-67. - Copy of order to be filed. 
    The health inspector shall keep on file in his office a copy of any order issued by him pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1971, § 14-10) 
Sec. 46-68. - Right of entry. 
    The health inspector or the city sanitary superintendent shall have the right to enter all places within the city where there is cause to suspect any nuisance, source of pollution or accumulation of material deleterious to public health therein. 
(Code 1971, § 14-11) 
Secs. 46-69-46-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING POLLUTION CONTROL 

Sec. 46-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote public health by decreasing citizen's exposure to secondhand smoke thereby creating smoke free environments for workers and citizens through regulation in the work place and all public places. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-101. - Definitions. 
    The words, terms, and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined herein shall have the meaning assigned to them in the City of Nacogdoches Building and Zoning Codes and Ordinances. 
    Business means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for nonprofit or profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity who employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, office landscaping, or similar structures. 
    Fraternal organization means a nonprofit organization that: 
a.  Is chartered by a national organization; 
b.  Is tax exempt under section 501(C)(8), (10), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
c.  Operates under a lodge system with a representative form of government; and is organized for the exclusive benefit of the members of the organization and their dependents. 
    Night club or dance hall means an establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by any of the following as a principal use of the establishment: 
a.  Live, recorded or televised entertainment, including, but not limited to performances by magicians, musicians or comedians; 
b.  Dancing; or 
c.  Any combination of a. and b. 
    Outdoor venue means city property where seating is provided for spectators by city or its agents. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways. A private residence used as a permissible home occupation is not considered a place of employment for the purposes of this article unless it is used as a child care, bed and breakfast or health care facility. 
    Private residence means any household unit or special unit type including but not limited to single-family detached and attached dwellings, two-family dwellings, apartments, condomenia, manufactured homes, or other residential dwelling units. 
    Private club where liquor by the drink is served means any establishment that serves liquor by the drink for on premise consumption. This shall include all porch, patio, and outside areas prohibiting unobstructed public access. 
    Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is allowed, including but not limited to banks, educational facilities, health facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, tattoo parlors, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place." 
    Restaurant means any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private or public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities. This shall include all porch, patio and outside seating areas. 
    Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
    Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, or burning of any tobacco product or similar substance in any manner or any form. 
    Sports arena means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-103. - Application of article to city-owned facilities. 
    All enclosed facilities owned by the city and within 20 feet of permanent outdoor venue seating shall be subject to the provisions of this article. The city manager may designate additional no smoking areas at outdoor venues owned by the city including but not limited to parks and festivals. The posting of signs according to section 46-107 of this article shall denote said areas. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-104. - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places and within 20 feet of any public entrance to a business or facility within the city, including but not limited to the following places: 
(1)  Elevators; 
(2)  Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit under the authority of the city, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots; 
(3)  Restrooms; 
(4)  Service lines; 
(5)  Retail stores; 
(6)  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to attorneys offices and other offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels; 
(7)  Restaurants; 
(8)  Night clubs or dance halls; 
(9)  Private clubs where liquor by the drink is served; 
(10)  Public areas of aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums when open to the public; 
(11)  Any facility that is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance, except when smoking is part of a stage production, and then only by the actors while performing onstage; 
(12)  Sports arenas and convention halls; 
(13)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city; 
(14)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including but not limited to hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices, and dentists' offices; 
(15)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, retirement facilities, nursing homes, hotels, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; and 
(16)  Polling places. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment or facility may declare that entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-105. - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications. 
(b)  Within 60 days of the effective date of this article, each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known, and maintain a written smoking policy that shall contain the following requirements: 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within a place of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. Smoking is further prohibited within 20 feet of any public entrance to a building or facility. 
(c)  The smoking policy shall be communicated by the employer to all employees within three weeks of its adoption. 
(d)  All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective employee. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-106. - Where smoking not regulated. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as childcare or health care facilities; 
(2)  A facility operated by a fraternal organization for a charitable, benevolent, or educational function if the premises are controlled by the organization; 
(3)  Retail tobacco store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental; 
(4)  A hotel, motel or bed and breakfast room designated as a smoking room and rented to a person, provided the hotel, motel or bed and breakfast may not designate more than 25 percent of its rooms that are rented for temporary overnight occupation by the public as a smoking rooms; 
(5)  A private or semi-private room in a nursing home or long-term care facility that is occupied by individuals who smoke and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare the entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-107. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  A minimum of one "No Smoking" sign or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted at all public entrances in every building or other place where smoking is regulated by this article, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of such building or other place. 
(b)  Every restaurant, nightclub or dance hall shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating smoking is prohibited inside the facility and within 20 feet of any entrance. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-108. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be implemented by the city manager. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the city manager. 
(c)  The city shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, a "self-certification" from the owner, manager, operator, or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(d)  It is the responsibility of the owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this article to inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(e)  It is the responsibility of the owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this article to enforce the regulations of this article at their establishment. Refusal by the owner, manager, operator or employee of the establishment to enforce the regulations of this article shall cause the owner, manager, operator or employee to be guilty of an infraction and subject to penalties consistent with chapter 1, section 1-14 of this Code. In the event patron(s) of an establishment regulated by this article fail to adhere to this article, the owner, manager, operator or employee of the establishment shall contact the city police department. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-109. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with any of its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to penalties consistent with chapter 1, section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-110. - No retaliation. 
    No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-111. - Other applicable laws. 
    This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. This article is cumulative of other laws that regulate smoking. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-112. - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Sec. 46-113. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be effective 60 days after the date of its publication in a local paper of general circulation. 
(Ord. No. 1489-4-08, 4-15-2008) 
Chapter 50 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; regulations for signs in historic districts, § 78-126 et seq.; utilities, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 118. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-26. - Purpose. 
    The city council declares that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks or districts of historical, cultural, and architectural importance and significance is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and general welfare of the public. It is recognized that the city represents the unique confluence of time and place that shaped the identity of generations of citizens, collectively and individually, and produced significant historic, architectural, and cultural resources that constitute their heritage. This article is intended to: 
(1)  Protect and enhance the districts and landmarks which represent distinctive elements of the city's historic, architectural, and cultural heritage; 
(2)  Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
(3)  Protect and enhance the city's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; 
(4)  Ensure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city; 
(5)  Promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most appropriate use of such property within the city; and 
(6)  Encourage stabilization, restoration and improvements of such properties and their values. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-27. - Authority to designate. 
    The city council may designate and zone certain sites, districts, areas, buildings, and lands in the city as historic landmarks to be protected, enhanced, and preserved in the interest of culture, prosperity, education and general welfare of the people, and define, amend, and delineate the boundaries thereof. All properties under the historic overlay zoning classification are considered historic landmarks for the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 2.1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-28. - Authority to initiate request for designation. 
    Any historic overlay zoning applications and/or request may be initiated by the historic landmark preservation committee, the owner of the affected property or the owner's authorized representative, or the city council or planning and zoning commission may direct the historic preservation officer to initiate such a request on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 2.2, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-29. - Moratorium upon initiation of historic overlay proceedings. 
    Upon initiation of the procedure for historic overlay zoning, no application may be accepted for a permit to place, construct, alter, demolish, or remove any structure on the property if the proposed work would alter the site or the exterior of a structure on the site. This moratorium ends on the earliest of the following dates: 
(1)  If the proposed zoning change is approved, the effective date of the ordinance implementing the change; 
(2)  If the proposed zoning change is denied, the day after the city council makes its final decision; or 
(3)  The 120th day after initiation of a request for designation as a historic overlay. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 2.3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-30. - Enforcement and criminal penalties. 
(a)  All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this article shall conform to any requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the building official to inspect periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event work is found that is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the committee and verification by the preservation officer, the building official shall issue a stop work order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work order is in effect. 
(b)  Any person who adversely affects the structural, physical, or visual integrity of a structure protected under the historic overlay in violation of this article of the zoning ordinance is liable to the city for damages. If the structural, physical, or visual integrity of the structure or property is adversely affected to the extent that it is not feasible to restore the structure, the damages are equal to the cost of constructing, using as many of the original materials as possible, a new structure that is a reasonable facsimile of the historic structure, as well as any engineer, architect, appraiser, or attorney's fees related to enforcement of this section. 
(c)  If it is feasible to restore the structural, physical, or visual integrity of the structure to its former level, the damages are equal to the cost of the restoration, using as many of the original materials as possible, as well as any engineer, architect, appraiser, or attorney's fees related to enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 12, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-31. - Ordinary maintenance. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district which does not involve a change in design, material, or outward appearance. In-kind replacement or repair is included in this definition of ordinary maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 13, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-32. - Demolition by neglect. 
    No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within a historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the historic landmark preservation committee, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. Examples of such deterioration include the following: 
(1)  Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports. 
(2)  Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members. 
(3)  Deterioration of exterior chimneys. 
(4)  Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar. 
(5)  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, or foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
(6)  Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 14, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 50-33-50-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC LANDMARK PRESERVATION COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-201 et seq. 

Sec. 50-61. - Created. 
    There is created a committee to be known as the historic landmark preservation committee. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-62. - Membership. 
    The historic landmark preservation committee shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the city council with consideration to be given to the following recommended professions: 
(1)  Architect, planner, or representative of a design profession; 
(2)  Historian; 
(3)  Licensed real estate broker; 
(4)  Property owner of a landmark or in a historic district; 
(5)  Attorney; and 
(6)  Archaeologist or from a related discipline. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3(A), 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-63. - Member credentials. 
    All members of the historic landmark preservation committee, regardless of background, shall have a known and demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3(B), 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-64. - Terms. 
    Members of the historic landmark preservation committee shall serve for staggered terms of at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3(C), 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-65. - Ex officio members. 
    In addition to the seven members of the historic landmark preservation committee appointed by the city council, the historic preservation officer and any other person of experience and knowledge designated by the city council as special advisor shall sit on the committee as ex officio members. None of the ex officio members shall have voting power, but shall assist the committee in its various functions. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3(D), 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-66. - Chair and vice-chair. 
    The chair and vice-chair of the historic landmark preservation committee shall be elected annually by a majority of committee members. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3(E), 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-67. - Powers. 
    The powers of the historic landmark preservation committee shall include the following: 
(1)  Staff recommendations. Recommendation for employment of staff and professional consultants as necessary to carry out the duties of the committee. 
(2)  Rules and procedures. Preparation of rules and procedures as necessary to carry out the business of the committee, which shall be ratified by the city council. 
(3)  Criteria for designation. Adoption of criteria for the designation of historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and the delineation of historic districts, which shall be ratified by the city council. 
(4)  Survey and inventory. Conduct surveys and maintain an inventory of significant historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and all properties located in historic districts within the city. 
(5)  Recommend designations. Recommend the designation of resources as landmarks and historic districts. 
(6)  Create subcommittees. Create subcommittees from among its memberships and delegate to these subcommittees responsibilities to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(7)  Maintain minutes. Maintain written minutes which record all actions taken by the committee and the reasons for taking such actions. 
(8)  Recognize contributions to preservation. Confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks or within districts by means of certificates, plaques, or markers. 
(9)  Increase public awareness. Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural, and architectural preservation by developing and participating in public education programs. 
(10)  Recommendations for use of funds. Make recommendations to the city government concerning the utilization of state, federal, or private funds to promote the preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the city. 
(11)  Certificates of appropriateness. Approve or disapprove applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to this article. 
(12)  Annual report. Prepare and submit annually to the city council a report summarizing the work completed during the previous year. 
(13)  Design guidelines. Prepare specific design guidelines for the review of landmarks and districts. 
(14)  Incentive programs. Propose preservation incentive programs for landmarks or districts. 
(15)  Recommendations for acquisitions. Recommend the acquisition of a landmark structure by the city government where its preservation is essential to the purpose of this article and where private preservation is not feasible. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3(F), 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-68. - Meetings. 
(a)  Generally. The historic landmark preservation committee shall meet at least monthly, if business is at hand. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chair or on the written request of any two committee members. All meetings shall be held in conformance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
(b)  Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of not less than a majority of the full authorized membership. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 3(H), (I), 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 50-69-50-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 

Sec. 50-96. - Appointment. 
    The city manager shall appoint a qualified city official, staff person, or appropriate resident of the municipal entity to serve as historic preservation officer. This officer shall administer this article and advise the historic landmark preservation committee on matters submitted to it. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 4, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 50-97. - Responsibilities. 
    In addition to serving as representative of the historic landmark preservation committee, the historic preservation officer is responsible for coordinating the city's preservation activities with those of state and federal agencies and with local, state, and national nonprofit preservation organizations. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 4, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 50-98-50-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS AND DISTRICTS 

Sec. 50-126. - Notification of property owners. 
    Property owners of proposed historic landmarks for landmark designation or properties within a potential historic district for district designation shall be notified prior to the historic landmark preservation committee's hearing on the recommended designation. At the committee's public hearing, owners, interested parties and technical experts may present testimony or documentary evidence which will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed historic landmark. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 5.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-127. - Timing of review and recommendations. 
    Upon recommendation of the historic landmark preservation committee, the proposed historic landmark shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission within 30 days from the date of submittal of designation request. The planning and zoning commission shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation within 45 days of receipt of such recommendation from the committee. Such hearings shall be in the same manner and according to the same procedures as specifically provided in the general zoning ordinance in chapter 118. The planning and zoning commission shall make its recommendation to the city council within 45 days subsequent to the hearing on the proposed designation. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 5.2, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-128. - City council public hearing. 
    The city council shall schedule a hearing on the historic landmark preservation committee's recommendation made pursuant to this division, to be held within 45 days of receipt of the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The city council shall give notice, follow the publication procedure, hold a hearing, and make its determination in the same manner as provided in the general zoning ordinance in chapter 118. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 5.3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-129. - Recording of designations. 
    Upon designation of a building, object, site, or structure as a historic landmark, the city council shall cause the designation to be recorded in the official public records of real property of the county, the tax records of the city and the county central appraisal district, as well as the official zoning maps of the city. All zoning maps should indicate the designated landmark with an appropriate mark. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 5.4, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-130. - Criteria for designation. 
    Upon meeting any one of the following criteria, a historic landmark or district may be designated if it: 
(1)  Possesses significance in history, architecture, archaeology, or culture. 
(2)  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state, or national history. 
(3)  Is associated with the lives of persons significant in the city's past. 
(4)  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type or period of architecture, or method of construction. 
(5)  Represents the work of a master designer, builder, or craftsman. 
(6)  Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 6, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 50-131-50-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 50-156. - Alteration or new construction affecting landmarks or historic districts. 
(a)  No person shall carry out any exterior reconstruction, alteration, restoration, rehabilitation of any historic landmark or any new construction on property within a historic district, nor shall any person make any material change in the light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements visible from a public right-of-way which affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the historic landmark or any property within a historic district without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the committee. 
(b)  A certificate of appropriateness is not required to remove, relocate, or demolish a designated historic landmark. Any person wishing to remove, relocate, or demolish a designated historic landmark or structure should refer to division 6, demolition or removal, sections 50-191 through 50-201 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 7, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-157. - Criteria for approval. 
(a)  Generally. In considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the historic landmark preservation committee shall be guided by any adopted design guidelines and, where applicable, from the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings. Any adopted design guidelines and Secretary of the Interior's standards shall be made available to the property owners of historic landmarks or property within historic districts. 
(b)  Minimal alterations. Every reasonable effort shall be made to adapt the property in a manner which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, object, or site and its environment. 
(c)  Preservation of distinguishing qualities. The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, object, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided when possible. 
(d)  Consistency of alterations with styles. All buildings, structures, objects, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged. 
(e)  Previous alterations. Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, object, or site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
(f)  Stylistic features and craftsmanship. Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize a building, structure, object, or site shall be kept where possible. 
(g)  Repair and replacement of features. Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever possible. If replacement is necessary, the new material should reflect the material being replaced in composition, design, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historical, physical, or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
(h)  Cleaning of structures. The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken. 
(i)  Archaeological resources. Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project. 
(j)  Acceptability of contemporary designs for alterations. Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, material, and character of the property, neighborhood or environment. 
(k)  Preservation of historic features with new alterations. Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to buildings, structures, objects, or sites shall be done in such a manner that, if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the building, structure, object, or site would be unimpaired. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 8, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-158. - Application. 
    Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to this division, the owner shall file an application for such a certificate with the historic landmark preservation committee. The application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  A detailed description of the proposed work. 
(3)  Location and photographs of the property and adjacent properties. 
(4)  Elevation drawings of the proposed changes, if available. 
(5)  Samples of materials to be used. 
(6)  If the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, method of illumination if any, and a plan showing the sign's location on the property. 
(7)  Any other information which the committee may deem necessary in order to visualize the proposed work. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 9.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-159. - Certificate required before building permit. 
    No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the historic landmark preservation committee. The certificate of appropriateness required by this division shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be required by any other section of this Code or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 9.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-160. - Timeframe for review and decision. 
    The historic landmark preservation committee shall review the application for a certificate of appropriateness at a regularly scheduled meeting within 60 days from the date the application is received, at which time an opportunity will be provided for the applicant to be heard. The committee shall approve, deny, or approve with modifications the permit within 45 days after the review meeting. If the committee does not act within 90 days of the receipt of the application, a permit may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 9.3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-161. - Decisions of committee. 
    All decisions of the historic landmark preservation committee on the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be in writing. The committee's decision shall state its findings pertaining to the approval, denial, or modification of the application. A copy shall be sent to the applicant. Additional copies shall be filed as part of the public record on that property and dispersed to appropriate city departments. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 9.4, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-162. - Appeal of decision. 
    An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness dissatisfied with the action of the historic landmark preservation committee relating to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to the city council within 30 days after receipt of notification of such action. The city council shall give notice, follow publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its decision in the same manner as provided in the general zoning ordinance in chapter 118. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 9.5, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 50-163-50-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 50-191. - Application for demolition permit. 
    Any owner seeking demolition or removal of a designated landmark shall submit an application to the historic preservation officer. The historic preservation officer shall immediately forward the application to the historic landmark preservation committee. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 10.1(A), 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 50-192. - Initial review of application for demolition permit. 
    Any owner seeking demolition or removal of a designated landmark shall submit an application to the historic preservation officer or his designee. Upon receiving a complete application, the historic preservation officer or his designee shall immediately forward the application to the historic landmark preservation committee. If any additional information is required, the historic preservation officer or his designee shall notify the applicant, in writing, within ten days of receiving the application. The request for a demolition permit may not be considered by the historic landmark preservation committee until the historic preservation officer or his designee deems it complete. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 10.1(B), 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 50-193. - Decision to demolish. 
    If the historic landmark preservation committee determines that the structure should be demolished or removed and no appeal to the city council is made within ten days, the historic preservation officer shall issue a demolition permit if all other requirements of this Code are met. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 10.1(C), 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-194. - Decision not to demolish. 
(a)  If the committee determines that the structure should not be demolished, the application shall be suspended for a period not to exceed one year from the date of the final decision, unless: 
(1)  The certificate for demolition or removal has been denied without prejudice; or 
(2)  The historic landmark preservation commission waives the time limitation because it finds that there are changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a new hearing. A simple majority vote by the historic landmark preservation commission is required to grant the request for a waiver of time limitation. 
(b)  After the one-year period following a denial of a certificate for demolition, the applicant may file a new application for demolition of the structure which was previously denied. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 10.1(D), 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-195. - Application requirements. 
    The application must be accompanied by the following information to be considered complete: 
(1)  An affidavit in which the owner swears or affirms that all information submitted in the application is true and correct. 
(2)  A written statement showing that the demolition is sought for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  To replace the structure with a new structure that is more appropriate and compatible with the historic overlay district. 
b.  No economically viable use of the property exists. 
c.  The structure poses an imminent threat to public health or safety. 
d.  The structure is noncontributing to the historic overlay district because it is newer than the period of historic significance. 
(3)  For an application: 
a.  To replace the structure with a new structure that is more appropriate and compatible with the historic overlay district, the following information must also be included: 
(i)  Drawings, photographs, or written descriptions depicting the original construction of the structure. 
(ii)  Drawings, photographs, or written descriptions depicting the current condition of the structure. 
(iii)  Any conditions the applicant requesting demolition is voluntarily placing on the new structure to mitigate the loss of the current structure. 
(iv)  Drawings of the new structure. 
(v)  A guarantee agreement between the owner and the city that demonstrates the owner's intent and financial ability construct the new structure. The guarantee agreement must: 
1.  Contain a covenant to construct the proposed structure by a specific date in accordance with architectural drawings approved by the city through the certificate of appropriateness process; 
2.  Require the owner or construction contractor to post a performance and payment bond, letter of credit, escrow agreement, cash deposit or other arrangement acceptable to the director to ensure construction of the new structure; and 
3.  Be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
b.  Of no economically viable use of the property, the following information must be included: 
(i)  The past and current uses of the structure and property. 
(ii)  Drawings, photographs, or written descriptions depicting the current condition of the structure. 
(iii)  Drawings, photographs, or written descriptions depicting the original construction of the structure. 
(iv)  Any conditions the applicant requesting demolition is voluntarily placing on the new structure to mitigate the loss of the current structure. 
(v)  The date and price of purchase or other acquisition of the structure and property. 
(vi)  The assessed value of the structure and property according to the two most recent tax assessments. 
(vii)  The amount of real estate taxes on the structure and property for the previous two years. 
(viii)  The current fair market value of the structure and property as determined by an independent licensed appraiser. 
(ix)  All appraisals obtained by the owner and prospective purchasers within the previous two years in connection with the potential or actual purchase, financing, or ownership of the structure and property. 
(x)  All listings of the structure and property for sale or rent within the previous two years, prices asked, and offers received. 
(xi)  A profit and loss statement for the property and structure containing the annual gross income for the previous two years and itemized expenses (including operating and maintenance costs) for the previous two years. 
(xii)  All capital expenditures during the current ownership. 
(xiii)  A restoration study of the structure, performed by a licensed architect or engineer. This study should analyze feasibility - structurally and financially - of restoration and/or adaptive reuse of the structure. 
c.  To demolish or remove a structure that poses an imminent threat to public health or safety, the following must be included: 
(i)  Drawings, photographs, or written descriptions of the current condition of the structure. 
(ii)  A study performed regarding the nature, imminence, and severity of the threat, performed by a licensed architect or engineer. 
(iii)  A restoration study of the structure, performed by a licensed architect or engineer. This study should analyze feasibility - structurally and financially - of restoration and/or adaptive reuse of the structure. 
(iv)  Any other information requested by the building official to determine the condition of the property. 
d.  To demolish or remove a structure that is noncontributing to the historic overlay district, the following must be included: 
(i)  Documentation that the structure is noncontributing to the historic overlay district. 
(ii)  Documentation of the age of the structure. 
(iii)  A statement of the purpose of the demolition. 
(4)  Any other evidence the historic landmark preservation commission, city council, or city planner requests. 
(5)  Any other evidence the property owner wishes to submit. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-196 - Economic review panel. 
(a)  Purpose. The historic landmark preservation commission shall approve an ad hoc three-person economic review panel, whose task is to review financial portions of applications of no economically viable use of the property. 
(b)  Members. The review panel shall consist of three persons knowledgeable in the local real estate economy, renovation and redevelopment. 
(c)  Restrictions. The review panel may not be: 
(1)  A person with financial interest in the property. 
(2)  An employee of the applicant. 
(3)  A city employee. 
(4)  A member of the landmark commission. 
(d)  Selection of review panel. The economic review panel must consist of: 
(1)  One person appointed by the city council upon recommendation of the historic landmark preservation committee, and 
(2)  One person selected by the property owner, and 
(3)  One person shall be selected by the first two appointees. If the first two appointees cannot agree on a third appointee within ten days of receipt of the application by the city planner or his designee, then the city planner will select the third appointee with preference given to a representative of the Texas Historical Commission. 
(e)  Economic review panel hearing. Within 30 days of appointment, the economic review panel shall review the application, hold a hearing, and forward its recommendation on to the historic landmark preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-197. - Historic landmark preservation committee public hearing for applications for demolition. 
(a)  For applications to replace a structure with a new, more appropriate structure, to demolish or remove a structure that poses an imminent threat to public health or safety, or to demolish or remove a structure that is noncontributing to the historic district, the historic landmark preservation commission shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of the date the city planner or his designee receives the completed application, and approve or deny the requests. 
(b)  For applications to request demolition or removal of a structure because no economically viable use of the property exists, the historic landmark preservation commission shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of the date the city planner or his designee receives the completed application. The purpose of this public hearing is to select the historic landmark preservation committee's appointee to the economic review panel. 
(c)  The historic landmark preservation committee shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of the hearing held by the economic review panel, and approve or deny the request for demolition or removal because no economically viable use of the property exists. 
(d)  Notice of public hearings. 
(1)  Before the tenth day before the date of the hearing, written notice of each public hearing before the historic landmark preservation commission on a demolition request shall be sent to each owner indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax role, of real property within 200 feet of the property on which the demolition is proposed. The notice may be served by its deposit in the United States mail. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday as observed by the city, that day shall be excluded. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-198. - Standard for approval. 
    The historic landmark preservation commission shall deny the application unless it makes the following findings: 
(1)  For a request to replace a structure with a new structure, unless it finds: 
a.  The new structure is more appropriate and compatible with the historic overlay district than the structure to be demolished and removed. 
b.  The owner has the financial ability and intent to build the new structure. The historic landmark preservation commission must first approve the certificate of appropriateness for the new structure before it may consider the request for demolition or removal. 
(2)  For a request to remove or demolish a structure that has no economically viable use, unless it finds: 
a.  The structure is incapable of earning a reasonable economic return unless the demolition or removal is allowed. A reasonable economic return does not have to be the most profitable return possible. 
b.  The structure cannot be adapted for any other use, which would result in a reasonable economic return. 
c.  The owner has failed during the last two years to find a developer, financier, tenant, or purchaser that would enable the owner to realize a reasonable economic return, despite reasonable efforts to do so. 
(3)  For a request to demolish or remove a structure that poses an imminent threat to public health or safety, unless it finds: 
a.  The structure is a documented major and imminent threat to public health and safety. 
b.  The demolition or removal is required to alleviate the threat to public health and safety 
c.  There is no reasonable way, other than demolition or removal to eliminate the threat in a timely manner. 
(4)  For a request to demolish or remove a structure that is noncontributing to the historic overlay district because it is newer than the period of historic significance, unless it finds that: 
a.  The current structure is noncontributing to the historic overlay district. 
b.  The structure is newer than the period of historic significance for the historic overlay district. 
c.  Demolition of the structure will not adversely affect the historic character of the property or the integrity of the historic overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-199. - No action. 
    If the historic landmark preservation commission does not take final action of the application within 90 days of the date the historic preservation officer or his designee receives the completed application, the building official shall issue a permit to allow the requested demolition or removal. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006) 
Sec. 50-200. - Appeals. 
    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the historic landmark preservation committee to the city council by filing a written notice with the historic preservation officer or his designee within ten working days after the decision of the historic landmark preservation committee. 
(1)  If no appeal is made of a decision to approve the certificate for demolition or removal within the ten-day waiting period, the building official shall issue the permit to allow demolition or removal. 
(2)  If an appeal is filed, the city council shall hear and decide the appeal within 60 days of its filing. When considering the appeal, the city council shall only consider whether the historic landmark preservation committee shall consider the same evidence that the historic landmark preservation committee considered in making the decision. If new evidence is presented, the city council shall refer the case back to the historic landmark preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-201. - Expiration. 
    A certificate for demolition or removal expires if the work authorized by the certificate for demolition is not commenced within 180 days from the date of the final decision to approve the request. The historic preservation officer may extend the time for commencement of work upon written request by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1446-12-06, 12-5-2006) 
Secs. 50-202-50-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ECONOMIC HARDSHIP 

Sec. 50-221. - Applicability. 
    After receiving written notification from the committee of the denial of a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the hardship process. No building permit shall be issued unless the committee makes a finding that a hardship exists. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 11.1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-222. - Criteria. 
    When a claim of economic hardship is made due to the effect of this article, the owner must prove that: 
(1)  The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible; 
(2)  The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and 
(3)  Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 11.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-223. - Good faith effort. 
    Under this division, the applicant for an economic hardship shall consult in good faith with the historic landmark preservation committee, local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. Such efforts must be shown to the committee. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 11.3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-224. - Timing for review and decision. 
    The committee shall hold a public hearing on the application within 30 days from the date the economic review panel makes its recommendation. Following the hearing, the committee has 30 days in which to prepare a written recommendation to the building inspector. In the event that the committee does not act within 60 days of the receipt of the application, a permit may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 11.4, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-225. - Decisions of the committee. 
(a)  All decisions of the committee shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the city secretary's office for public inspection. The committee's decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application. 
(b)  An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness dissatisfied with the action of the committee relating to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to the city council within 30 days after receipt of notification of such action. The city council shall give notice, follow publication procedure, hold hearings, and make its decision in the same manner as provided in the general zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XI, § 11.5, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 50-226. - Application. 
    An application for economic hardship will not be deemed complete by the city planner or his designee, until the following information is submitted: 
(1)  The past and current uses of the structure and property. 
(2)  Drawings, photographs, or written descriptions depicting the current condition of the structure. 
(3)  The assessed value of the structure and property according to the two most recent tax assessments. 
(4)  The amount of real estate taxes on the structure and property for the previous two years. 
(5)  The current fair market value of the structure and property as determined by an independent licensed appraiser. 
(6)  All appraisals obtained by the owner and prospective purchasers within the previous two years in connection with the potential or actual purchase, financing, or ownership of the structure and property. 
(7)  All listings of the structure and property for sale or rent within the previous two years, prices asked, and offers received. 
(8)  A profit and loss statement for the property and structure containing the annual gross income for the previous two years and itemized expenses (including operating and maintenance costs) for the previous two years. 
(9)  All capital expenditures during the current ownership. 
(10)  A restoration study of the structure, performed by a licensed architect or engineer. This study should analyze feasibility - structurally and financially - of restoration and/or adaptive reuse of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 50-227. - Economic review panel. 
    An economic review panel shall be convened as set forth in section 50-196. 
(Ord. No. 1380-11-04, 11-2-2004) 
Secs. 50-228-50-250. - Reserved. 
Chapter 54 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 54-26-54-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fair housing, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.001 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 54-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means the calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over. 
    Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 54-118, 54-119 or 54-120. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Familial status means that status described in section 54-116. 
    Family includes a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
    Major life activities means functions, such as but not limited to caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
    Marital status means an individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
    Physical or mental disability means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
    Physical or mental impairment includes: 
(1)  Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)  Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
    Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-11) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-52. - Interpretation and effect. 
    This division shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC 1961). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them by title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this division, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by federal court interpretations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-12; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 54-53. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any section of this division shall, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  Any person violating any section of this division may be enjoined by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-24) 
Sec. 54-54. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of this division all applicable transactions involving the following: 
(1)  The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such units as his residence. 
(2)  The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence, and not more than four such rooms are offered. 
(3)  The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
a.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person; 
b.  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this division. This shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; 
c.  The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of the sale; and 
d.  The owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental or more than three such single-family houses at any one time. 
If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, mental or physical disability, marital status, familial status or age. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(e)  Nothing in this division shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital status. 
(f)  Nothing in this division shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, if the reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling the rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this division. 
(g)  This division does not prohibit discrimination against a person because the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-16) 
State Law reference- Sales and rentals exceptions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.041; religious organization, private club and appraisal exemption, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.142; housing for elderly exempted, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.043; government restrictions based on health or safety standards exception, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.044. 
Sec. 54-55. - Cumulative legal effect. 
    This division is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-20) 
Sec. 54-56. - Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
    The fair housing administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of title VII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this division. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-22) 
Sec. 54-57. - Education and public information. 
    In order to further the objectives of this division, the fair housing administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-23) 
Secs. 54-58-54-85. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Administration[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Administrative provisions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.061 et seq. 

Sec. 54-86. - Fair housing administrator. 
    The chair of the city council shall appoint and the council shall confirm a fair housing administrator (referred to as "administrator"), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this division. The administrator may delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-17; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-81 et seq. 
Sec. 54-87. - Complaints. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the fair housing administrator. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  A copy of all complaints filed with the city shall also be forwarded to the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division of the Region VI Office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(c)  The administrator shall provide for free administrative counseling to those complainants who wish to file a private suit for relief in the local, state, or federal court. 
(d)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed or is committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein who allegedly committed or was threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(g)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-18) 
Sec. 54-88. - Investigation of complaints. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as provided in section 54-87, the fair housing administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  If the administrator determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the administrator shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of the complaint, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with this division. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(d)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violations be prosecuted in the municipal court. With such recommendations, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within 30 days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute the complaint to conclusion within 30 days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-19) 
Secs. 54-89-54-115. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Unlawful Practices 

Sec. 54-116. - Familial status. 
    A discriminatory act is committed because of familial status if the act is committed because the person who is the subject of discrimination is: 
(1)  Pregnant; 
(2)  Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in regard to whom the person: 
a.  Is the parent or legal custodian; or 
b.  Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or 
(3)  In the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual younger than 18 years of age. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.004. 
Sec. 54-117. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because the individual, group or business has complied with this division, because the individual, group or business has exercised rights under this division or enjoyed the benefits of this division or because the individual, group or business has made a charge, testified or assisted in any investigation or in any proceeding under this division or has made any report to the fair housing administrator. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-21) 
Sec. 54-118. - Discrimination in sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by section 54-54, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age. 
(3)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age. 
(6)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-13) 
State Law reference- Sale or rental of housing, V.T.C.A., Property Code §§ 301.021, 301.022. 
Sec. 54-119. - Discrimination in financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance, because of: 
(1)  The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(2)  The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age of the present or prospective owner, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling for which such a loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-14) 
State Law reference- Real estate transactions, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.026. 
Sec. 54-120. - Discrimination in provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, familial status or age. 
(Code 1971, § 101/2-15) 
State Law reference- Brokerage services, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.027. 
Chapter 58 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to establish and maintain police department, art. II, § 22[26]. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for police department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003. 

Sec. 58-1. - Interlocal assistance. 
(a)  The city adopts, in all respects, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq. 
(b)  The city, acting by and through its mayor or mayor pro tem or, in their absence or inability to act, the city manager or, in his absence or inability to act, the chief of police, may send or direct any of its regularly employed law enforcement officers to assist any other county or municipality when a request is received for assistance from the mayor or other officer authorized to declare a state of civil emergency in such other municipality or county, representing that there exists in such other county or municipality a need for additional law enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of the inhabitants of such other county or municipality, because of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat by three or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during the time of natural or manmade calamity. Any law enforcement officers sent to another municipality or county pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq. shall be peace officers of such other county or municipality under the command of the law enforcement officer therein who is in charge in that municipality or county, with all the powers of a regular law enforcement officer in such other county or municipality. Any such city law enforcement officers shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all other compensations while performing police duties outside of the city's territorial limits as though the same services were being rendered in the city. The city shall pay to such officers such wage, salary, pension and other benefits, together with medical, travel, food, lodging and other expenses incurred on account of performing services outside of the territorial limits of the city, and the city shall be reimbursed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq. by the other county or municipality requesting the services out of which such payments and expenses arose. 
(Code 1971, § 23-5) 
Chapter 62 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to establish and maintain free public library, art. II, § 22[18]. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish libraries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 251.001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Established. 
    There are created and established two libraries for the city: Sterne-Hoya House Museum and Library and Nacogdoches Public Library. 
(Code 1971, § 17-1; Ord. No. 1318-4-03, 4-1-2003) 
Secs. 62-2-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-201 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - RESERVED 

Secs. 62-31-62-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1493-7-08, adopted July 15, 2008, repealed Div. 2, §§ 62-56-62-60, which pertained to Sterne-Hoya House Museum and Library Board and derived from Ord. No. 1371-7-05, 7-19-2005. 

Secs. 62-56-62-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1732-6-17 , § 2, adopted June 6, 2017, repealed Div. 3 in its entirety. Former Div. 3, §§ 62-86-62-90, pertained the Nacogdoches Public Library Advisory Board and derived from the Code of 1971, §§ 17-17(b), 17-18(b), 17-19-17-21. 

Secs. 62-86-62-116. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1367-7-05, adopted July 5, 2005, deleted Art. III, § 62-116, which pertained to Nacogdoches Public Library; fees for out of county residents and derived from Code 1971, § 17-2; Ord. No. 1371-7-05, adopted July 19, 2005. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-117. - Library cards. 
    Each person must present his or her own current public library borrower's card in order to check out library materials. Cards are not transferable. To obtain a library card free of charge, an individual must complete an application form, along with a picture ID and verification of residency or property ownership in the county. Additionally, the following regulations shall apply to library cards: 
(1)  Children under 18 years of age may be issued a card on the signature of the parent or guardian. 
(2)  Texas residents who reside outside of the county may be issued a card with restricted borrowing privileges. 
(3)  A replacement fee will be charged for cards that are lost. 
(Ord. No. 1765-03-18 , § II, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 62-118. - Overdue materials. 
    Every person borrowing materials from the public library who has not returned the borrowed materials by the due date thereof shall be assessed late charges. The director or the director's designee(s) shall have the authority to waive any fee with cause. 
(Ord. No. 1765-03-18 , § II, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 62-119. - Lost or damaged materials. 
    Every person taking or borrowing materials from the library shall be responsible for payment of the replacement cost, plus a non-refundable processing fee, for any materials lost or damaged. Failure to pay fees for lost or damaged materials shall result in the suspension of privileges at the library until such fees are paid in full. The Director or the director's designee(s) shall have the authority to waive any fee with cause. 
(Ord. No. 1765-03-18 , § II, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 62-120. - Interlibrary loans. 
    Patrons in good standing may request to borrow materials not available at the library from other libraries across the country through the interlibrary loan system. A processing fee shall be assessed for each item borrowed through the interlibrary loan system. 
(Ord. No. 1765-03-18 , § II, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 62-121. - Suspension of use. 
    Loan privileges for materials will be suspended when excessive fees are accrued. The director or the director's designee(s) shall have the authority to waive any fee with cause. 
(Ord. No. 1765-03-18 , § II, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 62-122. - Charges for library services, fees, or fines. 
    All charges for library related services, fees or fines shall be periodically set and amended by city council by ordinance or resolution. The schedule of charges for library related services, fees or fines is maintained by and kept on file and available for review at the Nacogdoches Public Library. 
(Ord. No. 1765-03-18 , § II, 3-6-2018) 
Chapter 66 - MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILE HOMES AND PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 106; waterways, ch. 114; zoning, ch. 118; supplementary district regulations for manufactured housing, § 118-317. 
State Law reference- Manufactured housing standards act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dependent mobile home means a mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower. 
    HUD-code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does dot include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 CFR 3282.8(g). 
    Independent mobile home means a mobile home which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. 
    Manufactured housing or manufactured home means a HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home and collectively means and refers to both. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Mobile home or manufactured home park means any plot of ground upon which one or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Mobile home or manufactured home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home or manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home or manufactured home. 
    Park means a mobile home or manufactured home park. 
(Code 1971, § 18-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 
Sec. 66-2. - Exceptions to chapter. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the temporary storage of a mobile home or manufactured home which is not occupied as a dwelling within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 18-3) 
Secs. 66-3-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 66-31. - Location. 
    All mobile home or manufactured home parks shall be located only on property zoned for that specific use in conformity with the zoning in chapter 118. 
(Code 1971, § 18-14) 
Sec. 66-32. - Spaces generally. 
    Mobile home or manufactured home spaces shall be provided in every mobile home or manufactured home park, which spaces shall consist of a minimum of 2,500 square feet for each space. Each space shall be at least 35 feet wide and clearly defined. 
(Code 1971, § 18-15) 
Sec. 66-33. - Arrangement of homes. 
    Mobile homes or manufactured homes located in a mobile home or manufactured home park shall be situated so that there shall be at least 25 feet of clearance between mobile homes or manufactured homes; provided, however, that with respect to mobile homes or manufactured home parked end to end, the end-to-end clearance between mobile homes or manufactured homes may be more than 25 feet, but not less than ten feet. No mobile home or manufactured home shall be located closer than ten feet from any building within the park or from any property line bounding the park. 
(Code 1971, § 18-16) 
Sec. 66-34. - Attachments to homes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a mobile home or manufactured home park or for any person occupying a mobile home or manufactured home therein to construct or permit to be constructed in connection with such mobile home or manufactured home any additional structure, building or shelter in connection with or attached to it. However, awnings of canvas or metal, suitably constructed, may be attached to the mobile home or manufactured home, as well as a portable, prefabricated, temporary room for the express purpose of increasing mobile home or manufactured home living area, commonly called cabana, which meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The room shall be metal construction, fire resistive, double wall and mechanical joint panels, but no welded joints between panels is permitted. 
(2)  The strength of materials and the structure shall meet the minimum standards of the city building code. 
(3)  The room shall be capable of being dismantled when moved. 
(4)  Such room shall be completely dismantled and removed from the site at the time the mobile home or manufactured home to which it is an accessory is moved. 
(5)  The finish and appearance shall be as near the same as possible to the mobile home or manufactured home to which it is an accessory. 
(6)  The length shall not exceed the length of the mobile home or manufactured home to which it is an accessory. 
(7)  Only one such room per mobile home or manufactured home shall be permitted. 
(Code 1971, § 18-17) 
Sec. 66-35. - Driveways. 
    All mobile home or manufactured home spaces in a mobile home or manufactured home park shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 25 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. All driveways in a mobile home or manufactured home park shall be hard surfaced, well marked in the daytime, and lighted at night. The minimum quality of such driveway surfacing shall be two seal coats of asphalt or one inch compacted hot or cold asphalt mix on base approved by the city manager. However, this section shall not apply to those spaces abutting any public street. 
(Code 1971, § 18-18) 
Sec. 66-36. - Walkways. 
    All mobile home or manufactured home parks shall provide therein walkways, of not less than two feet in width, from each mobile home or manufactured home space to all service buildings. Each walkway shall be hard surfaced with the same quality surfacing required of driveways in section 66-35 and well marked in the daytime, and lighted at night. 
(Code 1971, § 18-19) 
Sec. 66-37. - Drainage. 
    Each mobile home or manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(Code 1971, § 18-20) 
Sec. 66-38. - Maintenance generally. 
    Each person owning or operating a mobile home or manufactured home park shall maintain such park and any facilities, fixtures, and permanent equipment in connection therewith in a clean and sanitary condition and shall maintain such equipment in a state of good repair. 
(Code 1971, § 18-21) 
Sec. 66-39. - Nonconforming parks. 
    Sections 66-31 through 66-37 shall not apply to mobile home or manufactured home parks in existence and operation on May 9, 1967, and such parks shall be treated as a nonconforming use insofar as the requirements of such sections are concerned. However, if any nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home park does not have a mobile home or manufactured home thereon for a period of 30 consecutive days or more, such mobile home or manufactured home park shall be considered as having been abandoned as a nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home park, and thereafter such mobile home or manufactured home park shall comply with all sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 18-22) 
Sec. 66-40. - Connection of water, sewer, electrical systems. 
    All mobile homes or manufactured homes located in a mobile home or manufactured home park shall be properly connected to an approved water, sewer, and electrical system. 
(Code 1971, § 18-23) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 
Sec. 66-41. - Inspection of water, sanitary conveniences. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of a mobile home or manufactured home park or his agent, representative or manager to provide for the regular inspection of the water and sanitary conveniences within the park. 
(Code 1971, § 18-24) 
Sec. 66-42. - Unsightly materials, vehicles. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of a mobile home or manufactured home park or his agent, representative or manager to prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of any kind within the park. 
(Code 1971, § 18-25) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 102. 
Sec. 66-43. - Cost basis of sewer, garbage services. 
    The cost basis of sewer and garbage services at a mobile home or manufactured home park shall be on a per-home count at the time the water meter is read by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 18-26) 
Sec. 66-44. - Payment of water, sewer, garbage service charges. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of a mobile home or manufactured home park, his agent, representative or manager, where such mobile home or manufactured home park is served by a master meter, to pay all city water, sewer and garbage service charges. Mobile home or manufactured home parks with individual meters shall be treated as all other residential customers. 
(Code 1971, § 18-27) 
Sec. 66-45. - Bottled gas, fuel oil. 
(a)  Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at a mobile home or manufactured home located in a mobile home or manufactured home park unless the cylinders therefor are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing and securely fastened in place. 
(b)  No cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located in a mobile home or manufactured home or within five feet of a door thereof at any mobile home or manufactured home park. 
(Code 1971, § 18-28) 
Chapter 70 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS, EXPLOSIVES, FIREWORKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Hunting and firearms at Lake Nacogdoches, § 114-241 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 70-26-70-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 70-51. - Discharge. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, a firearm is defined as any device designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance, or any device readily convertible to that use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any firearm, to include air rifles or BB guns, within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot upon or across any public street within the city any weapon, including any firearm, spring gun, slingshot, or similar device, that discharges shot, balls or other missiles. 
(Code 1971, §§ 19-2, 19-3) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit firing firearms, art. II, § 22[10]. 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.001. 
Secs. 70-52-70-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit fireworks, art. II, § 22[10]. 
State Law reference- Fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupation Code § 2154.001 et seq. 

Sec. 70-81. - Discharge. 
    No person shall cast, shoot, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, or other combustible fireworks of any kind within the city limits. However, mass fireworks displays, under the supervision of the police and fire departments, may be held or performed by bonded and insured persons within the city limits after approval for such displays has first been obtained from the city commission. 
(Code 1971, § 19-4) 
Sec. 70-82. - Sale. 
    No person shall exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give away or sell or offer for sale, within the city limits, any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, or other combustible fireworks of any kind. However, this section shall not apply to the sale of any such articles by wholesalers to each other or to the sale of any such articles at wholesale to merchants conducting business entirely without the city. 
(Code 1971, § 19-5) 
Secs. 70-83-70-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 70-111. - Injuring trees, shrubs or brush. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break, bruise, cut or injure any shrub, bush or tree growing along a sidewalk or around or on the premises of another or on public grounds within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 19-10) 
Chapter 72 - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1251-3-01, adopted Mar. 20, 2001, pertained to oil and gas wells and the substantive provisions were designated as §§ 191/2-1-191/2-8, 191/2-20-191/2-24, 191/2-26, 191/2-36-191/2-52. To preserve the numbering system of this Code and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated these §§ 191/2-1-191/2-8, 191/2-20-191/2-26, 191/2-36-191/2-52, as §§ 72-1-72-8, 72-20-72-24, 72-26, 72-36-72-52. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 72-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, and for all purposes under this chapter, the following words and terms wherever and whenever used or appearing in this chapter shall have the scope and meaning hereinafter defined and set out in connection with each: 
    Lease shall mean any tract of land subject to an oil, gas and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or any unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one lease, and any tract of land in which the minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership, is developed and operated as a separate tract. 
    Permittee shall mean the person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling and operation of a well under this chapter, and his or its administrators, executors, heirs, successors and assigns. 
    Person shall include both the singular and the plural, and shall mean and include any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, club, society, cooperative, trust, municipal corporation or political subdivision whatsoever. 
    Well shall include and mean any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, formation, strata or depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, liquid or gaseous hydrocarbon, or any of them. 
    All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributed thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-2. - Well location. 
(a)  No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than 300 feet of any residence or commercial building without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the owner or owners thereof. 
(b)  No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is which is within any of the streets or alleys of the city and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation except by special permit by order of the city council of the city, and then only temporarily. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 72-3. - Appointment of oil and gas inspector. 
    The city engineer is hereby designated oil and gas inspector and shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-4. - Wells below twenty thousand feet prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill a well within the city limits to a true vertical depth in excess of 20,000 feet, and no drilling and operating permit shall be granted for any well to a true vertical depth in excess of 20,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-5. - Premises to be kept clean and sanitary. 
    The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character to the satisfaction of the city health inspector and the code enforcement officer of the city at all times drilling operations or reworking operations are being conducted, and as long thereafter as oil and/or gas is being produced therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-6. - Escape of waste matter onto adjoining property. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit to escape any mud, water, oil, slush or other waste matter related to the drilling or operating of any oil or gas well onto any adjoining lots upon which the permittee does not have leases or other contractual rights to use the surface, or upon leases not owned by the permittee, or into the alleys, streets, gutters or sewers of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-7. - Violation of laws or regulations. 
    Any violation of the laws of the State of Texas or any rules, regulations or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining, or abandoning an oil or gas well or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, or in reference to fire walls, fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection, or convenience of persons or property, shall also be a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-8. - Penalties for violation. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provision hereof irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section hereof contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or any of the provision of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this chapter, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not more than $500.00; and the violation of each separate provision of this chapter, and of said permit, and of said bond, shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the city council, at any regular or special session thereof, may, provided ten days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this chapter and under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted in the event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of said permit, said bond, or this chapter. In the event the permit is revoked, the permittee may make application to the city council for a reissuance of such permit, and the action of the city council thereon shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 72-9-72-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS TO DRILL OR OPERATE 

Sec. 72-20. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to drill, to drill, or to operate, any well within the city limits or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such well, without a permit for the drilling and operation of such well having first been issued by the authority of the city council in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 72-21. - Application; filing fee; required information. 
    Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the city secretary and be accompanied with a filing fee of $500.00 in cash. Each application shall request a permit to drill and operate but one well, and the said application shall include full information, including the following: 
(1)  The date of said application; 
(2)  Name of the applicant; 
(3)  Address of the applicant; 
(4)  Proposed site of the well, including; 
a.  Name of the fee owner; 
b.  Name of the lease owner; 
c.  Brief description of the land; 
(5)  Type of derrick to be used; 
(6)  The proposed depth of the well (which shall not be deeper than 20,000 feet); 
(7)  Drawing showing location of well and any structures within 300 feet; 
(8)  Written permission from owners if well is within 300 feet; 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 72-22. - Issuance or refusal of permit. 
    The city council, within 30 days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill and operate a well, shall determine whether or not said application complies in all respects with the provisions of this chapter, and if it does, the city council shall then fix the amount of the principal of the bond and insurance provided for in section 72-24 herein, and after such determination shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well applied for. Each permit issued under this chapter shall: 
(1)  By reference have incorporated therein all the provision of this chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim in said permit; 
(2)  Specify the well location with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, or other available correct legal description; 
(3)  Contain and specify that the term of such permit shall be for a period of one year from the date of the permit and as long thereafter as the permittee is engaged in drilling operations with no cessations of such operations for more than 90 days, or oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from the well drilled pursuant to such permit; provided that if at any time after discovery of oil or gas the production thereof in commercial quantities shall cease, the term shall not terminate if the permittee commences additional reworking operations within 90 days thereafter, and if they result in the production of oil or gas, so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from said well; 
(4)  Contain and specify such conditions as are by this chapter authorized; 
(5)  Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled not exceeding the projected depth; and, 
(6)  Contain and specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall have complied with section 72-24 of this chapter. 
    Said permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the city manager and prior to delivery to the permittee shall be signed by the permittee (with one original to be retained by the city and one by the permittee); and when so signed shall constitute the permittee's drilling and operating license and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with they terms of such permit, and such bond, and this chapter. 
    If the permit for the well be reused, or if the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bond of the applicant be not approved and the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he wishes to withdraw his application, then upon the happening of said events the cash deposit provided for to be filed with the application shall be returned to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the city $100.00 as a processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 72-23. - Termination of permit. 
    When a permit shall have been issued, the same shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city unless within 180 days from the date of issuance actual drilling of the well shall have commenced. The cessation for a like period of the drilling operations or the cessation of the production of oil or gas from the well after production shall have commenced shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-24. - Permittee's insurance and bond. 
    In the event a permit be issued by the city council under the terms of this chapter for the drilling and operation of a well, no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city secretary a bond or a certificate of insurance, as follows: 
(1)  A bond in the principal sum of such number of dollars as has been so determined by the city council, but not to be less than $500,000.00. Said bond to be executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, as surety, and with applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the drilling and operation of the well. Said bond shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city secretary and remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months subsequent to the expiration of the term of the permit issued, and in addition the bond will be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay off fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon permittee by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this chapter, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city, which may be disturbed or damaged in their operations, to their former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste, and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the drilling or producing operations, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and restore said property to the same surface condition, as nearly as possible, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well or wells were first commenced; and that the permittee will indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit. If at any time the city council shall deem any permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee to file a new bond. 
    If, after completion of a well, permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, such as to removing derricks, clearing premises, etc., he may apply for the city council to have said bond reduced to a sum of not less than $50,000.00 for the remainder of the time said well produced without reworking. During reworking operations the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. 
(b)  In lieu of the bond required in paragraph (a) of this section, the permittee may carry a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, in an insurance policy with an insurance company authorized to do business within the State of Texas, and such policy or policies in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverages: 
(1)  Bodily injuries, $1,000,000.00 for one person; and $1,000,000.00 for one accident. 
(2)  Property damages, $1,000,000.00. 
    The permittee shall file with the city secretary certificates of such insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof by the city manager, who shall act thereon within ten days from the date of such filing. Such insurance policy or policies shall not be canceled without written notice to the city secretary at least ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event such insurance policy or policies are canceled, the permit granted shall terminate and the, permittee's rights to operate under such permit shall cease until the permittee files additional insurance, as provided herein, or otherwise complies with this section. 
(c)  The city manager, as the agent for the city council, in his sole discretion, may consider and accept evidence of financial responsibility of the applicant and if such evidence establishes to his satisfaction a degree of financial responsibility equivalent to or greater than that required in paragraphs (a) and (b) above, the city manager, as agent for the city council, may accept such financial responsibility in lieu of requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) above, or may accept a combination of such evidence of financial responsibility, bond or insurance. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 72-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 72-26. - Deeper drilling. 
(a)  Once any well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill such a well to a deeper depth than that reached in the prior drilling operations without the permittee as to such well obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a supplemental application with the city secretary specifying: 
(1)  The then condition of the well and the casing therein; 
(2)  The depth to which it is proposed such well be deepened, not to exceed in any event a total true vertical depth from the surface in excess of 20,000 feet; 
(3)  The proposed casing program to be used in connection with, proposed deepening operations; 
(4)  And evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings in said well currently pass the same tests as are in this chapter provided for in case of the drilling of the original well. 
(b)  In the event the city council is satisfied that said well may be deepened with the same degree of safety as existed in the original well, a supplemental permit may be issued with an additional filing fee of $500.00 to the permittee authorizing the deepening and operation of the well to such specified depth as applied for, not exceeding in any event a total true vertical depth from the surface in excess of 20,000 feet. In any deeper drilling or any deeper completion or any deeper production operations the permittee shall comply with all other provisions contained in this chapter and applicable to the drilling, completion and operation of a well or wells. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 72-27-72-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 72-36. - Drilling tract. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drill a well within the city limits on a tract of land which is less than three acres in size. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-37. - Derrick and rig. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well within the city limits, any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector; or to permit any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than 60 days after completion or abandonment of the well. At all times from the start of erection of a derrick, or a mast, or a gin-pole, until the well is abandoned and plugged or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as herein provided, the permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises at all times; provided, however, it shall not be necessary to keep an extra watchman on duty on the premises when other workmen of permittee are on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-38. - Pits. 
    Either earthen or steel slush pits shall be permitted in connection with the drilling operation. In the event a steel pit is used, said pit and its contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within 30 days after completion of the well. In the event an earthen slush pit is used, all mud shall be removed, and the pit shall be filled and leveled within 30 days after completion of the well. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-39. - Casing. 
    All casing, including surface protection and production strings, shall be either seamless steel or equivalent quality oil well casing. Each a production string of casing must comply with at least the following minimum internal pressure yield strength, computed in accordance with A.P.I. standards: 
Depth of String 
in Feet Internal Pressure 
Rating (p.s.i) 7-Inch Casing 0-3,400 2,720 lbs. 3,400-4,400 3,740 lbs. 4,400-5,850 4,360 lbs. 5,850-7,650 6,340 lbs. 7,650-9,450 7,240 lbs. 9,450-16,000 8,160 lbs. 16,000-20,000 9,690 lbs. 5 1/2-Inch Casing 0-4,400 3,110 lbs. 4,400-5,600 4,270 lbs. 5,600-6,900 4,810 lbs. 6,900-8,000 5,320 lbs. 8,000-15,000 7,740 lbs. 15,000-20,000 9,190 lbs.  
    Each joint and length of each particular casing string shall, prior to setting, unconditionally pass a complete cold water test. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-40. - Setting and cementing casing. 
    No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly setting surface casing to a minimum depth of 1,000 feet. No well shall be drilled within the city limits without cementing the surface casing by the pump-and-plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground; and without cementing the production string by the pump-and-plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the production string to at least 600 feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon; and in the event a protection string of casing be required under the terms of this chapter, without cementing the protection string by the pump-and-plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the protection string to at least 600 feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-41. - Valves and blowout preventers. 
    No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly equipping the surface casing when set with at least one master valve, and without properly equipping the protection casing when set with at least one master valve and one manual or fluid-operated, ram-type blowout preventer; and without properly equipping the production casing during completion operations and work-over operations with at least one master valve and at least one manual or fluid-operated, ram-type blowout preventer. On each well drilled a valve cock or kelly cock shall be installed on the kelly used. Each blowout preventer shall test 6,000 pounds and its mechanical operation shall be tested at least once every eight-hour period, and all control equipment shall be in good working condition and order at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-42. - Drilling fluid. 
    No well shall be drilled within the city limits without using mud as the drilling fluid after the setting of surface casing as provided in section 72-40 hereof. Prior to the time the well reaches a total depth of 5,000 feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil and/or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud-laden drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at not less than nine pounds per gallon. After the well reaches a total depth of 5,000 feet or the depth of the first known or encountered oil and/or gas bearing horizon, whichever is the lesser depth, the weight of the mud-laden drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than 200 pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. In reworking a well, a drilling fluid shall be at all times maintained at such weight as will provide a hydrostatic head of not less than 200 pounds per square inch in excess of the formation pressure. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-43. - Drill stem tests. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person in connection with the drilling or reworking operations of any well within the city limits to take and to complete any drill test or tests a except during daylight hours and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks, and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-44. - Tubing. 
    All tubing used in any well within the city limits shall be seamless steel tubing having not less than a minimum internal pressure yield strength of 5,280 pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth not exceeding 7,000 feet; or less than minimum internal pressure yield strength of 7,250 pounds per square inch if used in connection with a well completion at a depth from 7,000 feet to 12,000 feet; or less than minimum internal pressure yield strength of 10,570 pounds per square inch if used in connection with well completed at a depth in excess of 12,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-45. - Bradenhead. 
    Each well drilled within the city limits shall be equipped with a bradenhead with a working pressure of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall be a weld-on-type head to be welded by a certified welder, and thereafter pressure tested. The bradenhead installed on the surface casing shall be set above ground level and shall be equipped with fitting having a working pressure rating of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch. The bradenhead pressure shall be checked, at least once each calendar month and if pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures shall be immediately taken to eliminate the source and the existence of the pressure. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-46. - Christmas tree and wellhead connections. 
    The Christmas tree and all wellhead connections on each well drilled within the city limits shall be as follows: In all flowing wells completed at a depth of above 4,000 feet the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of 2,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 4,000 pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed to a depth of from 4,000 feet to 7,000 feet the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of 3,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 6,000 pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed to a depth of from 7,000 feet to 12,000 feet the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall be at least a minimum working pressure of 5,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 10,000 pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed below a depth of 12,000 feet, the Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall be at least a minimum working pressure of 10,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 15,000 pounds per square inch. All piping and fittings connecting the wellhead to an oil or gas separator shall have at least the same minimum working pressure and minimum test pressure as hereinabove specified for Christmas tree and wellhead connections. In the event the surface shut-in pressure of any well in the city limits exceeds 2,000 pounds per square inch, the flow wing of the Christmas tree shall be equipped with an automatic-closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valve. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-47. - Storage tanks and separators. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use, construct or operate in connection with any producing well within the city limits any storage tanks except to the extent of a maximum of four steel or fiberglass tanks, not exceeding 500 barrels capacity each and so constructed and maintained as to be vapor tight with connecting overflow, and each surrounded separately with an earthen fire wall at such distance and at such height as will, under any circumstances, hold and retail at least one and one-half times the maximum capacity of each tank. Separators shall be of high test of the minimum of 6,000 pounds and shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure-relief safety valve and a bursting head. The tanks and separators shall not be located within 300 feet of residence or structure except when the permittee has secured and presented to the city secretary the written permission of the owner or owners of those structures within 300 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-48. - Fences. 
    The owners of each well shall upon completion enclose said well together with all surface facilities and storage tanks, with a heavy steel fence, a minimum of [eight feet] with all gates to be kept locked, except when the permittee or his employees are in actuality with the enclosure. The fence shall be a sight-baring fence when it is located within an area, which is zoned single-family, duplex or apartment. [It] shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain the fence to the satisfaction of the oil and gas inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-49. - Venting and flaring of gas. 
    No person engaged in drilling and/or operating any well shall permit gas to escape or be vented into the air unless said gas is flared and burned. All gas flared or burned from a torch, pipe or another burning device within the city limits must be done in such manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard to any property and the location of the torch, pipe or any other burning device, the construction thereof, the maintenance thereof, and the operation thereof, shall at all times be in full compliance with such regulations as may from time to time be issued by the oil and gas inspector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-50. - Mufflers required. 
    Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations shall be electricity or properly muffled gas, gasoline or diesel engines; such mufflers to be approved by the oil and gas inspector prior to their use. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-51. - Disposal of saltwater. 
    The permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities which he may bring to the surface, and such disposal to be made in such manner as to not contaminate the water supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Sec. 72-52. - Abandonment and plugging. 
    Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a 200 foot cement plug in the bottom of the surface casing with the bottom of the plug 100 feet below the surface casing section, and the top of the plug 100 feet above the surface casing section; and to set a 50 foot cement plug in the top of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of casing may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations it will be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to flood the well with mud-laden fluid weighing not less than nine pounds per gallon and the well will be kept filled to the top with said mud-laden fluid at all times; mud-laden fluid of the above specifications will be left in the well bore below and between cement plug. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the Railroad Commission of the State of Texas in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee. It shall be the further obligation of the permittee or the operator of the well to cut the surface casing off at least six feet below the surface of the ground and to place at least a 25 foot cement plug in the top of the casing and to weld the top of the casing completely shut. The resulting hole in the ground must be completely filled to the surface of the ground and duly tamped. 
(Ord. No. 1251-3-01, 3-20-2001) 
Chapter 74 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate parks and playgrounds, art. II, § 21. 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; waterways, ch. 114. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to acquire land for parks and playgrounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 251.001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-201 et seq. 

Sec. 74-26. - Established. 
    There is created within the city a parks and recreation advisory board. 
(Code 1971, § 20-16) 
Sec. 74-27. - Composition. 
    The parks and recreation advisory board shall consist of seven adult citizens of the city. 
(Code 1971, § 20-17) 
Sec. 74-28. - Term of members. 
    The term of office of each member of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be three years. A member may serve a maximum of two terms or six years. 
(Code 1971, § 20-18) 
Sec. 74-29. - Compensation of members. 
    The members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1971, § 20-19) 
Sec. 74-30. - Rules of procedure. 
    The parks and recreation advisory board is authorized to adopt its own rules of procedure. 
(Code 1971, § 20-21) 
Sec. 74-31. - Removal of members. 
    The city council may, for good cause, remove any or all of the members of the parks and recreation advisory board. 
(Code 1971, § 20-29; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 74-32. - Authority generally. 
    The parks and recreation advisory board shall be consulted regarding advice on the operation and general administration of the parks and park playgrounds and other recreational property and facilities as may be requested by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 20-20; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 74-33. - Obligating city. 
    The parks and recreation advisory board shall never obligate the city in any manner or for any purpose. 
(Code 1971, § 20-26) 
Sec. 74-34. - Public tree preservation duties. 
    The duties of the board as relating to the care and maintenance of public trees shall be as follows: 
(1)  To study the needs of the city in connection with its implementation and administration of this chapter and the development of future public arboreal policies and initiatives. 
(2)  To act as a board of appeals as a result of the implementation of this article. 
(3)  To recommend policies and guidelines for the implementation of this article as specified herein. 
(4)  To utilize technology in seeking out efficient ways to implement policies, achieve short and long-term goals, and provide public educational materials and information about its objectives. 
(Ord. No. 1418-6-06, 6-6-2006) 
Sec. 74-35. - Public tree preservation. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    Public property means all parks, trails, traffic islands, municipal rights-of-way, and miscellaneous property owned by the city. 
    Public trees means all trees and shrubs having 50 percent or more of their diameter, measured at existing grade, resting on public property. 
(b)  Duties of parks and recreation advisory board. It shall be the responsibility of the parks and recreation advisory board to advise the city on the preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal and disposition of trees and shrubs on public property. The parks and recreation advisory board shall not make a recommendation to the city until the board has reviewed a report regarding the situation from a person that has experience and training in all issues regarding trees. Such experience may include a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university in urban forestry or agriculture with training in arboriculture or equivalent experience. 
(c)  Public tree care. The city shall have the right to maintain trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all public property, as may be necessary to ensure safety when servicing city utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is located on public property or municipal utility easement and which by reason of its nature is injurious to public health or safety, sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(d)  Abuse or mutilation of public trees. Unless specifically authorized by the city or its authorized agents, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any public tree; allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to public trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree. 
(e)  Construction materials on public property. No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any public tree growing therein, except by written permit of the city or its authorized agent. 
(f)  Recommended plantings. Recommended tree species to be planted on public property are those found in chapter 118 "Zoning", article VI. "Development Standards", division 1. "Generally", section 118-431 "Tree Standards", subsection (b) "Tree Species", of the Nacogdoches Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Utilities. No public trees other than those species listed as small deciduous trees in subsection (f) of this section may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(h)  Interference with city or its agents. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city or its authorized agents while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any public tree as authorized in this section. 
(i)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1418-6-06, 6-6-2006) 
Secs. 74-36-74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-61. - Reservation of park facilities. 
    Park facilities may be reserved for group functions, such as family reunions, church groups' activities, school picnics, etc., by making a reservation through the parks and recreation department office. A reservation permit will be issued to the individual making the reservation. Presentation of such permit at the facility site shall require an individual or group to leave the facility at the time and date stated on the permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to disregard or ignore such notification on the permit. 
(Code 1971, § 20-1) 
Sec. 74-62. - Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume alcoholic beverages within any city-owned property, without the appropriate permissions: 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages may be allowed in foregoing areas provided the appropriate application and deposit, and a reservation agreement is issued. 
(c)  The following guidelines and procedures apply to alcoholic beverages in all areas listed in subsection 74-62(a) above, except for the designated area of Festival Plaza: 
(1)  Consumption of alcohol on these properties is permitted during special events that are approved by the City of Nacogdoches. 
(2)  Applicant must submit an event application at least ten days prior to the proposed event. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverages must only be consumed in accordance with state law. 
(d)  The following guidelines and procedures apply to alcoholic beverages in the designated area of Festival Plaza: 
(1)  Alcohol is allowed only during a festival or event that is approved by the City of Nacogdoches. 
(2)  Applicant must submit a festival/event permit application at least 90 days prior to the proposed festival that includes the following documentation: 
a.  A map depicting the following: 
1.  The boundaries of the festival area; 
2.  Locations of fencing and type of fencing material to be approved by the city manager; 
3.  Locations of entrance and exit points; and 
4.  Locations of alcohol sales. 
b.  Proof of required licenses, permits and paid fees mandated by state and local law for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Applicant must present the request to the city council for consideration. 
(4)  The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to the area(s) indicated on the festival/event permit application. 
(5)  If the event is gated with controlled access: 
a.  Alcohol may be sold throughout the gated, controlled access area of Festival Plaza. 
b.  The gating and access control must be approved by the city manager. 
(6)  If the event is not gated with controlled access: 
a.  Alcohol may only be sold in areas designated in the festival/event permit application. 
b.  Each designated area shall be "double-fenced" of a material approved by the city manager with a four-foot space between fences for security personnel and minimum height of 48 inches. 
c.  The designated area shall meet all applicable health and safety codes. 
d.  The designated area shall have no more than one public entrance. 
(7)  Peace officers licensed in the state must be on site throughout the event's operation and outside the perimeter to provide security. The city manager shall determine the number of officers required for the event. The event holders will pay for the service of the peace officers. 
(8)  Alcoholic beverages may only be sold or consumed in accordance with state law. 
(9)  No glass containers will be allowed in Festival Plaza. 
(10)  The applicant will be responsible for the proper disposal of all trash on any property, public or private, which was utilized by the organizer during the event. Proper disposal of trash shall occur no later than 24 hours following the end of the event. 
(Code 1971, § 19-16(a); Ord. No. 1323-5-03, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1520-06-09, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1574-6-11, 6-21-2011; Ord. No. 1614-11-12, 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 74-63. - Livestock and motorized sport vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Livestock means any large animal that can be ridden or driven, including horses, donkeys, sheep, cattle, swine or exotic animals. 
    Motorized sport vehicle means any such vehicle propelled by a motor that can be ridden or driven, including three-wheelers, four-wheelers, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts and dune buggies. This definition does not prohibit motorized conveyances for city maintenance vehicles or handicapped persons, such as motorized wheelchairs. 
(b)  Prohibited uses. The use of livestock or motorized sport vehicles is prohibited on city park property. Exceptions for special uses may be granted by the city manager. Automobiles, buses and other passenger vehicles may be parked in recognized parking areas within parks while the occupants are engaged in authorized usage of the park. 
(Code 1971, §§ 20-3, 20-4) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102. 
Sec. 74-64. - Fundraising activities. 
    All fundraising activities, other than those sponsored or cosponsored by the city, shall be prohibited in all city parks. 
(Code 1971, § 20-2) 
Sec. 74-65. - Off-leash dog park facility. 
(a)  The fenced area located on the northern section of Banita Creek Park North shall be designated as an off-leash dog park. The regulations of section 6-30 of this Code pertaining to dogs shall be suspended in this area designated as an off-leash dog park. 
(b)  Mandatory requirements for use of the off-leash dog park are as follows: 
(1)  Hours: Sunrise to sunset (unless otherwise posted). 
(2)  Dogs must be current on all vaccinations and must wear city tags. 
(3)  Dogs must be leashed when entering and exiting the dog park. 
(4)  Choke, prong (pinch) and spike collars are strictly prohibited. 
(5)  No children under the age of 16 are permitted unless accompanied by an adult. 
(6)  Aggressive dogs are not permitted on the premises and must be removed at the first sign of aggression. 
(7)  Female dogs in heat are prohibited from entering the park. 
(8)  Dog owners must be in the park and within view of their dogs at all times. 
(9)  Absolutely no human or dog food or treats allowed in the park. 
(10)  Owner must clean up feces deposited by their pets. Seal feces in plastic bags before disposing in designated receptacles. 
(11)  Owners must fill any holes made by their dogs. 
(12)  Failure to abide by the park rules may result in loss of privileges and owners may be ticketed. 
(13)  Owners are liable for damage or injury inflicted by their dog(s). Owners are legally and financially responsible for their dog's behavior. The City of Nacogdoches has no liability or responsibility for injuries in the dog park. 
(14)  No smoking in the dog park. 
(15)  Dogs must wear a collar or harness at all times. 
(16)  Dogs shall be under voice control of their owners at all times. 
(17)  No dogs under four months of age may enter the park. 
(Ord. No. 1605-8-12, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 74-66. - Fees and charges. 
    All fees charged for the use of city parks, recreational facilities and for recreational sports programs shall be periodically set and amended by the city council by ordinance or resolution. Fees and charges are on file in the city's parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 1678-8-14, § 2.A., 8-19-2014) 
Chapter 78 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1361-4-05, adopted Apr. 5, 2005, amended the former Ch. 78, and enacted a new Ch. 78 as set out herein. The former Ch. 78 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1225-10-00, §§ 24-1-24-32, adopted Oct. 16, 2000; Ord. No. 1238-12-00, §§ 241/2-4, 241/2-6, 241/2-26, adopted Dec. 19, 2000; Ord. No. 1367-7-04, adopted July 6, 2004. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; supervision of sign erection, § 14-167; businesses, ch. 18; outdoor lighting, § 34-181 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; traffic control devices, § 102-86 et seq.; zoning, ch. 118. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
    All words used in the present tense shall include the future. 
    All words in the singular number include the plural number and all words in the plural number include the singular number. 
    The word "person" includes "corporation", "co-partnership", "association", and "individual". 
    The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
    Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Building Codes of the City of Nacogdoches. Terms not defined herein or in the building codes shall have the customary meaning assigned to them. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign means a sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found. 
    Advertising means to convey information, to seek the attraction of or to direct the attention of the public to any location, event, person, activity, goods, services, or merchandise. 
    Authority having jurisdiction means knowledgeable and qualified employees of the city who have backgrounds which will enable them to understand easily and quickly the issues presented in relation to rendering of interpretations of this chapter. The authority having jurisdiction is responsible for reviewing sign applications, issuing sign permits, and accepting variance requests and is responsible in enforcing all aspects of this chapter. 
    Awning means a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting framework (compare "marquee"). 
    Awning sign means a sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning. 
    Balloon or inflatable signs mean any form of advertisement in the form of or attached to a balloon or other inflatable, inflated or floating device, which is larger than two feet in diameter. 
    Banner sign means a strip of durable fabric on which a sign is printed; paper or reinforced cardboard type signs are not considered banner signs. 
    Billboard. See "off-premises sign." 
    Board of sign control and appeals. See section 78-33. 
    Building means any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. Each portion of a building separated from other portions by a fire-wall shall be considered as a separate building. 
    Building official means the officer or other designated authority or his duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of the construction codes. 
    Cabinet means a sign component that houses the other components of a sign. 
    Changeable copy sign (automatic) means a sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units. 
    Changeable copy sign (manual) means a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with changeable letters. 
    City-owned property means property owned or controlled by the City of Nacogdoches, Texas. 
    Clearance (of a sign) means the smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street or street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, extending over that grade. 
    Community support signs mean on-premise signs not consisting of a portable sign as defined by this chapter, which promote community spirit and support public or semi-public organizations; but do not advertise a commercial product or service or special event. Examples include, but are not limited to "Home of a Nacogdoches Dragon" signs or "SFA Game today" signs. 
    Construction sign means a temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located. 
    Copy means the wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter form. 
    Curbline means an imaginary line drawn along and parallel to the outermost part or back of the curb and gutter on either side of a public street; or, if there is no curb and gutter, along and parallel to the outermost portion of the paved street; or, if there is no paved street, along and parallel to the outermost edge of the traveled portion of the street. 
    Day means the portion of one calendar day from sunrise to sunset. 
    Directional/information sign means an on-premises sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information and which may not contain the name or logo of an establishment and which may contain no advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs. 
    District means any section of the city for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind of building therein. Also see "zoning district." 
    Double-faced sign means a sign with two faces. 
    Early voting period as defined in V.T.C.A., Election Code § 85.001. 
    Electioneering as defined in V.T.C.A., Election Code § 85.036. 
    Electrical sign means a sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used. 
    Electronic message centers means a sign or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not include text, including any sign or portion of a sign that uses changing lights or similar form of electronic display such as LED to form a sign message or messages with text and or images wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. This definition includes without limitation television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED displays, video boards, and holographic displays. 
    Facade means the entire building front including the parapet. 
    Face of sign means the area of a sign on which the copy is placed. 
    Festoons means a string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, or pinwheels. 
    Flag, corporate. The official flag of a company including logo flags. 
    Flag, spirit. School flags or flags that contain crests, pictures and such but contain no advertising. 
    Flashing sign means a sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract attention, utilizing a lighting source such as an incandescent or fluorescent light bulb, LED or other source of illumination. The term does not include changeable copy signs, animated signs, or signs which, through reflection or other means, create an illusion of flashing of intermittent light (compare "animated sign" and "changeable copy sign"). 
    Freestanding sign means a sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building. 
    Frontage means the length of the property line of any one premises along a public right-of-way on which it borders. 
    Frontage (building) means the length of an outside building wall on a public right-of-way. 
    Government sign means any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state, or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property, or facility. 
    Height (of a sign) means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, excluding decorative embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less (compare "clearance"). 
    Holiday signs means temporary signs containing only holiday messages and no commercial advertising. 
    Home occupation means any occupation or activity conducted within a dwelling unit which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes (see chapter 118, zoning). 
    Identification sign means a sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified. 
    Illegal sign means a sign which does not meet the requirements of this chapter and any applicable state laws or which has not received exempt status. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
    Incidental sign means a small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business, and not exceeding two square feet. The term means any sign located within the confines of a project which is not legible from any public right-of-way. 
    LED means light emitting diode. 
    Lot means a parcel of land legally defined on a subdivision map recorded with the appraisal district, or a parcel of land defined by a legal record or survey map. 
    Low profile sign means a sign having a maximum height of 11 feet and a maximum sign area of 60 square feet or less. 
    Maintenance means the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. 
    Mansard means a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building (compare "awning"). 
    Marquee means a permanent canopy, awning, or roof-like structure of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building. A marquee is considered to be part of the building. 
    Marquee sign means any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. 
    Nameplate means a nonelectric on-premises identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    Night means the portion of two calendar days from sunset to sunrise. 
    Nits means candela per meter square used as a measurement of brightness. 
    Occupancy means the portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied for a given use. 
    Office, retail, downtown, (B-1, B-2, B-3) means an identification of city zoning districts; refer to the zoning map for the location of districts. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which the sign is located, e.g., billboards or outdoor advertising. 
    On-premises sign means a sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located. Refer to chapter 118, zoning. 
    Owner means a person recorded as such on official records or the on-premises person in control of the premises. For the purposes of this chapter, the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the building official, e.g., a sign leased from a sign company. 
    Painted wall sign means any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
    Parapet means the extension of a false front or wall above a roofline. 
    Pennant means a triangular-shaped or other shaped ribbon or device which is greater than one inch in length and used either singularly or in groups on a line or pole for advertising purposes or for attracting the attention of the public. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, or similarly defined interest. 
    Point of purchase display means advertising of a retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an advertisement on a product dispenser. 
    Pole covers means covers enclosing or decorating poles or other structural supports of a sign. 
    Pole banners mean banners located on private light standards and poles, not to exceed 24 total square feet per pole. 
    Political sign means a temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national election or referendum. 
    Portable sign means any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building, including signs mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier, or other nonmotorized mobile structure. A portable sign which has its wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign under this definition. 
    Premises means a tract of land with buildings or part of a building, with its appurtenances. 
    Prohibited area is the area within which V.T.C.A., Election Code § 85.036(a) prohibits electioneering during the time an early voting or voting place is open for the conduct of early voting or voting. 
    Projecting sign means a sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign. 
    Public property means property owned or controlled by a public entity. 
    Public right-of-way (public street) means that land dedicated for public use commonly as a street, roadway, alley, bridge, or thoroughfare, and most often extends the entire width between property lines of any roadway, street, alley, bridge, or other similar thoroughfare, not privately owned or controlled, when any part thereof is open to the public for vehicular traffic, is the responsibility of the city or other similar public agency to maintain, and over which the city has legislative jurisdiction under its police power. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected over or on the roof of a building (compare "wall signs"). 
    Roofline means the top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections. 
    Rotating sign means a sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves in a revolving or similar manner. Such motion does not refer to methods of changing copy. 
    Searchlight means an apparatus containing a strong light source and a reflector for projecting a bright beam of light, usually truck or trailer mounted. 
    Shopping center. See "strip center." 
    Sign includes but is not limited to any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any person, persons, political party, event, establishment, product, goods, or services. 
    Sign, area of, means the area determined as follows: 
(1)  Projecting and freestanding signs. The area of the sign shall be measured as follows: 
a.  If the sign is composed of one or two individual cabinets, the area around and enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet or module shall be summed and then totaled to determine total area. The perimeter of measurable area shall not include embellishments such as pole covers, framing, decorative roofing, etc., provided that there is not written advertising copy on such embellishments. 
b.  If the sign is composed of more than two sign cabinets or modules, the area enclosing the entire perimeter of all cabinets and/or modules within a single, continuous geometric figure shall be the area of the sign. Pole covers and other embellishments shall not be included in the area of measurement if they do not bear advertising copy. 
c.  Only one face of a double-faced sign will be used to figure the total square footage. 
(2)  Wall signs. The area shall be within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message. If the sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as the background with no added decoration, the total sign area shall be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of each symbol or letter. The combined areas of the individual figures shall be considered the total sign area. 
    Snipe sign means a temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc. (such as a garage sale sign), less than four square feet. 
    Special event or public announcement signs mean a sign or notice posted to announce public information concerning special events, bazaars, rallies, or other similar activities. These special events, bazaars, rallies, or other similar activities must be sponsored by charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational or civic institutions. 
    State-maintained highway means any state-owned or state-maintained roadway within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Strip center (shopping center) means a building plot developed or ultimately to be developed with three or more stores, shops, or commercial enterprises, and which has shared parking facilities or access. 
    Subdivision identification sign means a freestanding or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development. 
    Temporary changeable advertisement means a promotional placard such as, but not limited to signs between pumps at service stations. Such signs are constructed of cardboard, wallboard, plastic, or metal, not to exceed six square feet in size and not intended for long term use. A portable sign shall not be considered a temporary sign. 
    Under-canopy sign means a sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee. 
    Use means the purpose for which a building, lot, sign, or structure is intended, designed, occupied, or maintained. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches from the wall of a building. This definition includes painted, individual letter, and cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard. 
    Window sign means a sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside, made of wood, paper, paint, or vinyl and not illuminated. 
    Zoning district means A (agricultural-open space), R-1, R-2, (single-family residential), R-3, R-4 (multifamily residential), B-1, B-2, B-3 (commercial district), I (industrial), M (medical district), and PD (planned development). Also see "district." 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1463-8-07, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 1649-10-13, § 2, 10-1-2013; Ord. No. 1662-3-14, § 2, 3-4-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Scope; conflicting provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all signs within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, provided that this chapter shall not preempt the sign laws of the historic preservation district. This law is subject to the provisions of the Local Government Code, ch. 216, pertaining to regulation of signs by municipalities. Any conflict between provisions of this chapter and Local Government Code ch. 216 shall be resolved in favor of Local Government Code ch. 216 and its amendments. All signs that are electrically operated or contain one or more electrical components must also contain an additional permit as required by section 14-61 et seq., the city electrical code. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-2.5. - Purpose and objectives. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to encourage aesthetically pleasing design consistent with the standards of the adopted comprehensive plan and to establish uniform standards for the placement of signs. 
    The specific objectives of this chapter are to balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected from potential harm; promote the health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the public; protect the public from damage or injury caused or attributable to distractions and destructions caused by improperly designed or located signs; protect and promote property values; promote community environmental setting and appearance, especially where scenic beauty is important; and to support he objectives of the individual zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-3. - Conformance with provisions of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, or maintain a sign in the city and extraterritorial jurisdiction except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-4. - Signs prohibited. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Abandoned signs. 
(2)  Banners, except allowed in sections 78-98 and 78-100. 
(3)  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals. 
(4)  Snipe signs or signs attached to trees, utility poles, public benches, or streetlights. 
(5)  Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying the sign. This does not apply to signs or lettering on buses, taxis, or vehicles operating during the normal course of business. Vehicles or trailers must have a current license and inspection. Also see section 78-77(6) for approval of motor vehicles. 
(6)  Off-premises signs except as allowed in subsection (10)a and b of this section. 
(7)  Portable and trailer signs. 
(8)  Signs on public rights-of-way, as follows: 
a.  With the passage of the ordinance creating this chapter, it shall be unlawful to place a sign upon a public street, public sidewalk, public alley, public right-of-way, public curb or other public improvement in any public street or grounds, on any public bridge or part of same or utility pole, or on any public building or structure of any kind belonging to the city, or in any public place or on any public improvement unless express consent therefore shall have been first granted by the city manager. However, coin-operated devices used to display and vend newspapers may be so placed, so long as they are not placed to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic. This subsection (8)a does not apply to public property leased for private business purposes. 
b.  Any unlawful sign found within a public right-of-way of a public street, public sidewalk, or public alley shall be seized and the removal thereof is authorized. The authority having jurisdiction, police officer and the department of inspection services are authorized to impound any unauthorized signs found on a public street, public sidewalk, or public alley and transport or cause the same to be transported to a location to be designated by the authority having jurisdiction for storage. The custodian of the storage area shall maintain records of where such signs were located when they were so impounded and the date on which they were so impounded and shall hold the signs in the storage area for a period of not more than 30 days. Any sign so held may be redeemed by the owner thereof upon the payment of a fee to the city through the custodian thereof for hauling the same to storage plus a per-day storage fee for each day the sign is stored. Such fees are on file in the city secretary's office and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any fine imposed upon such owner for violation of this chapter. 
c.  Signs permitted under subsection 78-77(23) are not prohibited by this section. 
(9)  Balloon signs except as allowed in sections 78-98 through 78-100. 
(10)  Off-premises signs, both commercial and noncommercial, except on public property, where there has been a determination of the authority having jurisdiction that the display of the sign: 
a.  Promotes a positive image of the city for the attraction of business or tourism; and 
b.  Depicts an accomplishment of an individual or group. 
Upon such determination, the city can authorize, upon approved construction plans, a sign to be located on city right-of-way. The sign shall be displayed for a period ordered by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(11)  Off-premises commercial signs and portable signs within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(12)  Signs painted on rooftops. 
(13)  Flashing signs. 
(14)  Any sign which emits sound, odor, or visible matter. 
(15)  Pennants and festoons except as allowed in sections 78-98 through 78-100. 
(16)  Searchlights. 
(17)  Temporary changeable advertisements except as allowed in sections 78-98 through 78-100. 
(18)  Pole banners except as allowed in sections 78-98 through 78-100. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1463-8-07, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 1649-10-13, § 2, 10-1-2013; Ord. No. 1662-3-14, § 2, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 78-5. - Compliance with building and electrical codes. 
(a)  No signs shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or door opening used as a means of egress. 
(b)  No sign shall be attached in any form, shape, or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that signs may be erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the provisions of the International Building Code and International Fire Prevention Code. 
(c)  The National Electrical Code will be followed for clearances from overhead conductors. The term "overhead conductors" as used in this subject means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground. 
(d)  No portion of any sign shall be located closer than ten feet from any electrical conductor. 
(e)  No portion of a sign or sign structure shall project into any public alley unless such portion is a minimum of 18 feet in height above grade. 
(f)  No sign shall be placed so that it obstructs the view for traffic movement at an intersection. Placement of signs shall conform to section 78-101. 
(g)  All signs shall be designed to withstand the design wind pressure as required in the city building code. 
(h)  All braces, guy wires and supports shall be designed to withstand all dead load and wind load stresses. 
(i)  Any sign with more than a 40-foot height shall have plans sealed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-6. - Maintenance. 
    All signs shall be properly maintained by the persons in control of the premises. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted if paint is required. Defective parts shall be replaced. The building official shall have the right under section 78-37 to order the repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged, or substantially deteriorated, as defined in the currently adopted International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-7. - Lighting. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, all signs may be illuminated in accordance with chapter 34, article VI, pertaining to outdoor lighting. However, no sign regulated by this chapter may utilize: 
(1)  An exposed incandescent lamp with an external reflector and without a sunscreen or comparable diffusion. 
(2)  Any exposed incandescent lamp: 
a.  In excess of 50 watts unless a screen or diffuser is used; or 
b.  Unless wattage does not exceed ten watts. 
A higher wattage incandescent lamp may be used with no diffuser for lane open or closed designation. 
(3)  Any revolving beacon light, flashing light, or strobes. 
(b)  Electrical signs shall comply with the requirements set forth by the adopted National Electrical Code and city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-8. - Changeable copy. 
    Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, any sign allowed in this chapter may use manual changeable copy. Signs with automatic changeable copy must meet the restrictions of section 78-99(5). 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1463-8-07, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 78-9. - Sign contractor's license. 
    No person may engage in the business of erecting, altering, relocating, constructing, or maintaining signs without all required state and federal licenses. A permit will not be issued to anyone for the erecting, altering, relocating, construction, or maintenance of signs until a sign contractor's license is secured from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-10. - Deposit or bond. 
    When any work on a sign or sign structure is to be done beyond the curb line or on or above public property which may cause the city to sustain loss, damage, or injury to public property, or to be put to expense in correcting conditions resulting therefrom, the building official shall require the person proposing to do such work to furnish a bond in the amount of $2,000.00 in a form determined by the city attorney, or to post a deposit of a like amount, to indemnify the city against any cost that may be incurred or any loss, damage, or injury that may be sustained by the city because of such work and as a guaranty of compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances. Such required bond or deposit shall be furnished or posted before any permit to work is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-11. - Substitution. 
    Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that advertising or business signs are permitted, subject to the same regulations applicable to such signs. 
(Ord. No. 1587-2-12, 2-7-2012) 
Secs. 78-12-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 78-31. - Authority having jurisdiction. 
    Enforcement of this chapter will be by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-32. - Penalties. 
    Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be consistent with chapter 1, section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-33. - Board of sign control and appeals. 
(a)  There is created a board of sign control and appeals consisting of five members as follows: 
(1)  Two real estate appraisers, each of whom must be a member in good standing of a nationally recognized professional appraiser society or trade organization that has an established code of ethics, educational program, and professional certification program; 
(2)  One person engaged in the sign business in the city; 
(3)  One employee of the state department of transportation who is familiar with real estate valuations in eminent domain proceedings; and 
(4)  One architect or landscape architect licensed by the state. 
(b)  Board members shall be appointed by the city council for a two-year term with a maximum of three reappointments, or until their successors are appointed. Members shall serve without compensation. A vacancy shall be filled by a person who meets the same requirements of the person being replaced as detailed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of this chapter or in modifying an order of the official, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three affirmative votes, shall be required. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal interest, as such term is defined by state law. 
(d)  The authority having jurisdiction or his designee shall act as secretary of the board of sign control and appeals and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member, the absences of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(e)  The board of sign control and appeals shall have the following powers: to hear and act upon matters set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216. 
(f)  The owner of a sign or duly authorized agent may appeal the decision of the board of sign control and appeals to a state district court as outlined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216, pertaining to regulation of signs by municipalities, or any successor statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 78-34. - Appeals. 
    Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the authority having jurisdiction on the grounds that the decision misconstrues or wrongly interprets this chapter may, within 30 calendar days after the decision, appeal the decision to the city council, pursuant to its rules and regulations. The appealing party shall comply with the decision of the authority having jurisdiction pending appeal unless the authority having jurisdiction shall direct otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 78-35. - Inspection upon completion. 
(a)  Any person installing, altering, or relocating a sign for which a permit is required shall notify the authority having jurisdiction upon completion of the work. The authority having jurisdiction may require a final inspection, including an electrical inspection and inspection of footings on freestanding signs. The authority having jurisdiction may require a shop or ground inspection prior to installation. 
(b)  Upon issuance of a permit, the authority having jurisdiction may require, in writing, that he be notified for inspection prior to the installation of certain signs. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-36. - Variances. 
(a)  As part of the permit application process under this chapter, the applicant may apply to the authority having jurisdiction for a variance from certain requirements of this chapter. A variance may be granted by the authority having jurisdiction where the literal application of this chapter would create an undue hardship for the sign user and the following criteria are met: 
(1)  A literal application of this chapter would not allow the property to be used. 
(2)  The granting of the requested variance would not be materially detrimental to the property owners in the vicinity. 
(3)  Any hardship is not in any way the result of the applicant's own action or the result of a self-created or personal hardship or for financial reason alone. Simply dividing a building into multiple occupancies shall not be sufficient grounds for granting a variance. Hardship caused the sign user under a literal interpretation of this chapter is due to conditions unique to that property and does not apply generally to the city. 
(4)  Applications for a variance may only be accepted when the site complies with this chapter. A variance request shall not be accepted after a sign is installed in violation of this chapter. 
(5)  All variance application fees are paid. 
(6)  The granting of the variance would not be contrary to the general objectives of this chapter. 
(b)  In granting a variance, the authority having jurisdiction may attach additional requirements necessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this chapter in the public interest. 
(c)  If the authority having jurisdiction denies an application for a variance from the requirements of this chapter, then the applicant may appeal the authority having jurisdiction's denial of the variance request to the planning and zoning commission. Such appeal must be made within 30 days after the date that the applicant receives notice from the authority having jurisdiction that the variance has been denied. 
(d)  City council approval or denial. The city council may take the following actions on any sign variance request: 
(1)  Approval. The city council may approve the request as presented. 
(2)  Denial with prejudice. The city council may deny the request with prejudice. If a request or amendment is denied with prejudice, a new application may be submitted within one year only if the new request is for a sign which more closely meets the guidelines listed in sections 78-96-78-101. If a request or amendment is denied by the city council without an indication of "with" or "without" prejudice, the action shall be considered to be "denied with prejudice." 
(3)  Denial without prejudice. The city council may deny the request or amendment without prejudice, in which case a request for a variance may be filed at the applicant's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1499-9-08, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1568-2-11, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 78-37. - Dangerous and defective signs. 
(a)  If upon inspection the authority having jurisdiction finds that a sign is abandoned or is structurally, materially, or electrically defective, or in any way endangers the public, the authority having jurisdiction shall issue a written order to the owner of the sign and occupant of the premises stating the nature of the violation and requiring them to repair or remove the sign within ten calendar days of the date of the order. 
(b)  In cases of emergency, the authority having jurisdiction may cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-38. - Removal of signs by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(a)  The authority having jurisdiction may cause the removal of an illegal sign in cases of emergency, or for failure to comply with the written orders of removal or repair. After removal or demolition of the sign, a notice shall be mailed to the sign owner stating the nature of the work and the date on which it was performed and demanding payment of the costs as certified by the authority having jurisdiction. If the amount specified in the notice is not paid within 30 calendar days of the notice, the amount shall be filed as a lien against the property of the sign owner, certified as an assessment against the property. 
(b)  The owner of the property upon which the sign is located shall be presumed to be the owner of all signs thereon unless facts to the contrary are brought to the attention of the authority having jurisdiction, as in the case of a leased sign. 
(c)  For purposes of removal, the definition of sign shall include all sign embellishments and structures designed specifically to support the sign. 
(d)  Any off-premises sign structure lawfully erected and maintained which has no copy, transcript, reproduction, model, likeness, image, advertisement, or written material for a period of 90 consecutive days is declared to be abandoned and in violation of this chapter and as such shall be restored to use or removed by the owner or permit holder within 30 days. If the sign is not restored or removed within the 30-day time frame, the building official shall cause the removal of the abandoned sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-39. - Citations. 
    Employees of the authority having jurisdiction shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Secs. 78-40-78-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING SIGNS 

Sec. 78-56. - Determination of exempt status. 
(a)  Signs which are in place on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which do not conform to the specific provisions of this chapter are exempt signs provided that the following have all been met: 
(1)  The authority having jurisdiction determines that such signs are properly maintained and do not in any way endanger the public. 
(2)  The signs are validly permitted or a variance has been granted in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  No sign may be designated as exempt from the provisions of this chapter which was not lawfully in place as of the time this chapter took effect. 
(c)  Upon removal or destruction of any legal nonconforming signs all future signs shall comply with regulations in sections 78-97 through 78-99. 
(d)  The provisions of section 78-99(5) are met. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1463-8-07, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 78-57. - Loss of exempt on-premises or off-premises status. 
    An exempt sign may lose exempt designation upon one or more of the following occurring: 
(1)  The sign is relocated, removed, or replaced. 
(2)  The structure of the sign is altered in any way such that the alteration is greater in value than 40 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign. The authority having jurisdiction may, whenever deemed necessary to reasonably determine the applicability of this subsection, require the owner of the sign to submit two or more independent estimates from established sign companies of the reproduction cost of a new sign. 
(3)  The sign is increased in size or height. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-58. - Maintenance and repair of exempt signs. 
(a)  An exempt sign is subject to all requirements of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. However, if the sign suffers more than 40 percent appraised damage or deterioration, it must be brought into conformance with this chapter or removed. The authority having jurisdiction may, whenever he deems necessary to reasonably determine the cost of damage or deterioration of the sign, require the owner of the sign to submit two or more independent estimates from established sign companies of the cost of replacing, repairing, or renovating the existing sign. 
(b)  The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified in writing prior to any copy changes for any sign or awning except for signs utilizing changeable mechanical or electrical letters. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Secs. 78-59-78-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS 

Sec. 78-76. - Required. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, prior to installation all signs and awnings shall have permits issued and all necessary fees shall be paid as described in this article. 
(b)  No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, or use a sign without first having secured a written permit from the building official of the city to do so, subject to the exceptions set forth in section 78-77. All signs that are fully electrified or contain one or more electrical components must also obtain an additional permit as required by article III of chapter 14. If any work is started before securing permit, twice the ordinary permit fee will be charged. 
(c)  Failure to first obtain a permit shall not exempt all provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-77. - Signs not requiring permits. 
(a)  No permit shall be required under this chapter for on-premises signs with the following descriptions; any sign listed in this section shall be erected and maintained in a safe condition in conformance with all other requirements of this chapter and the building code and electrical code in chapter 14: 
(1)  Signs erected by the city, state (including its political subdivisions such as counties and school districts), or the federal government and the lessees of such governmental entities. 
(2)  Railroad signs. 
(3)  Legal notices and address numbers. 
(4)  Signs otherwise required by federal, state, or local laws. 
(5)  On-premises signs not visible from a public street or under four square feet in area setting forth the location of or directions to parking or buildings located on the premises, or regulating the flow of on-premises traffic. Such directional signs may be lighted, consistent with the other requirements for electrical signs in this chapter and with the requirements of the building code and the electrical code in chapter 14 and article VI of chapter 34 pertaining to outdoor lighting. 
(6)  Signs displayed, designed, or used for or upon motor vehicles, when currently licensed and inspected to meet state and local laws. 
(7)  Signs which are mounted on the face of a building no higher than the roofline or which form an integral part of a canopy or marquee entrance and state only the building address number. 
(8)  Construction signs 32 square feet or less. These signs must be removed within 30 days after construction is completed. 
(9)  Holiday or special events decorations. The time the sign can remain on property is restricted to the discretion of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(10)  Political signs (see subsection 78-96(4)). 
(11)  Real estate signs. 
(12)  Window signs. 
(13)  Incidental signs. 
(14)  Periodically changing only the letters, numbers, or message portion of a changeable copy sign. 
(15)  Handheld signs or signs, symbols, or displays on persons. 
(16)  Official flags of the city, state, or federal government or any subdivisions of same such as the school district or county as long as they are securely fastened to poles or a permanent structure on the property. When such flags become tattered or faded, they must be removed or replaced. 
(17)  Corporate flags may be displayed as long as they are fixed to poles or standards provided on the property. When such flags become tattered or faded, they must be removed or replaced. 
(18)  Signs not visible from public streets (such as menu boards). 
(19)  Signs on outdoor machines, devices and equipment: signs located on outdoor machines, devices or equipment which display the trademark, trade name, manufacturer, cost or operating service instructions or similar information, but do not advertise the business where located. This exemption includes, but is not limited to signs on coin-operated vending machines, fuel dispensing pumps, telephone facilities, automatic teller machines, automatic vacuum cleaners, amusement rides and similar machines, devices or equipment. 
(20)  Signs located on the field side of scoreboards and fences of athletic fields. 
(21)  Special event or public announcement signs; 
a.  Such signs shall be allowed up to 14 days prior to such event, but shall be removed within two days after the scheduled event. 
b.  Such signs may be allowed for a maximum of 60 days. 
c.  The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified in writing prior to placement of special event or public announcement signs. 
d.  All signs shall be on-premises only, provided that nonprofit organizations shall be allowed temporary off-premises special event signs provided that: 
1.  The organization must have permission from the property owner to place the sign on his property. 
2.  There will be a maximum of six off-premises signs advertising the nonprofit organization function. 
3.  Each sign may be no more than 32 square feet in area. 
4.  The advertised function must occur within the corporate limits of the City of Nacogdoches and be sponsored by a nonprofit organization located in the City of Nacogdoches. 
(22)  Community support signs. 
(23)  a.  During the early voting period through the end of the following election day, a maximum of two temporary political signs for each candidate, measure, or political party may be placed within the designated electioneering area of the early voting or voting polling place building's premises which is also outside the prohibited area. The designated electioneering area is the portion of the center grassy strip west of the C. L. Simon Recreation Center and the Judy B. McDonald Public Library containing the flagpoles and monument and located outside the prohibited area. Such two signs shall each have a maximum area of four square feet but may contain the same message on both sides. Such signs must be placed in the designated electioneering area in a manner so as not to block or obscure other political signs. Such signs shall only be allowed from 7:00 a.m. on the beginning of the early voting period until 7:00 p.m. on election day at which time the signs shall be removed by the person or organization placing them. If early voting is not held at this location, such signs shall only be allowed from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on election day. 
b.  Any unauthorized persons removing political signs otherwise permitted by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14 of this Code. 
c.  Failure to remove permitted signs in accordance with the section is a violation of this section subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14 of this Code. 
d.  No tent, canopy, structure, or similar item encumbering or encroaching on city-owned property including the designated electioneering area is allowed. 
e.  Any signs on city-owned property not permitted may be removed by the city. Any political signs installed prior to the authorized time, placed in a location other than the designated location delineated, or not removed within the time prescribed herein, may be removed by city personnel and discarded or destroyed. 
f.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to notices posted by order of the court or notices to the public as required by law to be posted in a public place. 
g.  Motor vehicles or trailers displaying any political signs or literature is strictly prohibited on city-owned property within the prohibited area as defined by this section; and no person is authorized to park a motor vehicle or trailer displaying any political signs or literature on city-owned property outside of the prohibited area for longer than 30 minutes. 
(b)  The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified in writing prior to any copy changes for any sign or awning except for signs utilizing changeable mechanical or electrical letters. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1649-10-13, § 2, 10-1-2013; Ord. No. 1662-3-14, § 2, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 78-78. - Application. 
    Application for a permit for the erection, construction, alteration, or relocation of a sign shall be made to the authority having jurisdiction upon a form provided by the authority having jurisdiction and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner of the sign. 
(2)  Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be located, along with the name and address of the property owner. 
(3)  The type of sign or sign structure as defined in this chapter. 
(4)  A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with the locations and square footage areas of all existing signs on the same premises. 
(5)  Specifications and scale drawings showing the materials, design, dimensions, structural supports, and electrical components of the proposed sign; refer to the current adopted edition of International Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-79. - Permit and license fees. 
(a)  Sign permit fees shall be as follows, and all fees shall be continued in full force and effect as the same may be amended from time to time: 
Banner signs ..... $10.00 
Temporary changeable advertisements ..... 25.00 
Pole banners ..... 25.00 
Balloon or inflatable signs ..... 25.00 
Pennants and festoons ..... 25.00 
(b)  All temporary portable sign permits will expire on December 31, 2007. 
(c)  Fees for electronic message center permits will be determined by their valuation and corresponding fee in the current adopted building code. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005; Ord. No. 1463-8-07, 8-7-2007) 
Editor's note- Section (c) was added from Ord. No. 1463-8-07, adopted August 7, 2007, at the direction of the city. 
Secs. 78-80-78-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATIONS FOR ON-PREMISES SIGNS BY DISTRICT 

Sec. 78-96. - Signs permitted in all districts. 
    Signs are allowed as follows in all districts: 
(1)  All signs not requiring permits (section 78-77). 
(2)  One construction sign for each street frontage of a construction project, not to exceed 16 square feet in sign area in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and B-2 zoning districts or 32 square feet in sign area in all other areas. Such signs may be erected 30 days prior to beginning of construction and shall be removed prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, but shall not remain on the site if the building permit expires. 
(3)  One nonilluminated real estate sign per street frontage per lot or premise, not to exceed 16 square feet in sign area, except in properties over two acres not to exceed 32 square feet. 
(4)  Signs containing primarily a political message may be placed on private property only with the permission of the property owner and outside of the public right-of-way. Such signs may not: 
a.  Have an effective area greater than 36 square feet; 
b.  Be more than eight feet high; 
c.  Be illuminated; or 
d.  Have any moving elements. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1662-3-14, § 2, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 78-97. - Signs permitted in R-3, R-4, and "A" zoning districts. 
(a)  Signs are allowed as follows in R-3, R-4, and "A" zoning districts: 
(1)  All signs as permitted in section 78-96. 
(2)  Two subdivision identification signs per neighborhood, subdivision, or development entrance not to exceed 60 square feet per sign in sign area if the entrance has a median. One entrance sign per neighborhood, subdivision, or development entrance not to exceed 60 square feet in sign area if the entrance does not have a median. 
(3)  One entrance identification sign per apartment complex, mobile home park, or condominium complex, not to exceed 60 square feet in sign area. A second entrance sign may be permitted where a second entrance to the complex is located on another street. 
(4)  For permitted nonresidential uses, including churches and synagogues, one low-profile sign not to exceed 60 square feet in sign area, and one wall sign not to exceed 60 square feet in sign area. 
(b)  The following regulations apply to R-3 and R-4 zoning districts only: 
(1)  All allowed low-profile signs shall have a maximum height limit of five feet and shall have a setback of 12 feet from any public right-of-way and are not to exceed one square foot in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage to a maximum of 60 square feet. 
(2)  No sign may be illuminated except subdivision, apartment, mobile home park, or condominium complex identification signs, or signs for churches and synagogues, which may utilize indirect lighting or internal lighting where the copy only uses translucent light. (See Ch. 34 Article VI. "Outdoor Lighting".) 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-98. - Signs permitted in B-1, B-3, and "M" zoning districts. 
    Signs are allowed as follows in B-1, B-3, historic and "M" zoning districts: 
(1)  All signs as permitted in sections 78-96 and 78-97. 
(2)  For the historic district-downtown historic district, see article VI of this chapter. 
(3)  One freestanding sign shall be allowed subject to the requirements set forth in table 2 in section 78-101. 
(4)  Wall signage for each occupancy shall not exceed one and one-half square feet in sign area for each linear foot of that occupancy's building frontage on each street frontage up to a maximum of 300 square feet. 
(5)  Where an occupancy is on a corner or has more than one street frontage, one additional freestanding sign will be allowed on the additional frontage, not to exceed the size allowed in section 78-101. 
(6)  Strip centers and malls may place additional freestanding signs with a minimum 200 feet of separation on two acres or larger or have multiple signs on a single freestanding sign subject to the requirements set forth in table 1 in section 78-101. 
(7)  Signage on freestanding gas station canopies shall not exceed 30 total square feet in area. The lettering and logo shall not be more than two feet in height. This signage shall not be computed in the number of allowable freestanding or wall signs. 
(8)  On-premises banner signs and may be used only during business or activity opening, or special promotions, subject to the following: 
a.  Banners must be mounted on a building face. All four corners and at least three sides of the banner must be secured to the building. 
b.  Banners must be maintained in a good condition. Torn, frayed, or tattered banners must be removed. 
c.  Each occupancy is allowed one banner per each building face that is visible from the right-of-way. There may be no more than one banner mounted on each building face at any given time. 
d.  All banners must be placed at least 12 feet from the back of the curb, or property line, whichever is greater. 
e.  Permits must be obtained before the placement of banners. 
f.  Each occupancy may obtain eight banner permits per year, for a period of 30 days for each permit. 
g.  The total area of banner signage allowed at each occupancy is based on table 1 below: 
Table 1 
Frontage (Feet) Max Area (Square Feet) 0-100 25 101-200 50 201-300 75 301-400 100 401-500 125 501-600 150  
(9)  Only one under-canopy sign per elevation not to exceed 40 percent of the total elevation area shall be allowed. 
(10)  Awning signs not more than 30 percent of the surface area of the awning. 
(11)  Temporary changeable advertisements may be used, subject to the following: 
a.  Permits must be obtained before the placement of temporary changeable advertisements 
b.  Each occupancy may display no more than one temporary changeable advertisement at the same time. 
c.  Each occupancy may obtain two temporary changeable advertisements per year, and each permit is valid for six months. 
d.  All temporary changeable advertisements must be at least 12 feet from the back of the curb or property line, whichever is greater. 
e.  All temporary changeable advertisements must be securely fastened to a permanent structure such as a building, a privately owned light pole, a gas pump, etc. No signs may be attached to public utility poles or public street lights. 
(12)  Pole banners may be used, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Limited to not more than two pole banners on any pole. 
b.  Limited to no more than 24 total square feet of banners per pole. 
c.  Minimum height of 14 feet as measured from adjacent grade to the bottom of the pole banner. 
d.  Maximum height of 20 feet to the top of the pole banner. 
e.  Pole banners shall be maintained in good repair, should they become tattered or torn, they shall be replaced or removed. 
f.  Pole banners shall not be illuminated, except for indirect lighting associated with the main lamp of the pole to which it is mounted. 
g.  Pole banners shall be placed on privately owned poles within the interior of the property, and may not be placed on utility poles or street light poles. 
h.  Spacing shall be no closer than 80 feet between pole banners. 
i.  The number of banners shall not exceed one per 50 vehicle parking spaces. 
j.  Such pole banners shall be allowed in addition to site signage otherwise allowed by this article. 
k.  Permits must be obtained before the placement of pole banners. 
l.  Permits must be obtained once a year or each time the pole banners are changed, whichever is sooner. 
m.  Fees for pole banner permits shall be based on the overall pole banner package, not on a per-banner basis. 
n.  The following types of pole banners shall be allowed: 
i.  Pole banners on perimeter of private property. 
ii.  Pole banners may be installed along the periphery within 12 feet of property lines fronting public or private streets. 
iii.  Pole banners on the interior of the property. 
iv.  Pole banners within the interior of the parking lot, and may advertise products and services on the site. 
(14)  Balloon or inflatable signs may be used, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The following specific types of balloon or inflatable signs are allowed to be permitted: 
i.  Lighter than air devices. 
Anchorage for devices of this type must be adequate to keep the device in the desired location with the anchorage device remaining stationary. 
ii.  Air filled devices. 
No device of this type may be filled with any explosive or flammable gas. 
iii.  Air powered devices. 
This type of device must be located in a place so as to not interfere with any vehicles or pedestrians or enter onto public or other private property if the air supply fails. 
b.  The following regulations apply to all such balloon or inflatable signs: 
i.  No device shall be tethered or anchored in or on public right-of-way. 
ii.  No device shall be tethered or anchored so that is may blow into or onto a public right-of-way. 
iii.  No device shall be placed closer than 12 feet from the back of the curb, or property line, whichever is greater. 
iv.  No device shall be placed on public property without the written consent of the governing agency. 
v.  The tethering or anchorage shall be such that if part of the tethering or anchorage becomes unattached, the remaining anchorage or tethering will prevent the device from interfering with vehicles or pedestrians or enter onto public or private property. 
vi.  No device shall be located so that it interferes with or removes the use of the required parking of an occupancy. 
vii.  The device shall be displayed for no more than 18 consecutive hours in any 24-hour period and for no more than ten consecutive days. 
c.  Permits must be obtained prior to the placement of balloon or inflatable signs. 
d.  Each occupancy may obtain one balloon or inflatable sign permit per year. 
e.  Each permit will be valid for ten days. 
(15)  Pennants and festoons may be used, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Pennants and festoons may only be strung from buildings or privately owned poles. 
b.  No devices may be strung from poles located on the public right-of-way. 
c.  No such devices may be nearer to the ground than 14 feet. 
d.  No such devices may be attached to any temporary pole or structure. 
e.  Any device missing ten percent or more of the flags, by the determination of the authority having jurisdiction, must be removed or replaced. 
f.  All pennants and festoons must be permitted prior to their placement. 
g.  Permits must be obtained once per year for each occupancy or each time new pennants or festoons are installed, whichever is sooner. 
h.  Fees for pennant and festoon permits shall be based on the overall pennant and/or festoon package, not on a per pennant and/or festoon basis. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1587-2-12, 2-7-2012) 
Sec. 78-99. - Signs permitted in industrial zoning districts. 
    Signs are allowed as follows in industrial zoning districts: 
(1)  All signs as permitted in sections 78-96 through 78-98. 
(2)  One freestanding sign per premises subject to the requirements set forth in table 1 in section 78-101. 
(3)  One wall sign per occupancy, not to exceed one square foot in sign area for each linear foot of that occupancy's building frontage, up to a maximum of 300 square feet. 
(4)  Where an occupancy has more than one main street frontage, one additional wall sign and one additional freestanding sign are allowed on the additional frontage, not to exceed the size limitations of other allowed wall and freestanding signs. 
(5)  Electronic message centers shall conform to the following regulations: 
a.  The message or image on an electronic message center over 50 square feet in sign area must remain static for a minimum of 8 seconds. Electronic message centers less than 50 square feet in sign area may operate in any legal manner. 
b.  The message area of an electronic message board sign may be illuminated by incandescent lamps, LED (light emitting diodes), magnetic discs, or other sources of light. Whatever the light source, undue brightness is prohibited. For enforcing this provision, prima facie proof of undue brightness is the illumination of a portion of the sign in excess of the intensity levels specified below: 
1.  Day: 5,000 nits 
2.  Night: 1,000 nits 
To ensure compliance with this provision, the sign must have an automatic phased proportional dimmer, which must be used to reduce nighttime brightness levels (compared to daytime brightness levels). Further, prior to the issuance of a permit for an electronic message center sign, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the levels specified above, and the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the city. 
c.  Any electronic message centers installed prior to the date of the adoption of this ordinance must submit written certification from the sign manufacturer or other persons deemed appropriate by the city that the sign does not cause undue brightness and meets the intensity levels specified above. The owner of an electronic message center has 60 days from the adoption of this ordinance to submit such certification to the city. 
d.  A sign owner may modify existing, legal, conforming structures to an electronic message center only after filing application for a permit and receiving approval by the city. 
e.  Electronic message centers shall comply with applicable federal and state laws and regulations. 
f.  Failure to adhere to any of these provisions may result in the revocation of the electronic message center portion of the permit. 
g.  Only one electronic message center is allowed per premise. 
i.  When attached to an existing freestanding sign: 
1.  No electronic message center attached to a freestanding sign shall exceed 50 percent of the total allowable sign face area for any on-premise freestanding sign. 
2.  The addition of any electronic message center to any nonconforming freestanding sign is prohibited. 
ii.  When attached to a building face: 
1.  An electronic message center attached as a wall sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the area of the maximum allowable size for a wall sign at that location. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1463-8-07, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 78-100. - Signs permitted in B-2 zoning districts. 
    Signs are allowed as follows in B-2 commercial zoning districts: 
(1)  All signs as permitted in sections 78-96 through 78-99. 
(2)  One freestanding sign per premises subject to the requirements set forth in table 1 in section 78-101. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  One awning sign per occupancy not to exceed 50 percent of the surface area of an awning. 
(5)  Where a lot has in excess of 1,000 feet of main street frontage, one additional freestanding sign will be allowed, subject to the requirements set forth in table 1 in section 78-101 and may be placed no closer than 200 feet to any other freestanding sign on the same premises or any number of low-profile signs 200 feet apart. 
(6)  Where an occupancy has more than one street frontage, one additional freestanding sign is allowed on the additional frontage, not to exceed the size limitations of other allowed and freestanding signs. 
(7)  A projecting sign may be used instead of any allowed wall or freestanding sign, not to exceed a sign area of one square foot for each two linear feet of an occupancy's building frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1655-1-14, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 78-101. - Area, placement, and height. 
    No freestanding sign may be closer than one and one half feet from the back of the curb for each one foot in total height of the sign. In addition, no freestanding sign may be closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb. 
    Table 2, pertaining to area of freestanding signs, shall be as follows: 
TABLE 2 
Frontage (feet) Max Area* (square feet) 0-50 25 51-100 50 101-150 75 151-200 100 201-250 125 251-300 150 301-350 175 351-400 200 401-450 225 451-500 250 501-550 275 551-600 300  
Notes: 
1. No freestanding sign shall exceed 35 feet in height except as in No. 2. 
*2. Commercial zones with a minimum 100 feet of frontage on S.H. 224 West and U.S. 59 north of Loop 224 and U.S. 59 south of Loop 224 may have a sign up to a maximum of 50 feet in height with a minimum distance from the right-of-way of 100 feet. The sign shall not be closer than 200 feet to any property zoned R-1, R-2 and R-3, R-4, "M" and historic. 
3. Strip centers, reference subsection 78-98(6). 
4. For additional freestanding signs in commercial zones, reference section 78-100. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-102. - Signs permitted in planned development districts. 
    Signs allowed in planned development districts shall be approved in accordance with section 118-392 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1204-5-00, 4-15-2008) 
Secs. 78-103-78-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Historic preservation, ch. 50. 

Sec. 78-126. - Regulations for signs in historic districts. 
    All signs for locations designated in the historic overlay district shall receive a certificate of appropriateness before permits are issued. The underlying zoning district of the location in question shall determine the permissible signs as allowed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Secs. 78-127-78-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BANNERS OVER PUBLIC STREETS 

Sec. 78-133. - Banners over public streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to build, construct, fasten, tie or maintain any banners, streamers or other similar materials anywhere in the city in such a manner that the same shall be above, over and across any street within the city; provided, the provisions of this section do not apply to charitable organizations or any person engaged in promoting a nonprofit civic enterprise who has secured approval from the authority having jurisdiction and has furnished a bond indemnifying the city from any personal injury or property damage which might result from the fastening, tying, disconnecting, or maintaining any such banners or other similar material above, over or across any public street within the city. Upon presenting to the authority having jurisdiction evidence of securing the bond as required above, an approved permit from Texas Department of Transportation for use of State of Texas Right-of-Way for Temporary Signs, and a completed permit application, the authority having jurisdiction shall review the application and issue a permit to such charitable organization or any person engaged in promoting a nonprofit civic enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 78-134. - Fees. 
    Temporary overhead street banners ..... $200.00 
    Fees for electronic message center permits will be determined by their valuation and corresponding fee in the current adopted building code. 
(Ord. No. 1361-4-05, 4-5-2005; Ord. No. 1463-8-07, 8-7-2007) 
Chapter 82 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate removal of garbage, refuse and unsanitary vegetation, art. II, § 22[3]; authority of city relating to removal of ice, snow and other debris from sidewalks, art. II, § 22[6]. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance approving or prescribing rates, charges and fees including rates for garbage saved from repeal, § 1-9(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 46; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 106; garbage and trash at Lake Nacogdoches, § 114-34. 
State Law reference- Accumulation and removal of garbage and trash, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq.; minimum standards of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless a different meaning appears from the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Building wastes shall mean discarded materials incident to and resulting from the construction or repair of buildings and the clearing of land for new construction, such as, but not limited to, rock, brick, metal, wood, glass, trees, brush and vegetation, when such materials are in greater quantity than can be placed in one container. 
    Dumpster shall mean a container of durable metal or plastic, supplied by the city, approved for commercial collection. 
    Garbage shall mean all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including particles of food and meat, vegetable and animal offal, kitchen wastes in general, and tin cans, bottles, paper and other containers, paper or any other materials that contain or have attached thereto any residue of milk, soft drinks, food or other putrescible wastes, but excluding industrial wastes and by-products thereof. 
    Garbage container shall mean a watertight container of durable metal or plastic, of a type supplied by the city. 
    Landfill shall be the current designated sanitary disposal site for the city. 
    Refuse shall mean all other wastes, such as tin cans, metal, wood, glass, bottles, paper, cordage, ashes, household rubbish and any other nonclassified trash or discarded materials. 
    Sharps shall mean any hypodermic needle, syringe with needle, scalpel blade, razor blade and disposable razor. 
    Small dead animals shall mean the carcasses of fowl and animals no larger than a dog, but shall not include livestock or horses. 
    Yard waste shall be organic waste such as leaves, brush and grass clippings generated from residential property 
(Code 1971, § 13-1; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-1, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-0-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-2. - Official city sanitary disposal grounds. 
(a)  The official city sanitary disposal grounds are hereby defined as that place or places that are from time to time designated as such by the city council, and the specific description thereof shall be available at the city hall. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any garbage or refuse in the official city sanitary disposal grounds except at those specified locations designated by the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump garbage or refuse at any place within the city except in the official city sanitary disposal grounds. 
(d)  All garbage, refuse, and waste materials on the official city sanitary disposal grounds are the property of the city, and no person shall separate, collect, carry off, or salvage any such materials unless expressly authorized to do so by the city manager and then only under the direction and supervision of the sanitation department. 
(Code 1971, § 13-19; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-19, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 82-3. - Accumulation of garbage or refuse. 
    The owner or occupant of any premises in the city shall, at his own expense, keep the premises free from the accumulation of garbage or refuse which may in any manner prejudice public health or comfort. 
(Code 1971, § 13-3; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-3, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 82-4. - Permit for hauling. 
    No person, other than employees of the sanitation department, may collect or haul garbage, refuse or other waste materials within the city, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Any person operating a business, commercial or industrial establishment may haul garbage, refuse or other waste materials originating in his own establishment to the official city landfill if his means of conveyance is approved by the city as being sanitary and of a type that will prevent the spilling or leakage of its contents and the emanation of disagreeable odors. Such a person shall pay an annual fee for the privilege of disposing in said landfill, the amount thereof to be determined by the city by any practicable method prescribed by the city manager, but in no case shall such annual fee be less than $24.00. Each such annual fee shall be paid in advance at the city landfill, after which an account shall be opened that shall not be transferable to any other person, business, commercial or industrial establishment. The term of such annual fee shall run from January 1 to December 31 of each year, and the fee for part of a year ending on December 31 shall be prorated. 
(2)  A person, other than provided in subsection (1) of this section, may collect and haul garbage, refuse or other waste materials where wet garbage or garbage for livestock use is involved from within Nacogdoches County; provided that such person is permitted through TNRCC as a licensed transporter and that all route documentation is delivered to city landfill and approved for acceptance. 
(Code 1971, § 13-18; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-18, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 82-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1665-5-14, adopted May 6, 2014, repealed § 82-5 in its entirety. Former § 82-5 pertained to burning of garbage, refuse, wastes. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Sec. 82-6. - Acts declared trespasses or nuisances. 
    The following acts by any person are hereby declared to be unlawful as trespasses or public nuisances: 
(1)  Placing, depositing, dumping or throwing, or permitting or causing to be placed, deposited, thrown, or to remain, any garbage, refuse, dead animals, building wastes, or any other discarded materials on any of the following property: 
a.  Public or private property outside of any house, apartment or building in the city, unless the same has been deposited in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
b.  Lots or land, vacant or occupied. 
c.  Any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb, alley or any other public property. 
(2)  Permitting any garbage or refuse to remain on private property, or on streets or other property in the vicinity. The person occupying the property shall collect and dispose of any such garbage or refuse that is on the property or on streets or other property in the vicinity of his business, regardless of the means by which such garbage or refuse came to occupy the property. 
(3)  Causing or permitting to be or to remain in or upon any premises, public or private, any garbage, or animal, vegetable, or mineral matter, or any composition or residue thereof, that is in an unsanitary condition or injurious to public health or that emanates offensive or obnoxious odors. 
(4)  Permitting containers, bottles, tires, grass, or other vegetation to grow or to remain on lots or land, vacant or occupied, or upon any abutting sidewalk, curb or street, so as to become offensive or emanate offensive or obnoxious odors, or become a breeding place for flies or insects, or become in any way injurious to the public health. 
(Code 1971, § 13-21; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-21, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
State Law reference- Littering, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
Secs. 82-7-82-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-36. - Use of another person's container to avoid fees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any container belonging to another person as a means of avoiding payment of the collection fees levied by this article. 
(Code 1971, § 13-17; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-17, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 82-37-82-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 82-66. - Authority to direct times, places and manner of setting out. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to direct the times, places and manner of setting out containers for collection. 
(Code 1971, § 13-2; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-2, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 82-67. - Designation of location of container. 
    No garbage or refuse shall be collected by any authorized person unless the container thereof is placed as designated by the city manager. Residential containers must be placed at the curb line, out of the roadway or within ten feet of the edge of the roadway on noncurbed roadways, and be free of parked vehicles, trees or other obstructions. 
(Code 1971, § 13-6; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-6, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 82-68. - Service for nonapproved containers. 
    Any container that is set out for collection service which does not meet the requirements of section 82-1 of this article will not be serviced. 
(Code 1971, § 13-7; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-7, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 82-69-82-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 82-96. - Preparation of garbage and refuse. 
(a)  City will not collect waste from dumpsters when waste is above top of the dumpster. The city will not collect waste from outside of dumpster. 
(b)  If the customer needs additional collection, the fee will be based on dumpster size (cubic yardage) times current collection rate or arrangements shall be made through public works for a larger dumpster. 
(c)  All garbage containers shall be kept secure and fastened so that flies and other vectors cannot have access to the contents thereof. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city to provide containers meeting the requirements of section 82-1 at such times and places as shall be prescribed by the city manager. Additional rollout carts may be obtained through public works upon request, subject to additional collection fees as established in section 82-131. 
(e)  Tree limbs and brush shall be collected from single-family residential units. Limbs and/or brush shall be stacked within three feet to six feet of the curb or driving surface. Stacks shall not exceed six feet in length, four feet in width, four feet in height and stacks shall be limited to three piles, with a maximum limb diameter of 12 inches. 
(Code 1971, § 13-4; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-4, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 82-97. - Schedule. 
(a)  The city, through its sanitation department, shall collect garbage and refuse from all premises, including residential, commercial and industrial, at such times as prescribed by the city manager. 
(b)  Residential containers shall be placed at the curb line or within ten feet of edge of an uncurbed roadway between 6:00 p.m. on the day before collection and 7:00 am on the day of collection. Serviced containers must be removed from curb line on the day of service, no later than 7:00 p.m. 
(c)  Yard waste shall be placed within ten feet of the edge of the roadway for collection on the resident's normal day for garbage collection. Yard waste must be properly bagged. The city will only collect 20 bags per residence per week. 
(d)  Recycles will be collected from single-family residential property on the normal day of garbage collection. Recycles must be placed in city-approved "blue bags" and must be within ten feet of the roadway. 
(e)  Limbs and brush will be collected from single-family residential property on a regular rotation basis. Limbs and brush must meet residential limb collection guidelines. 
(Code 1971, § 13-5; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-5, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 82-98. - Building wastes. 
(a)  The person creating or in possession of building wastes shall be responsible for the disposal of such wastes in such a manner and at such places approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Building wastes shall not be collected as a part of the city's refuse and garbage collection service except as a special collection under subsection 82-131(e), in which event such wastes shall be prepared for collection as required by section 82-96. 
(c)  City-owned roll-off dumpsters may be rented for three days, based on availability, for a rate as set forth in section 82-131. Disposal fee will be per cubic yard of dumpster size times the rate set in section 82-131. No waste will be allowed above the sides of the roll-off dumpster. 
(d)  The city may refuse to collect or dispose of any garbage, refuse, yard waste, or other substance which it reasonably believes to be toxic or hazardous, which requires special handling in pickup or disposal of which the city's landfill is not permitted to handle. No person shall place such materials for pickup by the city in containers furnished by the city. 
(Code 1971, §§ 13-8, 13-9; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, §§ 13-8, 13-9, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 82-99. - Small dead animals. 
(a)  The sanitation department, upon being notified, shall pick up all small dead animals from within the city street rights-of-way for appropriate disposal. The city does not pick up dead animals off of private property. 
(b)  Any person having knowledge of the existence of any dead animal shall immediately notify the sanitation department. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place a small dead animal in any garbage or refuse container. 
(Code 1971, §§ 13-10-13-12; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, §§ 13-10-13-12, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 
Sec. 82-100. - Large dead animals. 
    Any person owning or in possession of dead animals other than small dead animals, such as livestock or horses, shall be responsible for their prompt disposal in such a manner as directed by the sanitation department. 
(Code 1971, § 13-13; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-13, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 
Sec. 82-101. - Disposal of sharps. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to improperly place "sharps" into any garbage container; container or garbage bag used for refuse. Proper placement of sharps for pickup by the city sanitation department shall be as follows: Sharps shall be placed in a puncture-resistant (hard plastic) container with a screw-on lid. The lid of the sharps container shall be screwed on tightly when placed in trash container (bag or can) to be picked up by the city sanitation department. Containers holding sharps are not recyclable and shall not be placed in bags or containers for recyclable pickup by the city sanitation department. 
(Code 1971, § 13-22; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-22, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Secs. 82-102-82-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 82-131. - Service collection and disposal fees and standards. 
(a)  Scope. This section is a schedule and shall not be deemed to require the city to accept any type or volume of waste from any location or source, though it shall serve as a basis and criteria for rejection of waste. 
(b)  Minimum fee. All active water accounts serving commercial, business, institutional, or residential, which are charged for sewer (with the exception of residents utilizing approved septic systems), shall be charged at least the minimum garbage collection fee, plus a fuel adjustment charge per collection, respectively. The fuel adjustment charge shall be calculated by the city manager on a monthly basis, and shall cover the city's monthly fuel cost for the sanitation department. 
(c)  Residential waste collected by city. Minimum fees are established for waste commonly generated from residential units where the waste is collected by the city either at the house side for qualified handicapped citizens, or in approved containers for collection by the city. Curbside collection shall utilize city-supplied containers only. Such charges are per month, per residential unit except where applicable to other established rate schedules, and shall include the cost of collection, hauling and disposal. For the purpose of this rate schedule, a single-family residence shall be one residential unit; a duplex shall be two units; triplex three units; and quadraplex four units. Each unit in an apartment complex above four units that is separately metered for other city utilities, and has approved containerized service, will be considered as a separate residential unit with collection fees to be based on charges established for this customer class. Service collection and disposal fees and standards for residential waste picked up by the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential unit-Curbside collection-One day a week pickup: 
a.  Effective 10/1/2018. 
1.  One container ..... $24.77* per month 
2.  Two containers ..... $41.39* per month 
3.  Three containers ..... $63.08* per month 
Note: *Plus fuel adjustment 
Tax will be charged on all garbage accounts 
(2)  Apartment unit in apartment complex having more than four units and separately metered for other city utilities and having approved dumpster collection - One pickup per week. 
Effective 10/1/2018 ..... $19.89* per month 
(3)  Apartment complexes, mobile homes and manufactured housing parks above four units that have master meter(s) for utility services shall be required to have approved containerized collection service with collection fees to be based on the containerized rate established on a cubic yard basis. 
a.  Apartment complexes, mobile homes or manufactured housing parks metered by a master meter(s) for city utility service shall have approved containerized collection service - $5.04* per cubic yard of waste collected per collection - one to six collections per week. 
b.  Each unit in a mobile home or manufactured housing park separately metered for other city utility services will be classified as a residential unit. 
(4)  A residential customer who can provide a certificate on a city supplied form from a medical doctor stating that he/she is unable to physically carry his/her household waste to the curb and that no one else residing at this residence can carry waste to the curb shall be allowed, upon return of completed form/letter, to receive house side collection service at the curbside collection service rate. Waste must be placed in city-supplied containers (outside garage, fences, etc.). City may require updated disability forms at its discretion. 
(5)  All fees are for the amount and type of waste commonly generated by such residential units. Excessive amounts or unacceptable types of waste shall be subject to additional fees, requirements, or refusal by the city manager. 
(6)  Pilot Program - the city shall reserve the right to charge fees as approved by the City Council and deemed necessary for services provided in the implementation of various programs, such as commercial recycling, etc. 
(d)  Commercial, industrial, institutional and similar nonresidential waste. Service collection and disposal fees and standards for commercial, industrial, institutional and similar nonresidential waste is as follows: 
(1)  The city shall have the right to require any of the classes who generate more than four 96-gallon roll out containers per pickup to have approved containerized collection service. A minimum charge of $28.64* will be assessed for roll out carts. Charges for minimum customers who desire multi-weekly collections will be based on the fee schedule below. Number of collections per week shall be determined by the city manager. 
(2)  Multiple carts/collections. The following rates will be charged for multiple cart collections: 
Effective 10/1/2018 
Carts 1 Day 2 Days 3 Days 4 Days 5 Days 1 $28.64* $57.28* $85.92* $114.56* $143.20* 2 $28.64* $57.28* $85.92* $114.56* $143.20* 3 $44.11* $88.22* $132.33* $176.44* $220.55* 4 $59.67* $119.34* $179.01* $238.68* $298.35*  
Note: * Plus fuel adjustment 
Tax will be charged on garbage rates 
(3)  The collection rate for dumpster service shall cover only one collection per week. Charges for minimum customers who desire multi-weekly collections will be based on the number of collection times the minimum charge. The number of collections per week shall be determined by the city manager. 
a.  Front load dumpsters - $5.04* per cubic yard of waste collected per collection - One to six collections per week. 
b.  After the city has made two separate attempts to collect waste from sites where dumpster is blocked, customers will be billed as if collection was made. To return and empty dumpster will be classified as an extra collection and appropriate fee charged. 
c.  Roll-off rates - City owned roll-off dumpsters may be rented for three days for a rate of $140.29*. Each additional three-day period, or part of, for an additional $70.15* minimum. Disposal rate will be $13.48** per cubic yard, per dumpster size, per collection. 
Note: **Plus pickup and return fuel adjustment. 
Tax will be charged on garbage rates. 
(4)  Regularly scheduled privately owned roll-off. The collection rate for regular scheduled service shall be $5.04** per cubic yard of non-compacted waste/refuse; or $5.55** per cubic yard of compacted waste/refuse collected, per collection. 
Note: ** Plus pickup and return fuel adjustment on privately owned dumpsters of 20 or more cubic yards. Tax will be charged on garbage rates. 
(5)  Garbage collection service will be provided to tenants and/or commercial enterprises located on city owned property outside the city limits of Nacogdoches at a rate of one and one-half times the rate charged for commercial garbage collection inside the city limits. All such tenants and enterprises shall be considered commercial and shall abide by the collection standards contained in this section. 
(6)  The city manager, shall have the right to set the schedule of frequency of pickup, specify the type of container, location of container, and refuse any waste based on volume, weight, dimension, hazard, state (liquid or solid), or type based on any city ordinance, state or federal law, regulations or permit pertaining to same including refusal based on health, air or water safety concerns. Under no circumstances will the city collect waste/refuse from any enclosed area, fenced yard. 
(7)  Special waste collection fee based on type of waste requested for collection; the following rates shall apply. The city manager shall have the right to determine equipment and personnel needed for collection. 
Personnel 1 man $29.58/hr. 2 men 40.71/hr. Truck with operator Pick-up 20.75/hr. Dump truck 37.51/hr. Loader/backhoe With operator 45.37/hr.  
*Note-All services are charged one-hour minimum. In addition to collection fee, current landfill gate rate disposal fee shall also apply. 
(e)  Waste delivered to city landfill. Disposal standards and fees for the city landfill are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum fees for waste delivered to the city landfill to be deposited in appropriate locations within the landfill according to city landfill rules or at the direction of the city employees on duty at the city landfill have been determined. 
(2)  For purposes of determining fees, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  City resident. A person who resides within the corporate limits of the City of Nacogdoches. 
b.  Commercial user. A person, corporation, or partnership that engages in a business, service, calling or occupation that generates waste. 
c.  Non-resident. A person who does not reside within the corporate limits of the City of Nacogdoches. 
d.  Special waste. Waste requiring special disposal methods/handling that is not required of other waste. 
(3)  Without regard to residential or commercial use the following fees are set for special items generated within the City of Nacogdoches. The city will not accept dead animals for disposal from outside the city. 
a.  Appliances: 
Large ..... $14.82 
Small ..... $8.25 
b.  Small dead animals no larger than a dog, each. ..... $14.82 
c.  Large dead animals, each ..... $76.43 
d.  Special waste: 
1.  City Resident, cu. yd. ..... $14.82 
2.  Non-resident, cu. yd. ..... $27.08 
e.  Tires will be accepted and fee assessed in accordance with the state tire recycling fee schedule. 
(4)  Household garbage, rubbish, waste and brush: 
a.  City residents - $6.77 per cubic yard non-compacted and $7.44 compacted, with a $14.82 minimum. 
b.  Non-residents - $13.36 per cubic yard non-compacted and $14.65 compacted, with a $29.53 minimum, except that non-residents may not bring brush to the landfill. 
c.  Commercial brush/yard waste - $8.01 per cubic yard, with a $18.03 minimum. 
(5)  Upon proof of residence with a qualifying city water bill, city residents may make one delivery of such waste per month to the landfill free of any charge. 
a.  Proof of resident status shall be by means of a city water bill or water bill receipt no more than one month old, together with other proof of identity and residence such as a drivers license or identification card issued by the State of Texas, or other identification acceptable to the director of public works for the city. Only one delivery shall be allowed on any one water bill per month. Free disposal cannot be accumulated and taken at one time. 
b.  For purposes of this rate schedule, a standard size pickup truck without special sideboards, frames, load extenders or similar methods loaded with acceptable waste shall be considered a load qualifying for one free disposal per month. 
(f)  [Cubic yardage.] Cubic yardage shall be determined by the city employee on duty at the landfill according to the criteria established by the city manager. 
(g)  [Yard waste.] Yard waste generated, cut, trimmed, or felled within the City of Nacogdoches and delivered to the landfill by private resident with a qualifying city water bill, as described in subsection (e)(4) above, may be disposed of at a location designated by the city employee on duty at no charge provided that: no other type waste is mixed with the load; limbs and bags are unloaded in the area designed by the landfill superintendent or his designee; and no trees or limbs are in excess of 12 inches in diameter. Bagged yard waste must be emptied at site. No plastic is allowed to remain within the designated area and shall either be removed from the landfill or disposed of as directed by the city employee on duty. 
(h)  Scope. This is a schedule and shall not be deemed to require the city to accept any type or volume of waste from any location or source, though it shall serve as a basis and criteria for rejection of waste. 
(Code 1971, § 13-14; Ord. No. 1222-9-00, § 13-14, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-14, 9-19-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1417-5-06, 5-16-2006; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 1497-9-08, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 1506-9-08, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1627-5-13, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 1714-8-16 , 8-16-2016; Ord. No. 1743-9-17 , 9-5-2017; Ord. No. 1779-09-18 , 9-18-2018) 
Sec. 82-132. - Billing and payment. 
    For the purpose of convenience, the service fees levied by section 82-131 shall appear on the same bills showing the charges for city water and sewer service, and such fees shall be payable at the city hall. 
(Code 1971, § 13-15; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-15, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Sec. 82-133. - Suspension of service for nonpayment. 
    Any person who fails or refuses to pay the collection fees prescribed by section 82-131 within ten days from the date the same shall become due and payable shall have his service suspended, and the sanitation department shall take appropriate action in accordance with the laws and ordinances regulating sanitation. 
(Code 1971, § 13-16; Ord. No. 1243-2-01, § 13-16, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 1264-9-01, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 1295-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1298-10-02, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 1335-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1374-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1387-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1437-9-06, 9-19-2006) 
Chapter 86 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Street powers of city, art. II, § 15; construction of sidewalks and curbs, art. II, § 16; improvement of sidewalks, art. II, § 17; franchises for use of streets, art. II, § 18; authority of city to alter streets, art. II, § 20; authority of city to regulate and remove all obstructions and encroachments, art. II, § 20. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(3); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not contained in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-9(5); any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades of streets in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(7); any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements saved from repeal, § 1-9(14); aviation, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; use of public property restricted by itinerant vendors, § 18-233; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; library, ch. 62; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; parks and recreation, ch. 74; signs, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 90; prerequisite requirements for existing residences, streets and utility services for subdivisions, § 90-65; standards and specifications for streets in subdivisions, § 90-181 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 98; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102; play streets, § 102-4; one-way streets and alleys, § 102-122; parking on narrow streets, § 102-159; standing, parking on one-way streets, § 102-160; utilities, ch. 106; vehicles for hire, ch. 110; waterways, ch. 114; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to control streets and rights-of-way, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; authority of city to regulate and remove obstructions and encroachments on streets and rights-of-way, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 86-26. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages in any public place within the city, excluding restaurants, private clubs and those areas indicated in section 74-62. 
(Code 1971, § 19-16(b)) 
Sec. 86-27. - Camping. 
    No overnight camping is permitted on any city-owned property, unless permitted by the city manger or his/her designee. 
(Code 1971, § 7-98; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1695-4-15, § 2, 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 86-28. - Obstructions on sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the use by pedestrians of any sidewalk in the city by placing thereon any boxes, material, vehicles, scales or other objects whatever. However, when it may appear to be to the best interest of the general public, the city manager may, by written permission, authorize the placing of certain objects on the city sidewalks. 
(b)  All merchants shall have the right to occupy one-half of a sidewalk when receiving and forwarding goods, wares and merchandise; provided, however, that such space shall not be occupied longer than five minutes at a time. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any merchant doing business in the city to occupy and use any part of a sidewalk for the purpose of exhibiting, displaying or advertising goods, wares or merchandise. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, at auction or otherwise, any goods, wares or merchandise on a sidewalk. 
(Code 1971, § 25-1) 
Sec. 86-29. - Removal of sand, dirt or gravel from streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the permission of the city manager, to take, remove or carry away any sand, dirt or gravel from or out of any city street. 
(Code 1971, § 25-2) 
Sec. 86-30. - Destroying or damaging public facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wilfully destroy or damage any bridge, culvert, drain, sewer, ditch, sidewalk, signboard or tile or anything of like character placed upon any street or sidewalk for the benefit of the public. 
(Code 1971, § 25-3) 
Sec. 86-31. - Playing ball. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in playing ball in or on any street or sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 25-5) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit amusements in streets and sidewalks, art. II, § 22[10]. 
Secs. 86-32-86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-61. - Excavation and grading code adopted. 
(a)  The Standard Excavation and Grading Code, 1975 edition, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., with amendments, is adopted and enacted as the excavation and grading code for the city. One copy shall be on file in the office of the city secretary, available to all persons for inspection. The excavation and grading code is adopted as fully as if set out at length in this article, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate city limits. 
(b)  Any or all additions or amendments to such code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the amendment a part of such code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such code and shall be understood and intended as additions and amendments to such code. 
(Code 1971, § 25-15; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 86-62. - Supervision of work. 
    The holder of any permit issued pursuant to this article shall make any opening in any street, sidewalk or driveway or break any curb or gutter or make any repairs thereof under the direction of the city manager, with due regard for the safety of the public and the preservation of such streets, sidewalks, driveways, curbs or gutters. 
(Code 1971, § 25-27) 
Sec. 86-63. - Indemnification of city. 
    Any person who makes an opening in any street, sidewalk or driveway or who breaks any curb or gutter within the city shall indemnify the city and all of its officers, agents and employees from all suits, actions or claims of any character, name and description brought for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person or person's property on account of any negligent act or fault of the indemnifier, his agents or employees. 
(Code 1971, § 25-28) 
Sec. 86-64. - Notice to police and fire departments. 
    The police and fire departments shall, except for emergency repairs, be contacted at least 24 hours before any street is cut pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1971, § 25-25) 
Sec. 86-65. - Safety devices required. 
    Any person desiring to make any opening in any street, sidewalk or driveway or to break any curb or gutter within the city shall provide such machinery guards, safe walkways, ladders, bridges, gangplanks, flares and other safety devices as may be needed to protect the public from accidents. 
(Code 1971, § 25-26) 
Secs. 86-66-86-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 86-91. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening in any street, sidewalk or driveway or to break any curb or gutter within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1971, § 25-16) 
Sec. 86-92. - Application. 
    Every applicant for a permit within the scope of this division shall submit a written application for the permit to the city manager. Such application shall state the street name and lot and block number in which the opening is to be made, the width of the opening desired, the purpose of the opening and the date on which the breaking is to be commenced. If the application is for a permit to break any curb or gutter, the application shall be signed by the owner of the property affected. 
(Code 1971, § 25-18) 
Sec. 86-93. - Fee. 
    Each applicant for a permit required by this division shall pay a fee of $25.00. 
(Code 1971, § 25-19; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005) 
Sec. 86-94. - Authority to grant. 
    The city manager shall have the authority to grant a permit required by this division to a person engaged in laying pipe for gas or water or for such other purposes within the public interest, upon application and payment of the fee imposed in this division. 
(Code 1971, § 25-17) 
Secs. 86-95-86-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 86-121. - Specifications for streets. 
    Any person desiring to cut any concrete or asphalt street within the city or replace any portion cut shall comply with the following specifications: 
(1)  Width of concrete cut. All concrete shall be cut back at least six inches from the ditch cut. Such cuts shall be done with a jackhammer or sawed with a concrete saw to a depth of two inches before breaking. 
(2)  Width of ditch. The ditch shall be of sufficient width so select backfill may be tamped or water soaked along each side of the pipe or casing. 
(3)  Backfill. The backfill at street crossings shall be of select material, wetted if required, placed in six-inch layers and thoroughly compacted by mechanical tamping. This compaction shall be required from 18 feet on either side of the curbline of streets to 18 feet of the curbline of such. Also, the compaction shall be continued to the top of the backfill. 
(4)  Alignment and grade. All concrete shall be replaced true in alignment and grade to the removed street. Also, all small concrete sections or slabs adjacent to any open cut on the street shall be removed and replaced and shall be of the same grade and thickness of that removed. 
(5)  Replacement of concrete curb and gutter and flexible base. All concrete shall be class A, and the curb and gutter shall conform to the grade and alignment of the curb and gutter removed. Replaced base shall consist of 12-inch compacted cement stabilized iron ore gravel approved by the city and shall extend a minimum of six inches on each side of the ditch. 
(6)  Replacement of monolithic curb and gutter and rigid base. The concrete, grade and alignment shall be the same as prescribed in subsection (4) of this section. If the original street had concrete wearing surface, the replacement shall be concrete 12 inches thick and poured to conform to the original street grade. If the removed street had a rigid base with an asphalt wearing surface, the replacement shall be 12-inch concrete with 11/2 inches of compacted asphalt wearing surface. The 12-inch concrete base shall extend a minimum of six inches on each side of the ditch. If the open cut crossing of a monolithic curb and gutter concrete street is such as to leave a short section adjacent to the ditch, the section shall be removed and replaced to the end of the section or the radius of the street turnout. 
(7)  Expansion joints. All expansion joints shall be of one-half-inch premoulded or three-quarter-inch cypress or redwood board and shall be placed in accordance with good engineering practice. 
(8)  Concrete curing. When completed, the concrete shall have at least three days of curing of a method approved by the city. Membrane curing compound, which complies with the Standard Specification for Liquid Membrane Forming Compounds for Curing Concrete, ASTM designation C 309 type 2 white pigmented, may be used. 
(Code 1971, § 25-20) 
Sec. 86-122. - Specifications for sidewalks and driveways. 
    Every person shall, in conformity with the lines and grades approved by the city, replace any sidewalk or driveway within the city which he has removed, while excavating, in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Materials. All concrete used in the construction shall consist of Portland cement, fine and coarse aggregate and water, and shall be proportioned to conform to the requirements for class A concrete. Reinforcing steel, if required, shall be deformed bars conforming to the requirements of ASTM designation A 305. 
(2)  Construction methods. Construction methods shall be as follow: 
a.  The subgrade shall be excavated and shaped to line, grade and cross section and, if considered necessary by the city, shall be of select material and mechanically tamped. The subgrade shall be lightly sprinkled before placing concrete thereon. 
b.  All forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp, and of a depth equal to the thickness of the finished work. They shall be securely staked to line and grade and maintained in a true position during the depositing of concrete. 
c.  All sidewalks shall be 48 inches wide by four inches thick and shall have a one-half-inch premoulded or three-quarter-inch cypress or redwood board expansion joint at least every 32 feet. Where any sidewalk abuts a curb, concrete step retaining wall or another concrete walk from a residence, an approved expansion board of one-inch thickness shall be placed. Similar expansion material shall be placed around all obstructions protruding through sidewalks. 
d.  All concrete shall be placed in the forms to the depth specified, spaded and tamped until thoroughly compacted and the mortar entirely covers the surface. The top surface shall be floated with a wooden float to a gritty texture. The outer edges and joints shall then be rounded with a suitable tool, formed so as to round the edges to a one-half-inch radius. 
e.  All sidewalks shall be marked into separate sections, each four feet in length, by the use of approved jointing tools. 
f.  All commercial driveways shall be replaced with a minimum of six-inch-depth concrete. If the original driveway contains wire or bar reinforcing or is thicker than six inches, the replacement shall be the depth of the original concrete and shall have a minimum of no. 3 reinforcing steel on 12-inch centers. 
g.  When completed, the sidewalks and driveways shall have a curing period of at least three days, of a method approved by the city. Membrane curing compound, which complies with the Standard Specification for Liquid Membrane Forming Compounds for Curing Concrete, ASTM designation C 309 type 2 white pigmented, may be used. 
h.  All sidewalks or driveways removed shall be replaced true to grade and alignment and shall be replaced in as good a condition as the concrete removed. 
(Code 1971, § 25-21) 
Sec. 86-123. - Replacement of concrete lips; enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who is granted a permit to break out any curb or gutter shall reconstruct, where the opening is made, a laid-down concrete lip which shall not be less than 12 inches in width. However, where the adjacent property is lower than the lowest point of the curb, the concrete lip shall be extended in sufficient width to obtain a height equal to the upright curb height adjacent to said opening. 
(b)  The city manager shall take all necessary steps to ensure that any repairs made adjacent to any openings in a curb and gutter conform with good and accepted engineering practices and subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 25-22) 
Sec. 86-124. - Construction defects. 
(a)  All street, sidewalk, driveway, curb or gutter work showing defects in alignment or grade within three years of completion shall be removed and replaced or repaired, as directed by the city, by the person who originally removed and replaced it when such defects can be traceable directly to him. 
(b)  Any person who breaks any water or sewer main or service line shall repair the break and have it inspected by a city inspector before it is covered. If necessary for the city crews to repair the break, the person shall be billed for cost plus ten percent for such repairs. 
(c)  The public utility company, individual, firm, or contractor will assume responsibility for defects in sewer or water lines which can be traced to construction during this project, regardless of when such defects appear. 
(Code 1971, § 25-23) 
Sec. 86-125. - Alteration of utility lines. 
(a)  No person shall alter existing utility lines without written permission from the responsible official of the line affected. 
(b)  Any person who alters any conduit or line to enable the city to furnish sewer or water service to any property shall make such alterations at his own expense and shall take immediate action when requested to do so by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 25-24) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 
Secs. 86-126-86-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 86-151. - Described. 
    As used in this division, the term "concrete curb and gutter" shall consist of Portland cement combined curb and gutter without reinforcing steel, constructed on an approved subgrade in accordance with this division and in conformity with lines and grades established by a registered professional engineer. 
(Code 1971, § 25-34) 
Sec. 86-152. - Materials. 
    Portland cement, fine and coarse aggregate and water shall conform to the specifications contained in section 86-153. 
(Code 1971, § 25-35) 
Sec. 86-153. - Mixing and proportions. 
    Concrete materials for a curb and gutter shall be measured by weighing on an approved batch scale. Water shall be measured by an approved measuring device for measuring water by volume which indicates the quantity in gallons and fractions thereof. Four and one-half sacks of cement, 20 to 30 gallons of water, approximately 1,500 pounds fine aggregate, and approximately 1,900 pounds coarse aggregate are required for one cubic yard of workable concrete. 
(Code 1971, § 25-36) 
Sec. 86-154. - Construction methods. 
(a)  Subgrade. The subgrade for the curb and gutter shall be shaped to line, grade and cross section, thoroughly tamped and lightly sprinkled before placing the concrete thereon. 
(b)  Forms. All forms shall be of metal, except short radius forms, and of a section approved by the city engineer, straight, free of warp and of a depth equal to the depth of the curb and gutter. All forms shall be well staked and thoroughly braced so that the tamping of materials will not disturb them or move them out of line. 
(c)  Expansion joint. The curb and gutter shall have a one-half-inch premoulded or three-quarter-inch cypress or redwood board expansion joint every 50 feet and shall be grooved with an approved grooving tool every ten feet if so specified by the city engineer. 
(d)  Finishing. All curb and gutter finishing shall be performed prior to the initial set of concrete. Plaster finish shall not be permitted. Care shall be taken that the curb and gutter shall show no trowel marks, high spots, sags or horizontal deflections, and any section showing such after being finished will be condemned by the city and shall be replaced by the contractor. 
(e)  Curing. The completed curb and gutter shall be cured by a method approved by the city. Liquid membrane curing compound which complies with the Standard Specifications for Liquid Membrane Forming Compounds for Curing Concrete, ASTM C 309 type 2 white pigmented, may be used. 
(Code 1971, § 25-37) 
Sec. 86-155. - Dimensions. 
    Unless a change order letter of authorization is secured by the contractor from the city manager and city engineer, a regular section of curb and gutter shall have the dimensions shown on the following drawing: 
_____ 
Dimensions 
(Code 1971, § 25-38) 
_____
Sec. 86-156. - Access to public streets. 
    There is adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing regulations for access to all public streets, the regulations for proposed driveways and proposed streets to existing public streets, the following requirements: 
(1)  A permit approved by the city engineer shall be required prior to the installation of any new or modified non-single-family residential driveway access or new or modified street access within the city limits or for a subdivision within the city's extra territorial jurisdiction. A permit approved by the city building official shall be required for any new or modified single-family driveway access. 
(2)  All access shall be in conformance with the city's comprehensive plan, dated July 15, 2003, as such may be amended. 
(3)  The design of all public street access shall be in accordance with "City Standards for the Design and Construction of Public Improvements", dated August 9, 2001, as such may be amended, and good engineering practice. 
(Code 1971, § 25-39; Ord. No. 1372-8-05, §§ 1-3, 8-2-2005) 
Chapter 90 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(8); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; submission of plans and evidence of compliance with article-subdivision plats, § 34-186; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 106; waterways, ch. 114; zoning, ch. 118. 
State Law reference- Subdivision of land, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building line means a line within a lot, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided in this chapter. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Dead-end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, having only one outlet to another street. 
    Engineer means a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
    Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street which is or in the future may be sold, conveyed, transferred or improved; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is always mandatory. The term "may" is merely discretionary. 
    Street means a public right-of-way however designated, which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent land. The term "street" is further defined as follows: 
(1)  Arterial street primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the city. 
(2)  Collector street primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas. 
(3)  Minor street is one used primarily for access to abutting residential property. 
    Subdivider means any person or agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined in this section. In any event, the term "subdivider" is restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner of land sought to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision means a division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition of any town or city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots or any lots and streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision, but it does not include the division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels or tracts of five acres or more and not involving any new street, alley or access easement. 
    Surveyor means a state licensed land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by state statute to practice the profession of surveying. 
    Utility easement means an interest in land granted to the city, the general public, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of such utilities. 
(b)  Definitions not expressly prescribed in this section are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
(Code 1971, § 26-3) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted under the authority of the state constitution and laws, including V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq., and the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.021. 
(Code 1971, § 26-1) 
Sec. 90-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the city and within the area surrounding the city and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions within the corporate city limits as well as those within that area delineated as the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Nacogdoches as allowed for under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021. 
(Code 1971, § 26-2) 
State Law reference- City's extraterritorial jurisdiction for subdivision purposes, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.; subdivisions generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 
Sec. 90-4. - Authority of city council. 
    The city council may promulgate rules, regulations, standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and arrangement of streets, curbs, streetlights, street signs, utility layouts, utility easements, gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, monuments, criteria for drainage easement requirements and drainage facilities. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed with the city secretary 60 days before they become effective. No such rules, regulations, standards, and specifications shall conflict with this chapter or any other city ordinances. All such improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the subdivider in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards and specifications. 
(Code 1971, § 26-15; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-5. - Application of chapter to extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(a)  This chapter is extended in its application to include all of the area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. The sections of this chapter shall have the same force and effect within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction as within the corporate city limits, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  No violation of any section of this chapter outside the corporate city limits, but within the city's area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall constitute a misdemeanor under this chapter, nor shall any fine provided for in this chapter be applicable to a violation within such area of extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(c)  If any section of the subdivision chapter dated July 1, 1969, is violated within the area of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction and outside its corporate limits, the city may institute any appropriate action of proceedings in the district court to enjoin the violation of such chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 26-16) 
Sec. 90-6. - Enforcement actions. 
    In behalf of the city, the city attorney shall, when directed by the city council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this chapter or the standards referred to in this chapter with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as such jurisdiction is determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or part of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 26-4(E); Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-7. - Subdivider's responsibility. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to familiarize himself with the procedures, specifications, and standards required by this chapter for the subdivision of land. 
(Code 1971, § 26-6) 
Sec. 90-8. - Variances. 
    The planning and zoning commission may authorize a variance from this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the planning and zoning commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to, or desirable in, the public interest. In making the findings required in this section, the planning and zoning commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved; existing uses of land in the vicinity; the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision; and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the planning and zoning commission finds that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area; and 
(4)  The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with this chapter. Such findings of the planning and zoning commission, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(Code 1971, § 26-5) 
Secs. 90-9-90-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Requirements for plats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.004. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-36. - Subdivision of large tracts. 
    Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the subdivider which is intended to be subsequently subdivided as additional units of the same subdivision, the preliminary and final plat shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area showing the tentative proposed layout of streets and land usage. The overall layout, if approved by the planning and zoning commission, shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the planning and zoning commission. Thereafter, plats of subsequent units of such subdivision shall conform to such approved overall layout, unless subsequently changed, and approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1971, § 26-12) 
Secs. 90-37-90-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PREREQUISITE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 90-61. - Permits. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued by the city for the installation of septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record or upon any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(b)  No permits shall be issued by the building/inspection department for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record. Permits shall not be issued for any structure unless all required city utilities and streets are in place and operational, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(Code 1971, § 26-4(A), (B)) 
Sec. 90-62. - Work done by city. 
    The city shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(Code 1971, § 26-4(C)) 
Sec. 90-63. - Utilities. 
    The city shall not sell or supply any water, gas, electricity, or sewer service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained in this chapter have not been complied with in full. 
(Code 1971, § 26-4(D)) 
Sec. 90-64. - Resolution of noncompliance. 
    If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have not been complied with in full and the city council passes a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval and reciting the fact that sections 90-61 through 90-63 will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein, the city secretary shall, when directed by the city council, cause a certified copy of such resolution, under the corporate seal of the city, to be filed in the deed records of the county in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filling of such resolution, the city secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed records of the county stating that sections 90-61 through 90-63 no longer apply. 
(Code 1971, § 26-4(F); Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 90-65. - Existing residences, streets and utility services. 
    This division shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of a permit for any lot upon which a residence building exists and was in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives (June 21, 1988), nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to, or abutting any lot, the last recorded conveyance of which, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives (June 21, 1988), was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision or lot therein recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives (June 21, 1988). 
(Code 1971, § 26-4(G)) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 106. 
Secs. 90-66-90-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 90-91. - Preparation and contents. 
(a)  The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger and shall show the following: 
(1)  Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similarly to the name of any other subdivision located within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  Description by metes and bounds of the subdivision. 
(3)  Acreage and number of lots within the subdivision. 
(4)  Names and addresses of the subdivider and record owner. 
(5)  Date of preparation, scale of the plat and north arrow. 
(6)  Vicinity sketch or map at a scale of not more than one mile per inch, which shall show the relation of the subdivision to well-known streets, railroads, and watercourses in all directions to a distance of at least one mile. 
(7)  Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines. 
(8)  Names of contiguous subdivisions and the owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land and an indication of whether or not contiguous properties are platted. 
(9)  Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers and similar data shall be referred. 
(10)  Location of the city limits line, the outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and zoning district boundaries, if they traverse the subdivision from part of the boundary of the subdivision or are contiguous to such boundary. 
(11)  Topographical information, which shall include contour lines on a basis of five vertical feet in terrain with a slope of two percent or more, and on a basis of two vertical feet in terrain with a slope of less than two percent. 
(12)  Existing sites as follows: 
a.  The location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. 
b.  The location, dimensions, description and name of all existing or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, permanent structures and other sites within or contiguous to the subdivision. 
c.  The location, dimensions, description, and flow line of existing watercourses and drainage structures within the subdivision or on contiguous tracts. 
(13)  The approximate location, dimensions and description of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the proposed subdivision. 
(14)  A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block. 
(15)  Designation of any sites for churches, sewage disposal plants, water plants, business, industry, or other special land uses. If a proposed use is unknown, the use shall be designated as unrestricted. 
(16)  Location of all building lines on all lots and sites within the subdivision. 
(17)  Names of all proposed streets, which shall not have the same spelling or be pronounced similarly to the name of any other street located within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, unless such proposed street is an extension of an existing street, in which case it shall be named the same as the existing street. 
(Code 1971, § 26-7) 
Sec. 90-92. - Processing. 
(a)  Formal application for subdivision preliminary plat approval shall be made by the subdivider in writing to the planning and zoning commission at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(b)  The subdivider shall submit one copy of the preliminary plat to the planning and zoning commission at least ten days prior to the date at which the formal application for preliminary plat approval is made to the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Each plat submitted for preliminary and/or final plat approval shall be accompanied by a filing fee on file in the city secretary's office. Minor plats shall have a filing fee on file in the city secretary's office. No action shall be taken by the planning and zoning commission until the filing fee has been paid. The filing fee shall not be refunded if the subdivider fails to make formal application for preliminary and/or final plat approval or if the plat is disapproved. 
(d)  Each plat submitted for preliminary approval shall be accompanied by a certificate or letter from a title guaranty company or title attorney indicating a current search and certifying to at least the following concerning title to the land: 
(1)  A statement of records examined and date of examination. 
(2)  A description of the property in question, including a metes and bounds description of the tract. 
(3)  The name of the fee owner as of the date of examination and the date, file number, volume and page of the recording of the deed involved. 
(4)  The name, file, number, date of filing and volume and page of any lienholders. 
(5)  A general description of any easements or fee strips granted, along with the file number, date of filing, and volume and page of recording. 
(e)  The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary plat as to its conformity with the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter or referred to in this chapter. 
(f)  Pertinent copies of the preliminary plat data shall be submitted to the city engineer who shall check the data for conformity with the standards and specifications contained or referred to in this chapter. 
(g)  The city engineer shall return the preliminary plat data to the planning and zoning commission with his suggestions as to modifications, additions or alterations of such plat data. 
(h)  Within 30 days after the preliminary plat is formally filed, the planning and zoning commission shall conditionally approve or disapprove such plat or conditionally approve it with modifications. If it is conditionally disapproved or conditionally approved with modifications, the planning and zoning commission shall inform the subdivider, in writing, of the reasons at the time such action is taken. 
(i)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission shall be deemed as expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final or record plat. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat. 
(j)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat will expire six months from the date of approval by the planning and zoning commission. However, if the subdivider shall apply in writing prior to the end of such six-month period, stating the reasons for needing an extension, this period may be extended for another six months, but not beyond a total of one year. 
(Code 1971, § 26-8) 
Secs. 90-93-90-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 90-121. - Conformance; contents. 
(a)  The subdivision final plat and accompanying data shall conform to the preliminary plat as conditionally approved by the planning and zoning commission incorporating any and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions imposed by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  The final plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible film sheets 24 inches wide and 36 inches long, with margins of not less than one inch on all sides. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger. Where more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. 
(c)  The final plat shall contain all of the features required for preliminary plats in section 90-91. 
(d)  In addition to the various requirements for the preliminary plat, the final plat shall also include the following: 
(1)  The exact location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundary or forming such boundary, with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and radii; area; and central angles, degree of curvature, tangent distance and length of all curves where appropriate. 
(2)  The exact location, dimensions, description and names of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions; bearing or deflecting angles and radii; area; and central angles, degree of curvature, tangent distance and length of all curves where appropriate. 
(e)  The final plat shall also include the following: 
(1)  A certificate of ownership and dedication. 
(2)  The certificate of the registered engineer or licensed surveyor who surveyed and monumented the subdivision. 
(Code 1971, § 26-9) 
Sec. 90-122. - Processing. 
(a)  If desired by the subdivider and approved by the planning and zoning commission, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop. However, such portion shall conform to all the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  After the subdivider is notified of approval of the preliminary plat, he may submit to the planning and zoning commission, at a regularly scheduled meeting, the final plat of the subdivision or portion thereof. 
(c)  No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has been submitted. However, if an approved plat has been duly recorded and the subdivider wishes to increase the size of the lots by combining two or more lots or by combining one lot with a portion of the adjacent lot in such manner that no portion of a lot remains smaller than the original lots, no preliminary plat will be necessary. 
(d)  A final plat of an approved preliminary plat or a portion thereof shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission within six months from the date of approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise the approval of the planning and zoning commission shall become null and void, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning and zoning commission. 
(e)  Formal application for final plat approval shall be made by the subdivider in writing to the planning and zoning commission at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(f)  The subdivider shall submit the original tracing, one reproducible copy, and formal application for the final plat when application is made to the planning and zoning commission. 
(g)  Each plat submitted for final plat approval shall be accompanied by a supplemental report from a title guaranty company or title attorney in which the letter or title certificate required in subsection 90-92(d) is brought up to current date. 
(h)  Prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider of any subdivision wherein public streets or easements are shown crossing private easements or fee strips shall, by letter to the planning and zoning commission, assume responsibility for seeing that any adjustments and protection of existing pipelines, electrical transmission lines, or other facilities shall be planned and provided for to the satisfaction of the holder of the private easements or fee strips and the city prior to the filing of the plat for record. 
(i)  The planning and zoning commission shall review the final plat as to its conformity with the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter or referred to in this chapter. A public hearing will be held by the planning and zoning commission on all requests for final approval of plats involving the replatting of a subdivision or part of a subdivision. Public notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with state law. 
(j)  The planning and zoning commission shall approve the final plat if it conforms to the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter or referred to in this chapter and if all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions imposed by the planning and zoning commission have been satisfied. 
(k)  The planning and zoning commission shall disapprove the final plat if it does not conform to the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter or referred to in this chapter or if all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions imposed by the planning and zoning commission have not been satisfied. If the final plat is disapproved, the planning and zoning commission shall inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons at the time such action is taken. 
(l)  If the planning and zoning commission fails to either approve or disapprove the final plat within 30 days from the date of formal application for final plat approval, the plat shall be automatically approved. 
(m)  Administrative plat approval. The approval of minor plats is delegated to the city planner and city engineer. Minor plats are those that involve four or fewer lots which front on an existing street and do not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. The prepared plat shall contain a certificate of approval by the city planner and the city engineer. See exhibit E attached to Ordinance No. 889. The city planner and the city engineer may, for any reason, elect to present the plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval. The city planner and city engineer shall not disapprove a plat and shall be required to refer any plat which is not approved to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission must act on the plat within 30 days after the date the plat is submitted for approval. 
(Code 1971, § 26-10) 
State Law reference- Plat approval procedure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.009. 
Sec. 90-123. - Recording. 
(a)  After the subdivision final plat has been finally approved, the planning and zoning commission shall cause the final plat to be recorded with the county clerk in the county in which the subdivision lies. No plat shall be filed for record without the written consent of the subdivider. If the subdivider fails to give such written consent within 30 days of the date of final approval of the plat, the planning and zoning commission may at any time thereafter cancel such approval. 
(b)  Prior to the recording of the final plat, the subdivider shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The subdivider shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a check in the amount of the recordation fee. 
(2)  The subdivider shall obtain from the holder of any private easement or fee strip within the subdivision crossed by proposed streets or other public easements an instrument granting to the public the use of the public streets or easements over and across such private easements or fee strips for construction, operation, and maintenance of those public facilities normally using the type of public streets and easements indicated. This instrument shall be delivered to the planning and zoning commission to be filed for record along with the plat. 
(3)  The subdivider shall furnish the planning and zoning commission a letter from the holder of the private easements or fee strips in question, stating that arrangements for any required adjustments in pipelines, electric transmission lines, or other similar facilities have been made to the satisfaction of the holder of the easement. 
(4)  The subdivider shall provide the planning and zoning commission with a letter from the city engineer stating that arrangements for all matters pertaining to any necessary adjustments have been made to the satisfaction of that department. 
(Code 1971, § 26-11) 
Secs. 90-124-90-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-151. - Compliance required. 
    Except as provided in section 90-152, no subdivision preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission unless it conforms to the standards and specifications in this article. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13) 
Sec. 90-152. - Exceptions for townhouse subdivisions. 
(a)  The following exceptions to the standards and specifications set forth in this article shall be allowed so as to permit the development of townhouse subdivisions, but such exceptions shall apply only to those developments which fall within the definition of a townhouse subdivision as follows: 
(1)  A townhouse subdivision is a development in which it is proposed to partition land into individual lots and construct townhouses which may be individually owned and where the minimum lot sizes are to be less than required in section 90-218. 
(2)  A townhouse is one of a series of dwelling units, each designed for single-family occupancy, which dwelling units are structurally connected or immediately adjacent to each other without side yards between individual dwelling units, and whose walls between individual dwelling units are either party or lot line walls. In either case, the wall between individual dwelling units shall be a firewall. 
a.  A party wall is a wall used jointly by two parties under easement, erected upon a line separating two parcels of land, each of which is a separate real estate entity. 
b.  A lot line wall is a wall adjoining and parallel to the lot line used by the party upon whose lot the wall is located. Lot line walls may share common foundations. 
c.  A firewall is a wall of noncombustible construction which divides individual dwelling units and is to restrict the spread of fire. 
(3)  Open space is all private property under common ownership designated for recreation area, private park for use of the property owners within the subdivision, play lot area, plaza area, building setbacks other than those normally required, and ornamental areas open to general view and use within the subdivision. Open space does not include streets, utility easements, and required building setbacks. 
(4)  All townhouse subdivisions shall have direct access from at least one dedicated and accessible public street having a right-of-way of at least 50 feet. 
(5)  A building line of not less than 20 feet shall be required on all lots fronting, backing or siding on a street. A building line of not less than 20 feet shall be required on all lots siding upon the subdivision boundary. 
(6)  Lots shall be provided as follows: 
a.  No lot shall contain less than 2,500 square feet in area or be less than 25 feet in width except as provided in subsection (a)(6)b of this section. 
b.  The minimum lot width and area may be reduced under the provision that open space, as defined in this subsection, be dedicated in accordance with the following: 
1.  For every 100 square feet of open space provided, the minimum lot area may be reduced by 200 square feet and the width of the lot by two feet. However, no lot shall be reduced so as to have a lot area of less than 2,000 square feet or a width of less than 20 feet. 
2.  The location and intended use of the open space shall, in all cases, be subject to the approval of the planning and zoning commission. Such open space shall be dedicated to the city or conveyed as a private open space to the trustees of an association or similar organization under a permanent agreement for maintenance and responsibility, which agreement is acceptable to the city council and approved by the city attorney. 
(b)  Townhouse subdivisions shall provide two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling. Such off-street parking space shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling. 
(Code 1971, § 26-14; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 90-153-90-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 

Sec. 90-181. - General standards. 
(a)  Adequate streets shall be provided by the subdivider, and the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of each shall conform to the city's comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to safety and convenience, and in their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood. 
(b)  Existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued, and such extensions shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith. 
(c)  Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(A)) 
Sec. 90-182. - Arterial streets. 
(a)  Arterial streets in a subdivision shall have a right-of-way width of at least 80 feet. However, arterial streets having a right-of-way width of less than 100 feet shall be increased to a width of 100 feet for a distance of 150 feet at the approach to a major street intersection, with a transition back to normal right-of-way over a distance of an additional 150 feet. 
(b)  Curves in arterial streets shall have a centerline radius of 2,000 feet or more. Reverse curves shall be separated by a minimum tangent of 100 feet. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(B)) 
Sec. 90-183. - Collector streets. 
(a)  Collector streets in a subdivision shall have a right-of-way of at least 60 feet. 
(b)  Curves in collector streets shall have a centerline radius of 800 feet or more. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(C)) 
Sec. 90-184. - Minor streets. 
(a)  Minor streets in a subdivision shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet with a minimum width of 32 feet from back of curb to back of curb. 
(b)  Reverse curves in minor streets shall have a centerline radius of 300 feet or more. 
(c)  Minor street offsets, when approved by the planning and zoning commission, must offset a minimum distance of 125 feet on centerline. 
(d)  The minimum design standards for a minor street shall be as follows: 
(1)  Surface: 1.5 inches (compacted) type D HMAC (hot mix asphaltic concrete). 
(2)  Base: six inches (compacted) crushed limestone or iron ore gravel. Iron ore gravel shall meet zero percent retained on the 2.5-inch sieve; 30 to 80 percent on the no. 40; no. 40 material shall have liquid limits (LL) less than 35 and plasticity index (PI) greater than four, less than 12; and California bearing ratio (CBR) greater than 50. 
(3)  Subgrade. If subgrade PI is greater than 20, it shall be lime stabilized to a depth of six inches. 
(4)  Concrete curb and gutter construction shall be in conformance with city standards and specifications. 
(5)  All materials and construction shall meet city and state department of transportation standards and specifications. Plans and specifications for the streets shall be prepared and sealed by a state registered professional engineer. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(D)) 
Sec. 90-185. - Intersections. 
(a)  All streets in a subdivision shall intersect at a 90-degree angle; however, variations may be approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Acute angle intersections approved by the planning and zoning commission shall have 25-foot radii at acute corners. 
(c)  Street intersections with or extending to meet an existing street shall be tied to the existing street on centerline with dimensions and bearings to show relationship. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(E)) 
Sec. 90-186. - Culs-de-sac. 
(a)  Culs-de-sac in a subdivision shall not exceed 600 feet in length and shall have a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter in residential areas and not less than 140 feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas. 
(b)  Temporary turnarounds shall be provided at the end of a street that will be extended in the future where such street exceeds 400 feet in length, but such turnarounds shall not be placed on the final plat. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(F)) 
Sec. 90-187. - Alleys. 
    Alleys shall be prohibited in a subdivision. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(K)) 
Sec. 90-188. - Dead-end streets. 
    Dead-end streets shall be prohibited in a subdivision, except where such a street is required in accordance with subsection 90-181(c). In such case, the dead-end street shall not exceed 400 feet in length. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(G)) 
Sec. 90-189. - Partial or half streets. 
    Partial or half streets shall be prohibited in a subdivision. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(H)) 
Sec. 90-190. - Provisional reserve abutting acreage tracts. 
    A provisional one-foot reserve shall be used along the side or end of streets that abut acreage tracts, as follows: 
One-foot reserve dedicated to the public in fee as a buffer separation between the side or end of streets in subdivision plats where such streets abut adjacent acreage tracts, the condition of such dedication being that when the adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat, the one-foot reserve shall thereupon become vested in the public for street right-of-way purpose, and the fee title thereto shall revert to and revest in the dedicator, his heirs, assigns or successors. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(I)) 
Secs. 90-191-90-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOTS AND BLOCKS 

Sec. 90-216. - Blocks. 
    The block length in residential areas in a subdivision shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 600 feet. The block length along an arterial street shall not exceed 1,600 feet. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(J)) 
Sec. 90-217. - Lots generally. 
(a)  All lots shown on the subdivision plat shall be for residential purposes unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  Side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street frontage and the following may be in lieu of bearings: All side lot lines are either perpendicular or radial to street frontage unless otherwise noted. 
(c)  Rear and side driveway access to arterial streets shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Double front lots are prohibited except when backing on arterial streets. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(L)) 
Sec. 90-218. - Minimum lot sizes. 
(a)  No lot in a subdivision shall be less than 75 feet in width or less than 110 feet in depth, unless otherwise provided. 
(b)  Radial lots fronting on the turnaround on a cul-de-sac may have a width of 60 feet at the building line; provided, however, such lots shall contain not less than 10,000 square feet. 
(c)  Corner lots shall have a width of not less than 80 feet. 
(d)  Corner lots siding on an arterial street shall have a width of not less than 95 feet. 
(e)  Lots facing or backing on an arterial street shall have a depth of not less than 120 feet. 
(f)  The minimum depth of lots backing on a natural drainage easement shall be 70 feet, measured between the drainage easement and the front lot line. Lots fronting on a natural drainage easement shall have a depth of not less than 70 feet, measured between the drainage easement and the rear lot line. Lots containing a natural drainage easement shall have a depth of not less than 70 feet, measured between the drainage easement and the front or rear lot line. Where such natural drainage easements are not parallel to the front or rear lot lines, the minimum depth shall be computed as the average of the sum of the distances as measured along the side lot lines. 
(g)  Lots not served by sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the state department of health as to lot area for approved septic tanks. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(M)) 
Sec. 90-219. - Numbering. 
(a)  Blocks in a subdivision shall be numbered consecutively within the overall plat and/or sections of an overall plat as recorded. 
(b)  All lots shall be numbered consecutively within each block. Lot numbering may be cumulative throughout the subdivision if the numbering continues from block to block in a uniform manner that has been approved on an overall preliminary plat. 
(c)  All areas to be used for other than residential purposes shall be labeled as "reserves" and shall be labeled alphabetically rather than numerically. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(P)) 
Secs. 90-220-90-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING LINES 

Sec. 90-246. - Residential uses. 
(a)  A building line of not less than 25 feet shall be provided on the front of all lots in a subdivision. A building line of not less than ten feet shall be provided on the side of a corner lot; provided, however, that if the side street has lots facing on the same side of the street as the side of the corner lot, a building line of not less than 25 feet shall be provided on the side of the corner lot. A building line of not less than 20 feet shall be provided on the rear of all lots. Such rear building line shall not prohibit the erection or construction of a detached accessory building closer than 20 feet to the rear lot line. Detached accessory buildings include but are not limited to automobile storage garages, laundry rooms, garden shelters, hobby rooms and mechanical rooms. 
(b)  A building line of not less than 35 feet shall be provided on the front of all lots facing an arterial street. A building line of not less than 20 feet shall be provided on the rear of all lots backing on an arterial street. A building line of not less than 20 feet shall be provided on the side of a lot siding an arterial street; provided, however, that if the arterial street has lots facing on the same side of the street as the side of the corner lot, a building line of not less than 35 feet shall be provided on the side of the corner lot. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(N)(1)) 
Sec. 90-247. - Apartment uses. 
    Areas in a subdivision reserved for apartment use shall provide a building line of at least 20 feet on the front of all lots and 20 feet on the side of all corner lots. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(N)(2)) 
Sec. 90-248. - Other uses. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified, a building line of not less than ten feet on the front of all lots and on the street side of corner lots shall be provided in a subdivision. 
(b)  When the opposite property has residential lots facing the lot, a front building line of not less than 25 feet shall be provided. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(N)(3)) 
Secs. 90-249-90-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EASEMENTS AND UTILITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 106. 

Sec. 90-276. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements for drainage adjacent to lots, tracts or reserves in a subdivision shall be noted: 
"This easement shall be kept clear of fences, buildings, planting and other obstructions to the operations and maintenance of the drainage facility, and abutting property shall not be permitted to drain into this easement except by means of an approved drainage structure." 
(b)  Utility easements shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the public and private utility companies. The minimum width of easements for city drainage, water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be 20 feet. Larger easements may be required as directed by the city engineer for facilities that cannot be effectively installed or maintained in a 20-foot width. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(O)) 
Sec. 90-277. - Utilities. 
(a)  The developer of a subdivision is required to install all water and sanitary sewer facilities, including pump and lift stations, taps and other appurtenances within the development. Such installation shall be at the developer's expense and shall be in accordance with city and state standards and specifications. 
(b)  Minimum pipe requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water lines shall be ductile iron pipe or C-900, class 150 PVC. 
(2)  Gravity sanitary sewer lines shall be ductile iron pipe or SDR 26 PVC. 
(3)  Pressure sanitary sewer lines shall be ductile iron pipe or C-900, class 100 PVC. 
(c)  All new water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be connected to the city's system. 
(d)  Extensions of water and sanitary sewer facilities beyond the development shall be in accordance with city ordinances, standards and specifications, except that developers of developments outside the city limits shall be responsible for all extension costs. 
(e)  Plans and specifications for the water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be prepared and sealed by a state registered professional engineer. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(R)) 
Sec. 90-278. - Street lighting. 
    The developer is responsible for design and installation of street lighting for the subdivision. Streetlights shall have 100-watt high-pressure sodium lamps and shall be placed at all intersections, at the ends of culs-de-sac and at a spacing of 200 to 300 feet in between. A final street lighting plan shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval at the time of final platting. 
(Code 1971, § 26-13(S)) 
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-9(1); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not contained in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-9(5); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-9(7); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1-94-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Property taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-26. - Delinquent tax subject to interest, penalties. 
(a)  All taxes not paid to the city by the due date shall be classified as delinquent and shall be subject to the payment of interest and penalties after delinquency as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.01 et seq. 
(b)  All taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection in an amount of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty, and interest due. 
(c)  The city assessor and collector of taxes shall deliver a notice of delinquency and of the penalty to the property owner at least 30 days and not more than 60 days before July 1. 
(Code 1971, § 27-13) 
State Law reference- Additional penalty for costs of collection, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07. 
Secs. 94-27-94-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FREEPORT GOODS EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.251. 

Sec. 94-56. - Authorized. 
    Beginning with the 1992 tax year, this section shall provide for the taxation exemption on all goods and inventories commonly referred to as "freeport goods" and exempt under article VIII, section 1-j of the state constitution and V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.251 to all businesses and industries in the city which can legally and properly qualify under the freeport exemption tax laws and criteria that has been or shall be adopted by the county central appraisal district. 
(Code 1971, § 27-16) 
State Law reference- Freeport goods exemption from taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.251. 
Sec. 94-57. - Taxation of tangible personal property in transit. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(1)  The terms "dealer's motor vehicle inventory," "dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory," "dealer's heavy equipment inventory," and "retail manufactured housing inventory" have the meanings assigned by subchapter B, chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(2)  The term "goods-in-transit" is defined to mean tangible personal property that: 
a.  Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state; 
b.  Is detained at a location in this state in which the owner of the property does not have a direct or indirect ownership interest for assembling, storing, manufacturing, processing, or fabricating purposes by the person who acquired or imported the property; 
c.  Is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than 175 days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this state; and 
d.  Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory. 
(3)  The term "location" means a physical address. 
(4)  The term "petroleum product" means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas. 
(b)  A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of goods-in-transit. A person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1474-11-07, 11-20-2007) 
Secs. 94-58-94-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 94-81. - Elderly persons. 
    Upon compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances, $20,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons 65 years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city. This shall extend to all homeowners 65 years of age and older living in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 27-50) 
State Law reference- Homestead exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(d)-(f). 
Sec. 94-82. - Disabled persons. 
    There is granted a homestead exemption of $20,000.00 to those homeowners who may be legally qualified and defined as disabled beginning with the 1989 tax year. 
(Code 1971, § 27-61) 
State Law reference- Exemptions authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(d)-(f). 
Secs. 94-83-94-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- The one-percent sales and use tax was adopted by referendum. 
State Law reference- Sales and use tax authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 

Sec. 94-111. - Rate. 
    The rate of the tax imposed by this article shall be the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the state legislature. 
(Code 1971, § 27-82) 
Sec. 94-112. - Imposed on telecommunications services. 
    A city sales tax is authorized and imposed upon all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(Code 1971, § 27-81) 
State Law reference- Telecommunications sales, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210(b). 
Secs. 94-113-94-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and does not include the cost of any food served or personal services performed by the hotel for the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
    Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, roominghouse, or bed and breakfast. The term does not include the following: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possess extends for a period of less than 30 days. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning or operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
(Code 1971, § 27-33) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 156.001, 351.001. 
Sec. 94-142. - Penalties. 
    If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in this article or shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall fail to pay to the city secretary the tax imposed in this article when such report or payment is due or shall file a false report, such person shall be punished, upon conviction, by a fine as provided in section 1-14. Such person who fails to collect or remit the tax within the time required or who violates the reporting requirements imposed by this article shall, in addition to the amount of any tax owed under this article, be liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney fees and a penalty equal to 15 percent of the total amount of the tax owed. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum beginning 60 days from the date due. 
(Code 1971, § 27-38) 
State Law reference- Penalties, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 111.060, 351.004. 
Secs. 94-143-94-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 94-171. - Levy of tax. 
    There is levied a tax upon the occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel in the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day. The tax shall be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel. 
(Code 1971, § 27-32(a)) 
Sec. 94-172. - Exemption. 
(a)  A United States governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(a) is exempt from the payment of tax authorized by this division. 
(b)  A state governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(b) shall pay the tax imposed by this division but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(c)  A person who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(d) is exempt from the payment of tax authorized by this division. 
(d)  A person who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(c) shall pay the tax imposed by this division but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(e)  To receive a refund of tax paid under this division, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim on a form provided by the city and containing the information required by the city. The state comptroller by rule shall prescribe the form that must be used and the information that must be provided. 
(f)  A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the city under this division only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. 
(Code 1971, § 27-32(b), (c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.006. 
Sec. 94-173. - Collection. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction shall collect the tax imposed in section 94-171 for the city. 
(Code 1971, § 27-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.0025. 
Sec. 94-174. - Reports. 
    On the last day of the month following each monthly period, every person required in section 94-173 to collect the tax imposed in this division shall file a report with the city secretary showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies and any other information as the city secretary may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The city will receive three percent of all proceeds collected under this division for collection expenses incurred. 
(Code 1971, § 27-35) 
Sec. 94-175. - Rules and regulations. 
    The finance director shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this division and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this division and the amount of taxes due under this division. 
(Code 1971, § 27-36) 
Sec. 94-176. - Administration, management and supervision of programs and activities funded by tax. 
    The city council may delegate the administration, management and supervision of programs and activities funded by the tax levied under this division pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
(Code 1971, § 27-37; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 94-177. - Duty and liability of hotel or motel purchaser or buyer. 
    Any person purchasing a hotel or motel shall retain out of the purchase price an amount sufficient to cover any hotel or motel tax due the city. If the buyer does not remit to the city such amount or show proof that the hotel or motel is current in remitting its occupancy taxes, the buyer shall become liable for any delinquent hotel or motel occupancy taxes owed on the purchased hotel or motel. 
(Code 1971, § 27-39) 
Sec. 94-178. - Collection by city. 
(a)  The city attorney or other attorney acting for the city may bring suit against a person required to collect the tax imposed by this division and pay the collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due to collect the tax not paid or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order. 
(b)  The remedy provided by this section is in addition to other available remedies. 
(Code 1971, § 27-40) 
State Law reference- Tax collection, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.004. 
Sec. 94-179. - Collection procedures on purchase of hotel. 
(a)  If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax imposed under this division is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount due until the seller provides a receipt by a person designated by the city to provide a receipt showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate that no tax is due. 
(b)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may request that the person designated by the city to provide a receipt under subsection (a) of this section issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The person designated by the city shall issue the certificate or a statement not later than the 60th day after the date that the person receives the request. 
(d)  If the person designated by the city to provide a receipt under subsection (a) of this section fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. 
(Code 1971, § 27-41) 
State Law reference- Collection procedures, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.0041. 
Sec. 94-180. - Reimbursement for collection expenses. 
(a)  The city may permit a person who is required to collect and pay over to the city the tax authorized by this division to withhold not more than one percent of the amount collected and required to be reported as reimbursement to the person for the costs in collecting the tax. 
(b)  The city may provide that the reimbursement provided by this section be forfeited because of a failure to pay the tax or to file a report as required by the city. 
(Code 1971, § 27-42) 
State Law reference- Reimbursement for collection expenses, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.005. 
Secs. 94-181-94-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION OF FUNDS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Use of funds, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 94-206. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to delegate and contract for the management and supervision of the following programs and activities funded with the hotel room tax: 
(1)  Funding the establishment, improvement, or maintenance of a visitor information center. 
(2)  The furnishing of the facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants. 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitation and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity. 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts. 
(5)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums. 
(Code 1971, § 27-43) 
Secs. 94-207-94-230. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Convention and Visitors Bureau Board 

Sec. 94-231. - Created. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint or remove a seven-member convention and visitors bureau board for the Nacogdoches Convention and Visitors Bureau (referred to as the "CVB") to administer the funds available under this division and to carry on the purpose of this division. Members of the board may be selected from applications received from interested residents and/or members from membership of the following tourism and community groups: 
(1)  One representative from the restaurant industry; 
(2)  Three representatives from retail merchants, including restaurants; 
(3)  One representative from historic interests, restoration, or preservation; 
(4)  One representative from a bed and breakfast providing bed tax revenues; 
(5)  Three representatives from the hotel/motel and or bed and breakfast industry; 
(6)  One representative from university interests; 
(7)  One representative from minority owned business interests; and 
(8)  Two at large community representatives. 
(b)  The city council may, at its sole discretion, consider persons recommended by the current board of directors, accept applications and/or nominations from the public at large or appoint from a membership list of persons who are members of tourism-related groups. The city council shall not be required to accept any recommendations but shall have the authority to appoint any city citizen. 
(Code 1971, § 27-44; Ord. No. 1508-10-08, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1689-12-14 , 12-2-14) 
Sec. 94-232. - Terms. 
    The terms of office of the members of the convention and visitors bureau board shall be three years, but appointment to the board shall be arranged so that no more than three members shall complete their full term in any one year. In determining the years of service and eligibility for reappointment, the city council shall follow its board and committee appointments policy. 
(Code 1971, § 27-45; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1689-12-14 , 12-2-14) 
Sec. 94-233. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    There is vested in the convention and visitors bureau board the full, complete and entire management and control of the convention and visitors bureau. 
(Code 1971, § 27-46) 
Sec. 94-234. - Rules of procedure; officers. 
(a)  The convention and visitors bureau board shall adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations as it may deem proper. Bylaws and amendments thereto must be submitted to the city council for consideration and approval prior to implementation. 
(b)  As a minimum, the board shall elect a chair, vice-chair, secretary, and treasurer to the board to keep such minutes and records as the board may deem necessary. 
(Code 1971, § 27-47; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 94-235. - Quorum. 
    Four members of the convention and visitors bureau board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. 
(Code 1971, § 27-48; Ord. No. 1689-12-14 , 12-2-14) 
Sec. 94-236. - Meetings. 
    The place, time, date and location of meetings of the convention and visitors bureau board shall be established by the board. Special meetings of the board may be called by the chair or three members of the board at such place and time as the chair may designate. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49) 
Sec. 94-237. - Open records, open meetings. 
    All meetings of the convention and visitors bureau board and all records of the board are subject to state laws in regard to open meetings and open records legislation. The meeting agenda shall be provided to the city secretary to be posted at least 72 hours prior to any regular meeting. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.1) 
Sec. 94-238. - Budget. 
    The convention and visitors bureau shall submit a budget for annual operations to the city secretary prior to July 15 each year. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.2) 
Sec. 94-239. - Allocation of funds. 
    The city council shall consider budget requests and allocate funds to the convention and visitors bureau board on a quarterly basis. Such amounts shall be paid no later than February 10, May 10, August 10 and November 10 of each fiscal year. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.3; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 94-240. - Reports. 
    The convention and visitors bureau board shall develop a marketing plan and program of work. A progress report of activities and financial operations shall be made to the city following the end of each calendar quarter. Each report shall include income and disbursements for the preceding quarter and the fiscal year to date. The first report each year shall include an annual report of the previous year's activities. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.4) 
Sec. 94-241. - Bank account. 
    The convention and visitors bureau board shall deposit funds received from the city in a separate bank account, established by the board in the depository that maintains all other public funds of the city. The fund shall be titled the "Nacogdoches Convention and Visitors Bureau Fund," and all monies paid by the city from hotel or motel tax for services by the board shall be deposited into designated accounts. The funds shall not be commingled with any other funds of the convention and visitors bureau, and the board shall have custody and responsibility for the funds, the bank account, and all records relating thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.5) 
Sec. 94-242. - Records retention. 
    All original books of entry of the convention and visitors bureau board shall be maintained in perpetuity. All canceled checks and other financial records shall be maintained for a period of six years or in conformance with the state laws regulating records retention. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.6) 
Sec. 94-243. - Audit. 
    All accounting procedures, records and reports of the convention and visitors bureau board shall be available for inspection by a duly authorized city representative. An independent audit of all of the program's financial records or a report on agreed upon procedures by a qualified certified public accountant shall be furnished to the city within 90 days of the close of each fiscal year. The type of report shall be confirmed during the budget adoption process and shall be funded as a line item in the annual convention and visitors bureau budget. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.7) 
Sec. 94-244. - Bond. 
    Convention and visitors bureau board members and/or staff designated to withdraw funds shall be bonded in the amount of $50,000.00. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.8) 
Sec. 94-245. - Compensation and expenditure of funds. 
    All expenditures of the convention and visitors bureau board shall be in accordance with applicable state laws and city ordinances as outlined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. and this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.9) 
Sec. 94-246. - Authority to contract. 
(a)  The convention and visitors bureau board is authorized to contract with the Nacogdoches County Chamber of Commerce for joint facility and fixed office costs. The board is also authorized to contract or develop a memorandum of agreement in regard to shared administrative activities of convention and visitors bureau staff and Chamber of Commerce staff. The authority granted in this division is not in limitation of other power or authority of the convention and visitors bureau to contract as allowed under law. 
(b)  The agreement between the city and the convention and visitors bureau shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council and the board of the convention and visitors bureau. 
(Code 1971, § 27-49.10; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 94-247-94-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1652-12-13, adopted Dec. 17, 2013, repealed Art. V in its entirety and enacted a new Art. V to read as set out herein. Former Art. V, §§ 94-276-94-280, 94-282-94-288, pertained to economic development tax abatement and utility extension policy and derived from Ord. No. 1316-2-03, §§ I-V, VII-XIII, adopted Feb. 18, 2003; Ord. No. 1498-9-08, adopted Sept. 2, 2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, adopted Nov. 17, 2009; Ord. No. 1608-10-12, adopted Oct. 2, 2012. 
State Law reference- Property redevelopment and tax abatement act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.001 et seq. 

Sec. 94-276. - Definitions. 
    The meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Company means an applicant for sales tax revenue sharing approved by the city council and which enters into an agreement regarding such within the city. 
    Company sales tax revenues means that portion of the gross sales tax revenue derived from the one percent municipal sales tax remitted by company to the state comptroller's office for the benefit of the city, less the two percent administrative charge. 
    Facade means a face of a building, usually the front. 
    Gross sales tax revenues means the city's share received from the state comptroller's office of municipal sales tax, such as that presently in effect pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 321.101 and 321.103, resulting from sales tax for the city derived from applicable standard industrial classification (SIC) code categories. The state comptroller may withhold up to two percent of the city's one percent municipal tax for auditor expenses and other costs associated with collections and administration of the tax. 
    Infill construction means a new construction on vacant land that is done in a manner as to be compatible with the scale and character of the property, neighborhood or environment. 
    New construction means any new building constructed which may or may not relate architecturally to any of its neighbors on a lot where an existing structure is demolished to accommodate such new building. 
    Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration. 
    Restoration means to bring back to a previous condition. In a restoration an earlier appearance of the building is recreated, both in form and detail. Original elements that have been covered are exposed, and missing pieces replaced with new ones that match the original. 
(Ord. No. 1652-12-13, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 94-277. - General purpose and objectives. 
    The city is committed to promoting high quality development in all parts of the city and to ongoing improvement in the quality of life for its citizens. These objectives are generally served by enhancement, expansion and diversification of the local economy. The purpose of the economic development programs is to promote retention, expansion and recruitment of existing and new industrial and commercial facilities. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 312, in which the city has and does resolve to elect to participate, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 378, Neighborhood Empowerment Zones, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 380, Economic Development Programs, and other available economic development programs which meet the economic goals and objectives of the city, the city may: 
(1)  Under V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 312 or V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 378 grant tax abatement on the value added to particular real and/or personal property by a specific development proposal; 
(2)  Create and adopt a neighborhood empowerment zone thereby and thereafter exercise powers regarding waivers of certain fees, certain sales tax refunding, property tax abatement, and other powers under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 378.004; 
(3)  May, under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 380 enter into diverse agreements for programs including loans and grants of public money and providing personnel and services of the city; and 
(4)  Participate in any other valid law, code, or program of the State of Texas or United States of America or their agencies for economic development. 
    Economic development programs will not be ordinarily considered for projects, which would develop without such incentives unless it can be demonstrated higher development standards, aesthetic improvements, and/or other development and community goals will be achieved through the use of economic development programs. The benefits of economic development programs are granted to owners of improvements on real property and/or personal property. If an applicant leases a facility to which an application will relate, the agreement shall be executed with owner of the property on which the facility is located as well as the lessee/applicant. 
    Within the context of these goals, the city will, on a case-by-case basis, give consideration to providing economic development incentives as a stimulus for economic development in the city. It is the policy of the city that said consideration will be provided in accordance with procedures and criteria adopted and from time to time changed by the city. Nothing herein shall imply or suggest the city is under obligation to provide an incentive and/or any extension of any incentive given to any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1652-12-13, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 94-278. - Criteria for tax abatement. 
    The city shall adopt and readopt criteria for tax abatement every two years and also adopt procedures for creation of reinvestment zones, applications and written agreements for such abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1652-12-13, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 94-279. - Use of criteria for determining tax abatement and value of incentives. 
    The criteria adopted by the city for tax abatement will be used to determine if it is in the best interest of the city to provide tax abatement to a particular applicant. The terms and conditions of each tax abatement agreement shall be negotiated on an individual basis and meet the requirements of V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 312. 
(Ord. No. 1652-12-13, 12-17-2013) 
Secs. 94-280, 94-281. - Reserved. 
Sec. 94-282. - Sales tax revenue sharing. 
    The city will, on a case-by-case basis, give consideration to providing incentives permitted under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 378 or programs under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 380 in the form of sales tax revenue sharing, grants, or other commitments as a stimulus for economic development in Nacogdoches. It is the policy of the city that said consideration will be provided in accordance with the procedures and criteria adopted by the city. Nothing herein shall imply or suggest that the city is under obligation to provide any incentive to any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1652-12-13, 12-17-2013) 
Sec. 94-283. - Criteria for sales tax revenue sharing or grants related to sales tax. 
    Any application for sales tax revenue sharing shall be reviewed by the city, and the proposed project must conform to the general guidelines adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1652-12-13, 12-17-2013) 
Chapter 98 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 118. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 98-1-98-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-26. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article and any permit granted in accordance with this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section, unless otherwise specifically provided in this article, the context clearly indicates otherwise, or such meaning would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Cell site means the location of a transmitter/receiver and backhaul network interface which provides telephonic or telecommunications type service to subscribers. The locations include single pole mounted receiver/transmitter units located on new or existing antenna structures and receiver/transmitter units located in buildings and on rooftops. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the state public utilities commission to offer local exchange telephone service. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider permit means the nonexclusive privilege granted by the city, consistent with the public ways act, authorizing a certificated telecommunications provider to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use, maintain, repair, rebuild or replace a local exchange telephone system that occupies any public ways. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider permittee means the person or the person's legal successor in interest who is issued a certificated telecommunications provider permit in accordance with this article. 
    Engineering department means the engineering department of the city. 
    Facilities means all equipment used and useful in a telecommunications system. 
    Federal Communications Commission (FCC) means the Federal Communications Commission or its legally appointed successor. 
    Force majeure means acts of God, landslides, earthquakes, lightning, fires, hurricanes, volcanic activity, storms, floods, washouts, droughts, civil disturbances, acts of terrorism or of the public enemy, partial or entire failure of utilities, strikes, explosions, lockouts or other industrial disturbances, insurrections, public riots or other similar events which are not reasonably within the control of the parties involved. 
    Laws means all applicable: 
(1)  City ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations; 
(2)  State laws and regulations; and 
(3)  Federal laws and regulations, including but not limited to the act, the public ways act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.001 et seq. and the Public Utility Regulatory Act V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.001 et seq. 
    Local access transport area (LATA) means that geographic area and communication system in which the city is located and in which any certificated telecommunications provider is authorized by the state public utilities commission to provide local exchange telephone service. 
    Local exchange telephone service means telecommunications service provided within an exchange to establish connections between customer premises within the exchange, including connections between a customer's premises and a long distance provider serving the exchange; it does not include a private telecommunications system or a wireless telecommunications system. 
    Local exchange telephone system means any system of communications lines, cables, equipment or facilities which are used to provide a local exchange telephone service in the public ways. 
    Penalties means any and all monetary penalties provided for in this article. 
    Permit means any certificated telecommunications provider permit, private telecommunications system permit, or wireless telecommunications system permit granted under this article. 
    Permit fee means a private telecommunications system permit fee or wireless telecommunications system permit fee. 
    Permittee means any certificated telecommunications provider permittee, private telecommunications system permittee, or wireless telecommunications system permittee authorized under this article. 
    Person means an individual, sole proprietorship, corporation, association, partnership, or other form of organization authorized to do business in the state, and includes any natural person. 
    Private telecommunications system means any system of communications lines, cables, equipment or facilities which are used to provide a telephone, video, data, telemetry, intercom or telecommunications service that in any manner occupies public ways. A private telecommunications system does not include a local exchange telephone system; a cable television system; a telephone system franchised by the city; or any part of a federal, state, county or local government-owned communications system. 
    Private telecommunications system permit means the nonexclusive privilege granted by the city authorizing a person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use, maintain, repair, rebuild or replace a private telecommunications system that occupies any public ways. 
    Private telecommunications system permit fee means the fees that must be paid to the city under subsection 98-88(b)(2) for the right to hold a private telecommunications system permit. 
    Private telecommunications system permit request fee means the fees that must be paid to the city under subsection 98-88(b)(1) to request a private telecommunications system permit. 
    Private telecommunications system permittee means the person or the person's legal successor in interest who is issued a private telecommunications system permit in accordance with this article for the erection, construction, reconstruction, operation, dismantling, testing, use, maintenance, repairing, rebuilding or replacing of a private telecommunications system in the city. 
    Public utilities commission (PUC) means the state public utilities commission or its legally appointed successor. 
    Public ways means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest, but does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to a wireless telecommunications system. No reference in this article to public ways shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its interests or other rights in such property are sufficient to permit its use for the installation and maintenance of a telecommunications system, and the permittee shall be deemed to gain only those rights which the city has the undisputed right and power to give. 
    Quarterly private revenue fee means the fee that must be paid to the city on January 1, April 1, July 1, and September 1, as prescribed in subsection 98-88(b)(4), based on the private telecommunications system permittee's total gross revenues for that quarter. 
    Quarterly wireless revenue fee means the fee that must be paid to the city on January 1, April 1, July 1, and September 1 of each year, as prescribed by subsection 98-88(a)(4), based on the wireless telecommunications system permittee's total gross revenues for that quarter. 
    Regulated permit means a private telecommunications system permit or a wireless telecommunications system permit. 
    Regulated permittee means a private telecommunications system permittee or a wireless telecommunications system permittee. 
    Regulated telecommunications system means a private telecommunications system or a wireless telecommunications system. 
    Revenue fee means a quarterly private telecommunications system revenue fee or a quarterly wireless telecommunications system revenue fee. 
    Telecommunications system means a local exchange telephone system, a private telecommunications system, or a wireless telecommunications system authorized hereunder. 
    Total gross revenues means all cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration received directly or indirectly by a regulated permittee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person in which the regulated permittee has a financial interest, or from any source whatsoever, arising from or attributable to the sale, lease, rental or exchange of regulated telecommunications system services or equipment by the regulated permittee within the city or in any way derived from the operation of its regulated telecommunications systems, including but not limited to any interconnection between its regulated telecommunications system in the city and any telecommunications system whatsoever. This sum shall be the basis for computing the revenue fee. Such sum shall not include any bad debts; deposits; promotional or vendor discounts or credits; or sales, service occupation or other excise taxes to the extent that such taxes are charged separately from normal service charges and are remitted by the regulated permittee directly to the taxing authority. 
    Wireless telecommunications system means any system capable of providing radio communications that encompasses mobile and ancillary communication services for business and residential subscribers using small cordless telephone devices which communicate using cell sites and occupying the public ways. 
    Wireless telecommunications system permit means the nonexclusive privilege granted by the city authorizing a person to erect, construct, reconstruct, operate, dismantle, test, use, maintain, repair, rebuild or replace a wireless telecommunications system, including all cell sites used in the operation thereof, that occupies any public ways. 
    Wireless telecommunications system permit fee means the fee that must be paid to the city under subsection 98-88(a)(2) for the right to hold a wireless telecommunications system permit. 
    Wireless telecommunications system permit request fee means the fee that must be paid to the city, per cell site, under subsection 98-88(a)(1), to request a wireless telecommunications system permit. 
    Wireless telecommunications system permittee means the person or the person's legal successor in interest who is issued a wireless telecommunications system permit in accordance with this article for the erection, construction, reconstruction, operation, dismantling, testing, use, maintenance, repairing, rebuilding or replacing of a wireless telecommunications system that occupies any public ways in the city. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-22; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-27. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  It is in the public interest to promote competition in the provision of telecommunications services and to ensure the availability of broadband transmission services to all residences and businesses. 
(2)  It is in the public interest, and consistent with its police powers and with the laws, for the city to exercise its historical right and authority to manage the public ways to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public and to obtain fair, adequate, and uniform compensation for the use of city property. 
(3)  It is in the public interest to establish nondiscriminatory procedures and requirements to authorize the provision of competitive telecommunications services using the public ways that do not impose administrative burdens upon the city or providers of such services and that are consistent with the laws. 
(4)  This article establishing rules governing the use of the city's public ways is authorized by this article and by other applicable laws. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to establish a competitively neutral policy for use of public ways to: 
(1)  Permit nondiscriminatory access to the public ways for providers of telecommunications services; 
(2)  Manage the public ways, consistent with the laws, so that the cost to the public of locating facilities within the public ways is minimized; 
(3)  Establish a uniform method of compensating the city for the use of its public ways by providers of telecommunications services; 
(4)  Promote competition among telecommunications service providers and encourage the universal availability of modern telecommunications services to all city residents and businesses; and 
(5)  Minimize congestion, inconvenience, visual blight and other adverse effects on the public ways. 
(Ord. No. 1192-2-00, § 1, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 98-28. - Scope. 
(a)  To the extent authorized under the laws, this article is subject to this Code and to general ordinance provisions passed pursuant to this Code affecting matters of general city concern and not merely existing contractual rights in effect or made effective. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various city codes and ordinances regarding permits, fees to be paid or the manner of construction. 
(b)  This article specifically complies with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.001 et seq., Management of Public Right-of-Way used by the telecommunications provider in municipality referred to in this article as the Public Ways Act, which established state-wide uniform standards for authorization and regulation of how certified telecommunications providers use their public ways, including payment of public ways fees to compensate municipalities for allowing such use. 
(c)  Except as forth in the Public Ways Act, this article specifically complies with, and applies to all telecommunications service providers regulated under, titles II and III of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (47 USC 201 et seq. and 47 USC 301 et seq.) the act, and under the jurisdiction of the PUC. No consent granted under this article authorizes the provision of any services not authorized by titles II and III of the act or by the PUC. Cable service and open video systems, as defined in title IV of the act, and any other content-based services, expressly are excluded from the requirements hereunder. 
(d)  Both the permittee and city shall comply with all applicable laws. 
(e)  If any section, provision or clause of this article challenged by a third party as invalid or unenforceable is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable or is preempted by applicable laws, the remainder of this article shall not be affected and shall continue to be enforced by the city. 
(f)  The city council shall be vested with the power and authority to reasonably regulate the exercise of the privileges permitted by this article in the public interest. A permittee shall not be relieved of the obligations to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance, nor does the city waive or limit any of its rights under this article by reason of such failure or neglect. 
(g)  This article does not give the city the right to authorize operations by permittees that otherwise is the right of the FCC or PUC. This article is expressly limited to establishing the requirements for grant of permits to use the public ways. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-21; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 98-29. - Existing telecommunications systems. 
    Telecommunications systems, which had been constructed or placed in the city's public ways prior to February 10, 2000, may remain within the public ways provided that the permittee of such telecommunications system complies with the sections of this article as they relate thereto. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-31) 
Secs. 98-30-98-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 98-56. - Administration. 
(a)  Consistent with the public ways act, a permittee shall report information that the city manager requires in the form and manner prescribed by the city manager relating to the use of public ways authorized by a permit granted under this article. 
(b)  The city manager shall report to the city council the city manager's determination that a permittee has failed to comply with this article. 
(c)  If the permittee is wholly or partially unable to carry out the obligations under the permit as a result of force majeure, the permittee shall give the city prompt notice of such force majeure, describing the force majeure in reasonable detail. The permittee's obligations under its permit, other than for the payment of monies due, shall not be deemed in violation or default for the duration of the force majeure. The permittee must use its best efforts to remedy as soon as possible, under the circumstances, the permittee's inability, by reason of force majeure, to carry out the responsibilities and duties under the permit. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-37; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 98-57. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer this article and enforce compliance with a permit granted under this article. 
(b)  In addition to any other rights set out elsewhere in this article, the city reserves the right to declare a forfeiture of the permit, and all the permittee's rights arising thereunder, if: 
(1)  The permittee violates any material provision of the permit. 
(2)  The permittee is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(3)  There is a final determination that the permittee has failed, refused, neglected or is otherwise unable to obtain and/or maintain any permit required by any federal or state regulatory body regarding the permittee's operation of the telecommunications system within the city. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the following are material provisions of this article, allowing the city, without limitation, to exercise its rights under this section or as set forth elsewhere in this article: 
(1)  The invalidation, failure to pay or any suspension of a regulated permittee's payments of permit fees or revenue fees to the city for use of the public ways. 
(2)  Any failure by the regulated permittee to submit timely reports regarding the calculation of its total gross revenues. 
(3)  Any failure by the permittee to maintain the insurance required under this article. 
(4)  Any failure by the permittee to maintain the bonds required under this article. 
(5)  Any failure by the permittee to otherwise fully comply with the requirements of sections 98-29 and 98-86 through 98-98. 
(d)  In addition to any rights set out elsewhere in this article, as well as its rights under this Code, the city reserves the right at its sole option to apply any of the following, alone or in combination: 
(1)  Impose a financial penalty of up to $1,000.00, per violation; or 
(2)  Suspend the permittee's permit rights until the permittee corrects or otherwise remedies the violation. 
(e)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city shall consider the nature of the violation, the persons burdened by the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further such violations, and any other matters the city deems appropriate. 
(f)  The city shall give permittee 30 days' prior written notice of its intent to exercise its rights under this section, stating the reasons for such action. If permittee cures the stated reason within the 30-day notice period, or if the permittee initiates efforts satisfactory to the city to remedy the stated reason and the efforts continue in good faith, the city shall not exercise its remedy rights. If permittee fails to cure the stated reason within the 30-day notice period, or if the permittee does not undertake and/or maintain efforts satisfactory to the city to remedy the stated reason, then the city council may, after providing permittee the right to a hearing, impose any or all of the remedies available under this section. However, in no event shall the city exercise its rights under this section if a bona fide, good faith dispute exists between the city and the permittee. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-38; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 98-58-98-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 98-86. - Regulated permits. 
(a)  No person, whether public, private, for profit or not for profit, shall construct, operate or continue to operate a regulated telecommunications system, including any modifications thereto, which occupies the public ways within the city without having been issued an appropriate regulated permit by the city council. 
(b)  Each applicant for a regulated permit shall demonstrate to the city that it is legally, financially and technically qualified to be granted the regulated permit. Evidence to demonstrate such qualifications may include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Experience providing the proposed services; 
(2)  Authorizations to provide such service granted by the Federal Communications Commission, the state public utilities commission, and other states or municipalities; 
(3)  Previous years' audited financial statements for the applicant, individual financial statements for principals or investors, or other such financial information as the city may desire; and 
(4)  Technical and operating characteristics of the proposed telecommunications system and facilities, including the information concerning use of existing utility poles and conduits required under section 98-91. 
(c)  Any modification to a regulated telecommunications system only can be made upon amendment by the city of the applicable regulated permit (referred to as the "permit amendment"). The regulated permittee must apply for such permit amendment. Such application must describe all proposed changes to the regulated telecommunications system and must demonstrate that such changes comply with all requirements under this article. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude a regulated permittee from entering into a contract for the use of any portion of its regulated telecommunications system with any person or other entity for any services, whether specified in this article or not, provided that such person or entity is another permittee and has assumed responsibility for obtaining any required authority from the city. 
(e)  All regulated permits granted under this division shall be nonexclusive. The city expressly reserves the right to grant regulated permits for the use of the public ways to provide telecommunications services to other persons, as well as the right, in its own name as a municipality, to use the public ways for similar or different purposes allowed regulated permittees under this article, by regulated permit or otherwise. 
(f)  The regulated permittee must maintain a local business office open to the public during normal business hours for the purpose of handling customer service. All books and records required under this division must be maintained in this local office. 
(g)  The act of granting, amending, denying or terminating a regulated permit is a legislative function within the discretion of the city council. A person whose application for a regulated permit is denied, is not considered by the city council on or before the 45th day after the application is submitted with the city secretary, or whose regulated permit is terminated must petition the city council for reconsideration before seeking judicial remedies. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-23; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 98-87. - Certificated telecommunications provider permit. 
(a)  A certificated telecommunications provider shall be subject to requirements imposed by the city for any person to obtain and maintain a permit to excavate the public ways. The certificated telecommunications provider permittee also shall be subject to any requirements in this article that are not otherwise prohibited under the laws. 
(b)  Consistent with the public ways act, the city may inspect a certificated telecommunications provider permittee's business records to the extent necessary to conduct an authorized review for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all access line reporting requirements, provided that such inspection must commence within 90 days after the filing of the certificated telecommunications provider permittee's access line reports, as required under the public ways act. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-24) 
Sec. 98-88. - Fees. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunications system permit. Except as provided, it shall be a term and condition of any wireless telecommunications system permit issued in accordance with this division that, as part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such wireless telecommunications system permit and the city's permission thereby to occupy and use its public ways, fees shall be paid as follows: 
(1)  All applicants shall pay the city a wireless telecommunications system permit request fee per cell site that uses the public ways. This fee is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(2)  The wireless telecommunications system permittee shall pay to the city an annual wireless telecommunications system permit fee per cell site that uses the public ways. This fee is on file in the city secretary's office. The city may adjust the annual wireless telecommunications system permit fee each year to the extent allowed under the laws. The minimum adjustment shall be set by the cumulative increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) published by the United States Department of Labor for Urban Wage Earners (1967=100%) since the initial establishment of this wireless telecommunications system permit fee for any and all subsequent increases, and only after a public hearing with at least 20 days' notice to all wireless telecommunications system permittees. 
(3)  The wireless telecommunications system permit fee provided for in subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be payable annually on or before October 1 of each calendar year for the portion of the wireless telecommunications system within the city's public ways on January 1 of that year. A prorated wireless telecommunications system permit fee, based upon the calendar quarter in which the application is filed, shall be paid at the time of the application for a wireless telecommunications system permit for all new portions of the wireless telecommunications system. 
(4)  The wireless telecommunications system permittee shall pay to the city a quarterly wireless revenue fee, which shall be a minimum of five percent, or the maximum percentage allowed under the laws, of all total gross revenues from wireless telecommunications system cell sites that use the public ways. The quarterly wireless revenue fee is due January 1, April 1, July 1, and September 1 of each year. 
(5)  Privately owned lines or cables placed by the wireless telecommunications system permittee to support the backhaul portion of the wireless telecommunications system network constitute a private telecommunications system and are subject to all applicable requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  Private telecommunications system permit. Except as provided in this article, it shall be a term and condition of any private telecommunications system permit issued in accordance with this article that, as a part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such private telecommunications system permit and the city's permission thereby to occupy and use the public ways, fees shall be paid to the city as follows: 
(1)  All applicants shall pay the city a private telecommunications system permit request fee on file in the city secretary's office. 
(2)  All private telecommunications system permittees shall pay the city an annual private telecommunications system permit fee, on file in the city secretary's office, for the right to operate a private telecommunications system. The city may, at its option, adjust this private telecommunications system permit fee each year to the extent allowed under the laws or by an amount not exceeding the proportional cumulative increase in the CPI since the initial establishment of this private telecommunications system permit fee for any and all subsequent increases, and only after a public hearing and with at least 20 days' notice to all private telecommunications system permittees. 
(3)  The private telecommunications system permit fee provided for in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be payable to the city annually on or before October 1 of each calendar year for the portion of the private telecommunications system within the public ways on January 1 of that year. A prorated private telecommunications system permit fee, based upon the calendar quarter in which the application is filed, shall be paid at the time of an application for a private telecommunications system permit for all new portions of the private telecommunications system. 
(4)  The private telecommunications system permittee shall pay to the city a quarterly private revenue fee, which shall be a minimum of five percent or the maximum percentage allowed under the laws, of all annual total gross revenues derived from transmissions that enter a private telecommunications system through the local access transport area. The quarterly private revenue fee is due and payable to the city on January 1, April 1, July 1 and September 1 of each year. 
(5)  Lines, cables or fiber optics of a private telecommunications system which are placed in a conduit or a duct-bank owned by an entity not exempt under the laws from this article shall require a private telecommunications system permit, unless the franchise, or other authorization by which the exempt entity has the right to place the conduit or duct-bank within the city property, prohibits the application of the private telecommunications system permit fee requirements contained in this division to the lessee of space within the conduit or duct-bank. The fee for the additional private telecommunications system permit shall be one-half the private telecommunications system permit fee required under subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Report. Each revenue fee payment shall be accompanied by a written report to the city, prepared by an independent certified public accountant and verified by an officer or other authorized representative of the regulated permittee, containing an accurate statement in summarized form, as well as in detail, of the regulated permittee's total gross revenues and the computation basis and method. Such reports shall be in a form satisfactory to the city. 
(1)  No acceptance by the city of any permit fee or revenue fee payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall any acceptance of payments be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable. All amounts paid under this section shall be subject to confirmation and recomputation by the city, provided that such audit and computation is completed within three years of the date any audited and recomputed payment is due. 
(2)  If the regulated permittee disputes the city's determination of underpayment, the regulated permittee shall place the disputed amount in an escrow account until final resolution. 
(3)  All regulated permittee's books, maps, and records directly concerning its total gross revenues under this article and concerning its calculation of permit fee or revenue fee payments to the city shall be open for inspection by proper city representatives upon no less than 48 hours' prior written notice during normal business hours. All other reports required by this Code and city ordinances shall be made available to city representatives by the regulated permittee, from time to time, as required. 
(d)  Interest on unpaid fees. Permit fees or revenue fees not paid within ten days after the due date, including any such unpaid fees discovered during an audit and recomputation performed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date due until paid. Interest shall be due on the entire late payment from the date on which the payment was due until the date on which the city receives the payment. 
(e)  Payment of other license fees, taxes or charges. Payment of the permit fee or revenue fee shall not exempt any regulated permittee from the payment of any other license fee, tax or charge on the business, occupation, property or income of such regulated permittee that lawfully may be imposed by the city or other taxing authority, except as may otherwise be provided in the ordinance imposing such other license fee, tax or charge. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-25) 
Sec. 98-89. - Duration. 
(a)  Any permit issued by the city pursuant to this division shall continue in full force and effect for a period of five years if the permittee is in compliance with this article and with all applicable federal, state, and local ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  A permit automatically shall be renewed for additional five-year periods unless the city or the permittee notifies the other to the contrary, in writing, 90 days prior to expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-26) 
Sec. 98-90. - Locations. 
(a)  Any permit issued for a telecommunications system in accordance with this article shall apply only to the location stated on the permit. 
(b)  Each wireless telecommunication system permit shall clearly state the location of each cell site and shall specify the height and cell configuration of that cell site. 
(c)  The city shall have access to plans concerning the certificated telecommunications provider permittee's and private telecommunications system permittee's telecommunications system as maintained in their normal course of business. Such information shall be made available to the city, after proper notice, at the applicable permittee's business office during normal business hours. 
(d)  Every permittee must be a member of the "one call" utility notification center (1-800-233-2133) or any subsequent alert and warning system to protect and locate its underground equipment. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-27) 
Sec. 98-91. - Use of public ways and pole attachments. 
(a)  Any person who shall carry on or conduct any business, occupation or profession for which a permit is required by this division without first obtaining such a permit shall be considered to be in violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 98-57. 
(b)  Before commencing any construction for a telecommunications system that involves the public ways, the permittee first shall obtain the approval of, and all other necessary authorizations from, all appropriate city agencies, including but not limited to the engineering and planning departments. If a written application is required, such application shall be made in the form prescribed by the engineering department. The permittee shall notify the city, as soon as is practicable, when any routine repairs require excavation or other disturbance of the public ways. 
(c)  Upon obtaining such approval as is required under this section, the permittee shall give the engineering department and any other appropriate agency notice within 48 hours of the proposed construction, unless otherwise approved by the engineering department, except for emergency repairs of existing lines or cables. Prior to commencing any such construction, the permittee shall provide the engineering department with a schedule for all work to be done in the public ways. 
(d)  To the extent permitted under the laws, any person who submits a request for a permit, in accordance with section 98-86, shall include therein proposed agreements for, or other materials describing the use of, existing utility poles and conduits, if applicable, with the owner of such facilities to be used or affected by the construction of the proposed telecommunications system. Any agreements for the use of existing utility poles shall become effective on the date of execution of the permit issued in accordance with this division. If permission to use existing poles or conduits cannot be obtained or if the use of such poles and/or conduits is economically impractical, the permittee shall submit documentation to the engineering department supporting the unavailability of existing poles and conduits and a detailed plan for construction ensuring protection for existing facilities. Such plans shall include detailed drawings of the location and manufacturer's specification for such facilities. 
(e)  To the extent permitted under the laws, nothing in this article or in any permit issued in accordance with this division shall be construed as authorizing the permittee to erect and maintain new poles in areas serviced by existing poles, if the poles are available for the permittee's use. 
(1)  The wireless telecommunications system permittee shall obtain written approval from the engineering department and other appropriate city agencies before erecting any new poles or cell site support structures. 
(2)  The certificated telecommunications provider permittee and the private telecommunications system permittee shall obtain written approval from the engineering department and other appropriate city agencies before erecting any new poles or underground conduit where none exist. 
(f)  Except for emergency situations, it shall be unlawful for the permittee or any other person to excavate or otherwise disturb the surface of any public way for any purpose whatsoever without obtaining approval to do so after proceeding in the manner prescribed in this section. Violation of this section shall subject the permittee to all penalties and remedies prescribed in this article and to all other remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city. 
(g)  Without affecting the legal relationship between a permittee and its contractors, all construction and maintenance of any and all telecommunications systems using the public ways shall, regardless of who performs the installation and construction, be and remain the permittee's responsibility. 
(h)  The permittee shall restore any public way it has disturbed in accordance with the provisions of the city's standard specifications for such public way and shall, at its own cost and expense, restore and replace any other property disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by or on account of its activities to the condition such property was in immediately prior to the disturbance, damage, or injury or shall make such other repairs or restorations as outlined in the approved permit. If emergency repairs are necessary, permittee shall notify the city as promptly as possible after beginning the work on such repairs. The permittee subsequently shall apply for appropriate permits, such application to be made no later than three business days after commencement of the emergency repairs. The permittee must comply with all Code and ordinance provisions relating to such repairs, including the payment of applicable fees. Such fees shall be payable by a certificated telecommunications provider only to the extent permissible under the public ways act. 
(i)  Whenever, because of widening or straightening of streets, it shall be deemed necessary by the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a permittee, such alterations shall be made by the permittee, at its expense, within 120 days from receipt of notice to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the city. The permittee also shall be required to make alterations as necessary to accommodate other city projects, including water or sewer line projects, but the permittee shall be reimbursed in advance for the cost of such alterations, unless otherwise agreed by the permittee. 
(1)  The city shall provide the permittee with the standard notice of the requirements imposed under this subsection that is given under similar circumstances to other city franchisees, licensees, or permittees. If the permittee fails to remove or relocate any such facilities on or before the date established by the city in such notice, the city may exercise all its legal rights to cause and/or effect such removal or relocation, and the expense thereof shall be paid by the permittee, including all direct, indirect and/or consequential costs and expenses incurred by the city due to permittee's delay. If the city requires the permittee to relocate its facilities, the city shall be obligated to provide the permittee with one alternate location for its facilities within the public ways based upon a reasonable determination of the permittee's requirements after consultation therewith. If such alternate location is unacceptable to the permittee, city shall have no further obligation with respect to providing an alternate location, and the permittee shall be required to identify its own alternate location. Any new location selected under this subsection shall be subject to all applicable permit and other requirements under this article. 
(2)  Any costs incurred by the permittee under this subsection shall be offset to the extent that such expenses or costs are reimbursable or payable to the permittee or the city by the state, the United States or any governmental agency or subdivision of either, whether directly or indirectly, but nothing in this subsection shall impose any obligation of the city to pay such costs and expenses except to the extent it actually receives funds from the state, United States or any governmental agency or subdivision of either, for the reimbursement or payment of such expenses. 
(j)  The permittee shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain all facilities in good condition, order and repair. 
(k)  The permittee shall, consistent with its standard business practices, keep maps and records of its facilities which occupy the public ways. Copies of such maps and records, including as-built drawings, shall be available for inspection by city representatives at the permittee's local office during, after proper notice, normal business hours. 
(l)  The permittee shall comply with all rules and regulations issued by the engineering department governing the construction and installation of telecommunications systems. To the extent required under the laws, each telecommunications system will have the following minimal attributes: 
(1)  The primary switching location shall have adequate emergency standby power; and 
(2)  The system shall have emergency alert system and 911 capabilities in accordance with Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations then in effect. 
(m)  To the extent permitted under the laws, the permittee shall not, as to rates, charges, services, facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to undue prejudice or disadvantage. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-28) 
Sec. 98-92. - Assignment, transfer, sale and subleasing. 
(a)  There shall be no assignment of a regulated permit issued pursuant to this division or transfer of control over a regulated permittee, in any manner whatsoever, without the prior written consent of the city. The proposed assignee or transferee must show financial responsibility, as determined by the city, and must agree to comply with all provisions of the regulated permit. The city shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed assignment or transfer of control if its refusal to consent or its decision to take other action is not communicated in writing to the regulated permittee within 120 days following receipt of written notice of the proposed assignment or transfer of control. 
(b)  The regulated permittee shall promptly notify the city whether it will be involved in any actual or proposed change in ownership or management or transfer of control or acquisition by any other party of control of the regulated permittee. The term "control" as used in this subsection is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of ten percent of the voting shares of the regulated permittee. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the regulated permittee shall make the regulated permit subject to termination unless and until the city consents thereto. 
(c)  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such assignment or transfer of control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective assignee or transferee, and the regulated permittee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. 
(d)  The consent or approval of the city to any assignment of the regulated permit or to any transfer of control over the regulated permittee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the city's rights in and to the public ways, and any such assignment or transfer of control shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the regulated permit. 
(e)  In no event shall an assignment or transfer of control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a duly authorized signatory to the regulated permit. 
(f)  Consistent with the public ways act, any certificated telecommunications provider permittee must maintain information concerning its current point of contact and must notify the city of any assignment on transfer of control within a reasonable time after consummation of such transaction. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-29) 
Sec. 98-93. - Location of cell sites. 
(a)  Cell sites are allowed to be installed or operated on business property or on property owned by the city. Construction of any cell site not otherwise authorized by the permit shall require the permittee to first file for grant of a permit amendment, as required under subsection 98-86(c). Each cell site will require a permit as indicated in subsection 98-86(a). Any application for a wireless telecommunications system permit to construct a cell site on business property or on property owned by the city must include a detailed design drawing of the proposed cell site and a statement of permission by the owner and must be signed by the property owner and notarized. 
(b)  No cell site, including associated repeaters or translators, is allowed to be installed or operated on residential property. Placement of such facilities on residential property is a violation of this article and subject to a fine of not less than $5,000.00 per day for each day the facilities remain located on such residential property. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-30) 
Sec. 98-94. - Insurance. 
(a)  Under this division, the permittee shall maintain public liability and property damage insurance that protects the permittee and the city, as well as the city's officers, agents, and employees. The insurance shall provide coverage at all times of not less than $200,000.00 for personal injury to each person, $500,000.00 for each occurrence, and $50,000.00 for each occurrence involving property damages, plus costs of defense; or a single limit policy of not less than $500,000.00 covering all claims per occurrence, plus costs of defense. The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to maximum limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the state during the term of the permit. The permittee shall also carry such insurance as is required by all applicable federal and state laws to protect it from all claims under the worker's compensation laws in effect that may be applicable to the permittee. The terms and conditions of such insurance coverage shall comply with the requirements set forth in the permit. The permittee shall maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage, in the terms and amounts required, for the duration of the permit. 
(b)  The permittee shall maintain on file with the city a certificate of insurance certifying the coverage required in subsection (a) of this section. The adequacy of the insurance shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the permit and to the reasonable approval of the city attorney. 
(c)  The city council reserves the right to require the permittee to increase the minimum amounts of liability insurance coverage to such amounts as are deemed by the city council to be reasonably necessary at such time. Such requirement shall be expressed by resolution or ordinance. 
(d)  Such policy of liability insurance shall contain the provision that written notice of expiration, cancellation, or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the city secretary and to the permittee at least 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof. 
(e)  The insurance requirements in this section may be met by acceptable evidence of self-insurance backed by assets sufficient to provide the same levels of coverage. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-32; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 98-95. - Bonds. 
(a)  Upon the effective date of the permit issued pursuant to this division, the permittee shall furnish proof of the posting of a faithful performance bond running to the city, with good and sufficient surety approved by the city, in the penal sum of $100,000.00. The bond shall require that the permittee shall well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term and condition of the permit. The permittee shall pay all premiums charged for the bond, and shall keep the bond in full force and effect at all times throughout the term of the permit, including, if necessary, the time required for removal of the permittee's facilities. The bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire without 30 days' written notice first being given to the city auditor. The bond shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the city attorney. During the term of the permit, the permittee shall file with the city auditor a duplicate copy of the bond along with written evidence of payment of the required premiums. However, in no event shall the city exercise its rights against the performance bond under this section if a bona fide, good faith dispute exists between the city and the permittee. 
(b)  During all times when the permittee is performing any construction work in or under the public ways requiring city authorization, the permittee shall post a faithful performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit, as is required therefor, running to the city, with good and sufficient surety approved by the city, in the sum of $100,000.00. The bond or letter of credit shall require that the permittee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the permit. The permittee shall pay all premiums or other costs associated with maintaining the bond or letter of credit, and shall keep the bond or letter of credit in full force and effect at all times during the construction work. The bond or letter of credit shall provide that it may be terminated upon final approval of the permittee's construction work in or under the public ways by the engineering department, which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Upon such approval, the city would execute all documents necessary to release the bond in accordance with the terms of this section. During the duration of the construction work, the permittee shall file with the city auditor a copy of the bond or letter of credit, along with written evidence of the required premiums. The bond or letter of credit shall be subject to the reasonable approval of the city attorney as to its adequacy under the requirements of this section. 
(c)  The financial requirements of this section may be waived by the city upon a showing of financial responsibility by the permittee. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-33) 
Sec. 98-96. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Each regulated permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any direct claim for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost or expense, including court and appeal costs and reasonable attorney fees or expenses, arising from any casualty or accident to person or property because of any construction, excavation or any other act done under its regulated permit, by or for such regulated permittee, its agents or employees, or because of any neglect or omission of such regulated permittee to keep its regulated telecommunications system in a safe condition, but not if arising out of or because of any negligence or willful misconduct by the city, its officers, agents or employees. The city shall provide each regulated permittee prompt notice of any such claim which such regulated permittee shall defend with counsel of its own choosing. No settlement or compromise of any such claim will be done without the prior written approval of the regulated permittee. Each regulated permittee and its agents, contractors and others shall consult and cooperate with the city while conducting its or their defense of the city. 
(b)  Each regulated permittee also agrees to indemnify the city for any damages, claims, additional costs or expenses assessed against or payable by the city arising out of or resulting, directly or indirectly, from such regulated permittee's failure to remove, adjust or relocate any of its facilities in the public ways in a timely manner in accordance with a relocation schedule furnished to such regulated permittee by the engineering department, unless such regulated permittee's failure arises directly from the city's negligence or willful misconduct. 
(c)  A certificated telecommunications provider permittee shall be subject only to the indemnification provisions set forth in the public ways act. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-34) 
Sec. 98-97. - Performance evaluations. 
(a)  In order to ensure that the regulated permittee is complying with the terms of this article and its regulated permit and with the character, quality, and efficiency of service to be rendered, given, performed, and furnished thereunder, the city shall have the right to conduct a performance evaluation on or about the anniversary date of the effective date of such regulated permit. 
(b)  This performance evaluation shall be initiated by written notice from the city to the regulated permittee, setting forth the issues to be evaluated and the schedule for such evaluation. 
(c)  Public participation in this evaluation shall be sought by the city. 
(d)  The results of the evaluation will be relevant to consideration of any request for renewal or expansion of authorization pursuant to section 98-86. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-35) 
Sec. 98-98. - Confidentiality. 
    If a permittee notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information, reports, documents, or writings required under this article, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports, documents, and writings. Upon receipt by the city of requests for a permittee's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify such permittee of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall determine if the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552, requires disclosure. The city shall request and obtain an attorney general's opinion if it believes the requested information is not excepted from disclosure. 
(Code 1971, § 281/2-36) 
ARTICLE III. - WIRELESS NETWORK PROVIDER USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 98-99. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist the city in the competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory management of the physical use, occupancy and maintenance of its public rights-of-way by wireless network providers; 
(2)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the physical use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by wireless network providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and 
(3)  Assist the city in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-100. - Governing law. 
    This article shall be construed in accordance with Chapter 284 of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code ("the Code") to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-101. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the definitions found in the City Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles ("the Design Manual") are hereby incorporated into this article and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the Design Manual are specifically applicable to this article: 
    Applicable codes means: 
(1)  The most current building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by the City's Code of Ordinances; and 
(2)  Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with Chapter 284. 
    City means the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, or its lawful successor. 
    City council means the municipal governing body of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas. 
    Chapter 284 means V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Chapter 284. 
    Code means the V.T.C.A. Local Government Code. 
    Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory city codes and ordinances. 
    Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
    Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
    Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
    Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
    Location means the city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, or designee. 
    Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
    Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
    Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation. 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro tower. 
    Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
    Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
    Pole means a service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
    Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Service pole means a pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
    Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
    Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
    Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by Chapter 284, or V.T.C.A. Utilities Code, § 51.002. 
    Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
    Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-102. - Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. 
    Pursuant to this article and subject to the Design Manual and the Code, a wireless network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities. 
    The terms of this article shall apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs later. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-103. - Compliance with Design Manual and applicable codes. 
    All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this article, city applicable codes, and the terms and conditions of the city's Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-104. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
    A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and network support poles described in the Code in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-105. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 284 of the Code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a city public right-of-way. 
(b)  As required by Chapter 284 of the Code, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services for the city for which the permit is sought. 
(c)  A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network nodes and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. 
(d)  The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications: 
(1)  Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant will comply with the city's Design Manual and applicable codes; 
(2)  Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the Design Manual and this article; 
(3)  A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance that provides that the network provider and its contractor has at least $1,000,000.00 in general liability coverage. 
(e)  Exception: As provided in Section 284.157 of the Code, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; 
(4)  Notwithstanding subdivision (d) above, the network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance of work described in this subdivision (d). 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-106. - Installation in historic districts or design disricts. 
    A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city manager or his or her designee before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required to comply with the general aesthetic requirements described in the city's Design Manual. The city has the authority to designate new historic districts and design districts at a future date. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-107. - Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. 
    A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city manager's or his or her designee's discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of way: 
(1)  Is in a municipal park; or 
(2)  Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than 50 feet wide; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(3)  In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of-way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(4)  The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the city's Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-108. - Municipal review process by the city. 
(a)  Determination of application completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination. 
(1)  For network nodes and note support poles: No later than 30 days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(2)  For a transport facility: No later than ten days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the city. 
(1)  For network nodes: No later than 60 days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(2)  For network support poles: No later than 150 days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(3)  For transport facilities: No later than 21 days after the city receives the complete application. 
(c)  Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable City Code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail or other legally appropriate means to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the application. 
(d)  Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial application. 
(1)  The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city. 
(2)  The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(e)  Nondiscriminatory review. Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-109. - Time of installation. 
    A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city manager may in his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-110. - Applicable fees and rental rates to the city. 
(a)  [Fees and rates payable to the city.] As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which shall be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city. 
(b)  Network nodes. 
(1)  Application fee. The application fee shall be $250.00 for each network node application covering up to five network nodes and $125.00 for each additional network node per application. 
(2)  Annual public right-of-way rate fee. The annual public right-of-way rate shall be $250.00 per network node installed in the city public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Public right-of-way rate adjustment. As provided in Section 284.054 of the Code, the city may adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60th day following the written notice. 
(c)  Node support poles. The application fee for each network support pole shall be $500.00. 
(d)  Transfer facilities. The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be $28.00 monthly for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for access lines under Chapter 283 of the Code or cable franchise fees under Chapter 66 of the V.T.C.A. Utility Code. 
(e)  Micro network nodes. No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached on lines between poles or node support poles. 
(f)  Collocation of network nodes on service poles. Subject to the city's pole service agreement, the collocation of network nodes on city service poles shall be at a rate of $20.00 per year per service pole. 
(g)  City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment rate consistent with Section 54.024 of the V.T.C.A. Utilities Code, applied on a per-foot basis. 
(h)  [Payment in lieu prohibited.] The city shall not seek or accept in-kind services in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from any user of the public rights-of-way for use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-111. - Indemnity. 
    As provided in Section 284.302 of the Code, a wireless network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network provider. The city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions ("claims") covered by this indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city; however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 98-112. - Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers. 
    Nothing in this article shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers. 
(Ord. No. 1745-9-17 , § II, 9-5-2017) 
Chapter 102 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate use of streets by vehicles, art. II, § 22[14]. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-9(12); solicitation from occupant of motor vehicle, § 26-5; junked or abandoned vehicles, § 34-91 et seq.; unsightly materials, vehicles at mobile homes or manufactured home parks, § 66-42; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 70; livestock and motorized sport vehicles in parks, § 74-63; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 110, handicapped parking, § 118-468. 
State Law reference- Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Processions. 
(a)  No procession, march or demonstration, excepting the military forces of the United States and funerals, shall occupy, march or proceed on any street or sidewalk except on application and in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager who, prior to granting or refusing such permit, shall make the investigation referred to in this section. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council. Such appeal may be perfected by notice in writing given by any interested party addressed to the city secretary, who shall place such appeal on the agenda of the next regular or special meeting of the council, and the appeal shall be promptly heard by the council. 
(b)  The permit shall be granted by the city manager or by the city council on appeal, unless after investigation by the city manager he finds that the granting of the permit will unduly disturb the convenience of the public in the use of the streets. The finding by the city manager is subject to review by the city council. 
(c)  The permit, if granted, shall be upon such conditions or changes in time, place and manner as would avoid disturbance yet reasonably allow the legal purposes of the applicants. 
(d)  The act of the city council is subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction to the extent provided by law. 
(Code 1971, § 29-3; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
State Law reference- Parades, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202. 
Sec. 102-2. - Use of coasters, skates, skateboards or toy vehicles. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, inline skates (roller blades) or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(b)  No person shall operate or ride upon any device or similar device listed in subsection (a) of this section within a business district. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "business district" shall mean any area within the city limits designated as B-1, B-2 or B-3 on the city's official zoning map. 
(Code 1971, § 29-6) 
Sec. 102-3. - Placarding motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place inside or to post or stick any placard, sign, picture, or advertisement of any kind on any motor vehicle parked on any public street or square without the consent of the owner or person in charge of such motor vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 3-4) 
Sec. 102-4. - Play streets. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the street or part thereof. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1971, § 29-26) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
Secs. 102-5-102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 102-31-102-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC DIVISION 

Sec. 102-56. - Established under control of police chief. 
    There is established in the police department a traffic division to be under the control of the chief of police. 
(Code 1971, § 29-2) 
Secs. 102-57-102-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITIZENS ON PATROL/VOLUNTEER DISABLED PARKING ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1248-3-01, adopted Feb. 20, 2001, pertained to citizens on patrol and these provisions were designated as §§ 29-82-29-85. For purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 29-82-29-85 as §§ 102-72-102-75. 

Sec. 102-72. - Persons authorized to enforce certain disabled parking laws. 
    On the approval by the chief of police, the persons so authorized shall contact the chief of police or his designee to determine what procedures should be followed and to receive all training required. Authorizations under this section will be valid until rescinded by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1248-3-01, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 102-73. - Definitions. 
    Citizen enforcement shall mean any individual interested in being authorized by the chief of police to issue citations for disabled parking violations within the city limits who must request such authority in writing to the chief of police. 
    City employees means persons employed by the city as a parking patrol; public service officers employed by the police department, or persons authorized by the chief of police to issue municipal court citations for any parking violation in the same manner as police officers; however such persons shall not be armed with firearms, unless otherwise authorized by law. The citizen authorization requirements set forth in V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 681.0101, subsections b-e shall not apply to city employees authorized under this subsection. 
    Department means the Texas Department of Transportation. 
    Disability means a condition in which a person has; 
(1)  Mobility problems that substantially impair the person's ability to ambulate; 
(2)  Visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with correcting lenses; or 
(3)  Visual acuity of 20/200 but with a limited field of vision in which the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle of 20 degrees or less. 
    Disabled parking placard means a placard under V.T.C.A. § 681.002. 
    International symbol of access means the symbol adopted by the Rehabilitation International [of] 1969 at its Eleventh World Congress on Rehabilitation of the Disabled. 
    Mobility problem that substantially impairs a person's ability to ambulate means that the person: 
(1)  Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest; 
(2)  Cannot walk without the use of or assistance from another person, or a prosthetic device; 
(3)  Cannot ambulate without a wheel chair or similar device; 
(4)  Is restricted by lung disease to the extent that the person's forced expiratory volume for one second, measured by spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than 60 millimeters of mercury on room air at rest; 
(5)  Uses portable oxygen; 
(6)  Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in the severity as Class III or Class IV according to standards set by the American Heart Association; 
(7)  Is severely limited in the ability to walk because of arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition; or 
(8)  Has another debilitating condition that, in the opinion of a physician licensed to practice medicine in this [state] or a state adjacent to this state, or authorized by applicable law to practice medicine in a hospital or other health facility of the Veterans Administration, limits or impairs the person's ability to walk. 
(Ord. No. 1248-3-01, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 102-74. - Enforcement by certain appointed persons. 
    A political subdivision may appoint a person to have authority to file charges against a person who commits an offense under this chapter. (V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, subtitle H. § 681.0101) 
(Ord. No. 1248-3-01, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 102-75. - Minimum requirements to be a citizen on patrol (COP) member. 
(a)  Must not have any arrest or convictions for felonies or for crimes against persons. 
(b)  Must sign a release for a criminal background check. 
(c)  Must agree to abide by the Nacogdoches COP Rules of Conduct. 
(d)  Must be 18 years of age or older. 
(e)  Must sign a release of responsibility. 
(f)  Must not get arrested for any offense while a COP member. 
(g)  Must take and subscribe to an oath of office that the city prescribes. 
(h)  Must successfully complete a training program of at least four hours in length developed by the city police department. 
(i)  A person appointed under this division is not a peace officer, and has no authority other than the authority applicable to a citizen to enforce a law under this division; and may not carry a weapon while performing duties under this division. 
(j)  A person performing duties under this division is to be nonconfrontational with the public at all times. 
(k)  A person appointed under this division is not entitled to compensation for performing duties under this division, or to indemnification from the city or the state for injury or property damage the person sustains, or liability the person incurs in performing duties under this section. 
(l)  The city and the state are not liable for any damage arising from and act or omission of a person appointed under this division. 
(m)  The written request for authority must include reasons for the request and the names, address and telephone number of all individuals the requestor wishes to be involved in such a program. The requestor should understand that he/she would only be enforcing handicap-parking violations. Additionally, the requestor must make clear the individual's intent to be trained in that particular area of enforcement and to understand its obligations with regard to issuing citations under such authorization. 
(n)  The chief of police shall be responsible for reviewing any written requests pursuant to the above requirements; such requests will be forwarded to the chief of police's office for review. The chief of police will have the sole authority to authorize requesting individuals. 
(o)  The chief of police or his designee shall be responsible for the recruitment, training, record keeping, volunteer coordination, and any oversight of the program that may be required. The chief of police is the sole authority in all matters of discipline, participation and termination of participants in any program under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1248-3-01, 2-20-2001) 
Secs. 102-76-102-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Signs, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to place and maintain traffic-control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.002. 

Sec. 102-86. - Installation. 
    The chief of police shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under this Code and other city traffic ordinances to make affective the provisions and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this Code and other city traffic ordinances or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 29-19) 
Sec. 102-87. - Testing. 
    The chief of police may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 29-20) 
Sec. 102-88. - Placing of restricted turn signs. 
    The chief of police is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1971, § 29-21) 
Sec. 102-89. - Placing of turning markers. 
    The chief of police is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1971, § 29-22) 
Sec. 102-90. - Erection of stop signs. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and he shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop sign is required. 
(b)  Every stop sign erected pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall bear the word "stop" in letters not less than six inches in height, and such signs shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination or by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. 
(c)  Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(Code 1971, § 29-23) 
Sec. 102-91. - Designation of crosswalks; establishment of safety zones; marking traffic lanes. 
    The chief of police is authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this Code and other city traffic ordinances. 
(Code 1971, § 29-24) 
Secs. 102-92-102-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 102-121. - Maximum speed limit. 
    The maximum speed limit for any vehicle within the city, unless some other limit is established in accordance with law, shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(Code 1971, § 29-37) 
State Law reference- Authority to set speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(12). 
Sec. 102-122. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  Whenever any city ordinance designates any one-way street or alley, the chief of police shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described by ordinance as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 29-39) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate one-way streets and require traffic thereon to move in one specific direction, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202. 
Sec. 102-123. - Authorization. 
    The chief of police or her/his designee is hereby authorized to implement the applicable provisions of the ordinance from which sections 102-123-102-126 derived to further protect public welfare and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1580-10-11, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-124. - Application. 
    The provisions of the ordinance from which sections 102-123-102-126 derived shall apply to all persons operating a motor vehicle on public roadways within the incorporated limits of the City of Nacogdoches. 
(Ord. No. 1580-10-11, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-125. - Violations; electronic messaging while driving. 
(a)  A driver of a motor vehicle may not use a wireless communication device to view, send, or compose an electronic message or engage other application software while operating a motor vehicle. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if a wireless communications device is used: 
(1)  While the vehicle is stopped; 
(2)  Strictly to engage in a telephone conversation, including dialing or deactivating the call; 
(3)  As a global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to the vehicle; 
(4)  For obtaining emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard, or to prevent a crime about to be committed; 
(5)  In the reasonable belief a person's life or safety is in immediate danger; or 
(6)  Solely in a voice-activated or other hands-free mode. 
(c)  This section does not apply to an operator of an authorized emergency vehicle using a wireless communication device while acting in an official capacity. 
(d)  To the extent this section conflicts with the V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 545.424, regarding the use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors, or V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 545.425, regarding the use of wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, this section does not apply. 
(Ord. No. 1580-10-11, 10-18-2011) 
Secs. 102-126-102-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Development standards for off-street parking and loading, § 118-461 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.207. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-151. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Notice. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this article or by other city ordinances or by state law, the police officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city, for the driver to answer to the charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the notice. The officer shall send a copy of such notice to the traffic court. 
(b)  Warning letter. If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a notice affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, the traffic court shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that if such letter is disregarded for a period of five days, a complaint will be filed and warrant of arrest issued. 
(c)  Presumption. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred; provided, however, that this presumption shall apply only when the procedure prescribed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section has been followed. 
(Code 1971, § 29-69) 
State Law reference- Administrative adjudication, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 682.001 et seq. 
Sec. 102-152. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
    The chief of police shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within this city unless the state highway commission has determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 29-53) 
State Law reference- Authority, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.303(c). 
Sec. 102-153. - Obedience to angle parking signs. 
    Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the chief of police for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1971, § 29-54) 
Sec. 102-154. - Prohibitions on angle parking. 
(a)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(b)  Angle parking shall be prohibited to all vehicles with an overall length of 19 feet or more. 
(Code 1971, § 29-55) 
Sec. 102-155. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1971, § 29-56) 
Sec. 102-156. - Parking in business district during certain hours. 
    No person shall park a vehicle on any street between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. of any day in a business district. 
(Code 1971, § 29-57) 
Sec. 102-157. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1971, § 29-58) 
Sec. 102-158. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1971, § 29-59) 
Sec. 102-159. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1971, § 29-60) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
Sec. 102-160. - Standing, parking on one-way streets. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs upon the lefthand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(b)  When such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such lefthand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1971, § 29-61) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Additional parking regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.303. 
Sec. 102-161. - Stopping, standing, parking near hazardous, congested places. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate, by proper signs, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1971, § 29-62) 
Sec. 102-162. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
    The chief of police is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the freight curb loading zones and stating the hours during which this section is applicable. 
(Code 1971, § 29-63) 
Sec. 102-163. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Code 1971, § 29-64) 
Sec. 102-164. - Standing in freight curb loading zones. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1971, § 29-65) 
Sec. 102-165. - Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs. 
    The driver of a bus, hackney or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, hackney stand or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1971, § 29-66) 
Cross reference- Vehicles for hire, ch. 110. 
Sec. 102-166. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a hackney in a hackney stand, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed. However, the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus, hackney or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1971, § 29-67) 
Cross reference- Vehicles for hire, ch. 110. 
Sec. 102-167. - Trailers and semitrailers. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Semitrailer means every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Trailer means every vehicle designed or used to carry its load wholly on its own structure and drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit or for the person in charge or the operator of any trailer or semitrailer to park or leave standing such trailer or semitrailer upon any portion of any public street for one continuous period of over 30 minutes without authority from the chief of police. 
(Code 1971, § 29-68) 
State Law reference- Overnight parking of commercial vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.307. 
Sec. 102-168. - Parking on private property. 
(a)  Consent of owner required. It shall be unlawful to park an automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle upon private property within the city without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(b)  Property partially publicly owned and partially privately owned. Where property is partially publicly owned and partially privately owned, it shall be unlawful for anyone to park in such area where the private owner has properly placed proper signs thereon stating "no parking." 
(c)  Impoundment of vehicle upon execution of complaint. Upon the execution of a proper complaint by the owner of such property, the police shall impound any such vehicle subject to the violation of this section. 
(Code 1971, §§ 29-70-29-71) 
Secs. 102-169-102-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC PARKING IN DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-196. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Public parking regulations in the downtown business area shall be enforced between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except on certain holidays or other special days as may be designated by the city council. 
(b)  Parking regulations that relate to overtime parking in the public parking areas shall not be enforced on Saturdays, Sundays, January 1, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day of each year. 
(Code 1971, § 29-75; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 102-197. - Twenty-four-hour parking prohibited. 
    In no case shall any vehicle be allowed to be parked continuously for more than 24 hours in any public parking space in the downtown business area. Operators of vehicles parked over 24 hours in any public parking space shall be cited for overtime parking and may be towed away at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1971, § 29-76) 
Sec. 102-198. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1653-1-14, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2014, repealed § 102-198 in its entirety, which pertained to two-hour parking zones designated and derived from the Code of 1971, § 29-77; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, adopted Nov. 17, 2009. 
Sec. 102-199. - Parking within marked lines; violation. 
(a)  All vehicles parked in a public parking space in the downtown business area will be parked within the marked lines, which define the parking space. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across such marked lines. 
(b)  No person shall permit, cause or allow any vehicle registered in his name or under his control to be parked in violation of this division. Persons who park their vehicles or vehicles under their control in violation of this division will be subject to citation and fine. 
(Code 1971, § 29-78) 
Sec. 102-200. - Fine. 
(a)  The fine for overparking in the downtown business area is set at $10.00 per violation. If the fine is paid to the municipal court within ten working days of the issuance of the citation, the fine for overparking shall be $5.00 per violation. In all cases parking fines are paid directly to the municipal court. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or other persons, such as a parking attendant officially designated by the city, shall enforce downtown parking regulations. 
(Code 1971, § 29-79) 
Sec. 102-201. - Special parking areas. 
(a)  Special parking areas are established and designated as those parking areas containing public parking spaces in the city parking lot located in the 400 block of East Main Street, being the same lot located on the northwest corner of the intersection of East Main Street and Mound Street, and the public parking spaces located in the parking lot on the west side of North Pecan Street between East Main Street and East Hospital Street. 
(b)  In no case will any vehicle be allowed to be parked in a special parking area for more than a 24-hour period without being moved out of such special parking area. A vehicle parked continuously for over 24 hours in a public parking space within a special parking area without being moved out of such special parking area will be cited for overparking and may be towed away at the owner's expense. 
(c)  The two-hour restriction for other public parking spaces does not apply to public parking spaces in the special parking areas. 
(Code 1971, § 29-80) 
Sec. 102-202. - Free parking placards. 
(a)  Free parking placards may be issued by the convention and visitors bureau or any other organization designated and authorized by the city council to tourists and other special visitors to the city which will allow free parking in all public parking areas in the downtown area. A free parking placard is good for 24 hours from the date and time of issuance. 
(b)  A vehicle displaying a free parking placard will not be ticketed while occupying a public parking space in the downtown area. The appearance and design of a free parking placard shall be as approved by the city council. 
(c)  In no case is this section intended to supersede or make void any other municipal regulation or state law pertaining to handicapped parking spaces, fire lanes, designated no parking zones or any otherwise posted or regulated public parking in the downtown area. 
(Code 1971, § 29-81; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 102-203-102-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRUCK ROUTES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 102-231-102-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRUCKS WEIGHING ONE AND ONE-HALF TONS OR MORE 

Sec. 102-256. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Through vehicle means any commercial vehicle whose origin and destination is other than the city, having no legitimate business reason for not using the designated through truck route, State Highway Loop 224. 
(Code 1971, § 29-96.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-257. - Use required. 
    Any truck, truck tractor, and semitrailer or any commercial vehicle with a rated capacity of 11/2 tons or more according to the manufacturer's classification or the equivalent thereof being operated as a through traffic vehicle shall use State Loop 224 as the through truck route. 
(Code 1971, § 29-96) 
Sec. 102-258. - Deviations from route. 
    Deviations from the through route established in this division shall be allowed only for a detour prescribed by the city or the state department of transportation, to load or unload, to report to a truck carrier terminal or for repairs. Proof of the legitimate reason for being off the through truck route shall be available in the truck log or manifest of the vehicle involved and shall be shown to the officer stopping the truck upon request. Deviation may be allowed at any time for emergency, public utility or municipal vehicles. 
(Code 1971, § 29-96.2) 
Sec. 102-259. - Prohibited in the square. 
    No through truck traffic will be permitted in or on the area of the city commonly known as the square, unless the truck is making a pickup or delivery or there is another legitimate reason specified in this division. The square is that area of circulation which immediately surrounds the downtown Plaza Principle. 
(Code 1971, § 29-96.3) 
Sec. 102-260. - Use of shortest distance. 
    When a legitimate deviation of the truck route designated in this division is made, the shortest distance back to the through truck route shall be used, and the square shall not be used. 
(Code 1971, § 29-96.4) 
Sec. 102-261. - Signs and markings. 
    Appropriate signs and markings are to be erected by the state department of transportation to designate the truck route on State Loop 224. 
(Code 1971, § 29-96.5) 
Sec. 102-262. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police is responsible for the enforcement of this division. This division shall be strictly enforced. 
(b)  All persons violating this division shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, § 29-96.6) 
Secs. 102-263-102-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate the operation of bicycles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; bicycle regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.001 et seq. 

Sec. 102-291. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the signs. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1971, § 29-104) 
Sec. 102-292. - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1971, § 29-110) 
Secs. 102-293-102-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.001 et seq. 

Sec. 102-321. - Crossing at right angles. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1971, § 29-122) 
Sec. 102-322. - Yielding to vehicles. 
    Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to permit any pedestrian to cross a roadway where prohibited by a traffic control device. 
(Code 1971, § 29-123) 
Sec. 102-323. - Hitchhiking. 
    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(Code 1971, § 29-124) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.007(a). 
Secs. 102-324-102-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - VEHICULAR TRANSPORTATION OF DANGEROUS MATERIALS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 

Sec. 102-351. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous and dangerous materials include the following: 
(1)  Dangerous materials formed by chemical reaction. There are many materials which represent no particular disposal difficulty, provided they are kept from contact with other materials with which they might react forming a dangerous reaction product. Calcium carbide reacts with water forming lime and acetylene, an explosive gas. Sodium, potassium and calcium metals react with water forming hydrogen, an explosive gas when mixed with air. Cyanide salts, used in metal cleaning, form deadly hydrogen cyanide gas when reacted with organic and inorganic acids. All materials reacting with commonly encountered substances to form dangerous materials are considered to be in this class. 
(2)  Explosive. An explosive is defined as any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion, i.e., with substantially instantaneous release of gas and heat, unless such compound, mixture or device is otherwise specifically classified. Common compounds of this classification are organic nitrates, perchlorates, peroxides, fulminates, oxides, hydrides, and others. Nitroglycerine (dynamite), TNT, hydrogen peroxide, ammonium nitrate, and ketone peroxides are examples of this classification. 
(3)  Flammable materials. The materials which constitute this general classification are those petroleum products or derivatives which are capable of being burned in the presence of air or oxygen when they are exposed to a flame, spark, or any form of ignition. These materials include natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas, naphtha, gasolines, oils, and other flammable petroleum products which have not been specifically listed in this subsection. These materials can be gaseous, liquid or solid or combinations of these. 
(4)  Radioactive materials. Materials in this classification are all of those which emit alpha, beta, or gamma radiation. Radium, cobalt-60, carbon-14, strontium-90, and all radioactive isotopes are common examples of this classification which might be encountered in the city. 
(5)  Toxic, poisonous and corrosive materials. Materials in this classification can consist of gases, liquids and solids. The degree of toxicity can range from slight to deadly. Corrosive materials range from mildly active to materials capable of causing deep chemical burns. Examples of toxic materials are as follows: 
a.  Gases. Carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, ammonia, hydrogen cyanide, chlorine, bromine, fluorine, and others. 
b.  Liquids. Hydrocyanic acid, carbolic acid, oxalic acid, formic acid, benzene, toluene, aniline, nitrobenzene, and others. 
c.  Solids. Arsenic and arsenic compounds, tellurides, beryllium compounds, organic drugs, and others. 
d.  Corrosive materials. Corrosive materials including hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, sulphuric acid, carbolic acid, chlorine, phosphorus, lime, caustic soda and others. 
(Code 1971, § 29-135) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 102-352. - Designated routes. 
    The following described traffic routes shall be designated as "hazardous and dangerous materials routes" within the city and shall be properly identified: 
(1)  Loop 224, which completely surrounds the city. 
(2)  U.S. Highway 59 North, from the city limits to Loop 224. 
(3)  U.S. Highway 59 South, from the city limits to Loop 224. 
(4)  State Highway 7 East, from the city limits to Loop 224. 
(5)  State Highway 7 West, from the city limits to Loop 224. 
(6)  State Highway 21 East, from the city limits to Loop 224. 
(7)  State Highway 21 West, from the city limits to Loop 224. 
(8)  State Loop 495 from the north city limits to Loop 224. 
(Code 1971, § 29-136) 
Sec. 102-353. - Restrictions. 
    Except for entities with a place of business in the city carrying the product outside the city or foreign business making a local delivery or parked on any public street or any residential area within the city limits and engaged in the delivery or unloading of a product to a place of business, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven or operate or maintain any vehicle to transport any dangerous or hazardous material defined in this article, but not expressly limited to, over any street or alley within the city, except those routes designated in section 102-352. 
(Code 1971, § 29-137) 
Sec. 102-354. - Enforcement. 
    The fire marshal, fire department and police department shall, in connection with their duty, imposed by law, diligently enforce this article. 
(Code 1971, § 29-138) 
Sec. 102-355. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, § 29-139) 
Secs. 102-356-102-364. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TOW TRUCK AND VEHICLE STORAGE BUSINESS REGULATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1570-4-11, adopted April 5, 2011, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 102-365-102-390, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1486-3-08, adopted March 18, 2008; Ord. No. 1505-9-08, adopted Sept. 16, 2008. 

Sec. 102-365. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Consent tow means any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody or control of the vehicle. The term does not include an incident management tow or a private property tow. 
    Drop fee means a fee that must be offered on a private property tow where the vehicle is hooked up and is ready for immediate transport. Any vehicle that is not hooked up completely and ready for immediate transport and the owner or operator of the vehicle arrives on the scene the vehicle must be released without a fee. 
    Incident means an unplanned randomly occurring traffic event that adversely affects normal traffic. 
    Incident management tow means any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned because of a traffic accident or to an incident. 
    Light-duty tow truck has a 15,000-pound GVW or greater, a boom capacity of 8,000 minimum with dual winches and a wheel lift with at least 4,000-pound capacity. One hundred feet of three-eighths[-inch] wire rope. 
    Non-consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not consent tow including: 
(1)  An incident management tow; and 
(2)  A private property tow. 
    Parking facility means any public or private property used, in whole or in part, for restricted and/or paid parking of vehicles. The term includes a restricted space on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted parking facility, a commercial parking lot, a parking garage, and a parking area serving or adjacent to a business, church, school, home, apartment complex, property governed by a property owner's association, or government-owned property leased to a private person. 
    Person means an individual, a corporation, organization, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, joint venture, association, or other legal entity. 
    Rollback/car carrier rated for one vehicle has a 19,000-pound GVW; for two vehicles as a 25,500-pound GVW minimum requirements. 
    Tow away means a tow that is conducted from a parking facility and without the consent of the owner or operator of that vehicle, but with the parking facility's authorization. 
    Tow business means the business of towing or removing vehicles for compensation, or the expectation of compensation, regardless of whether the purpose of the towing is to remove, repair, wreck, store, trade, or purchase vehicles. 
    Tow rotation list means a list prepared and maintained by the city police department of tow companies, which have requested and qualified to appear thereon. 
    Tow truck means any motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another vehicle. The term does not include: 
(1)  A motor vehicle owned and operated by a governmental entity, including a public school district; 
(2)  A motor vehicle towing; 
a.  A race car; 
b.  A motor vehicle for exhibition; or 
c.  An antique motor vehicle. 
(3)  A recreational vehicle towing another vehicle; 
(4)  A motor vehicle that is used in combination with a tow bar, tow dolly, or other mechanical device if the vehicle is not operated in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise; 
(5)  A motor vehicle that is controlled or operated by a farmer or rancher and used for towing a farm vehicle; 
(6)  A motor vehicle that: 
a.  Is owned or operated by an entity that the primary business of which is the rental of motor vehicles; and 
b.  Only tows vehicles rented by the entity. 
    Towing company means a person operating a tow truck licensed with TDLR (Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation). The term includes the owner, operator, employee or agent of a towing company but does not include a political subdivision of the state. 
    Unauthorized vehicle means a vehicle parked, stored, or located on a parking facility without the consent of the parking facility owner. 
    Vehicle means a device in, on, or by which a person or property may be transported on a public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer, but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track. 
    Vehicle storage facility (VSF) means a facility operated by a person licensed under V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, ch. 2303. 
    Vehicle storage facility license means the license issued by TDLR (Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation) authorizing a business to store vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-366. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the tow business and make non-consent tows in the city unless such person possesses a current, valid tow truck license, issued by the State of Texas that lists each tow truck operated by that tow company. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-367. - Vehicle storage facility. 
    Each tow company performing non-consent tows shall utilize a licensed VSF located in the city limits or within the extra territorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-368. - Police inspection. 
    Any tow truck performing non-consent tows within the city limits may be inspected by an official of the Nacogdoches Police Department at any time the tow truck is being operated on the public streets as a tow truck. Such inspections may be conducted to ensure required licenses and compliance with this article and state law. Further, upon the request of the chief of police or his/her designee, a tow company performing non-consent tows within the city shall produce records from VSFs used for non-consent tows to ensure compliance with the maximum rates established under this article and other requirements of this article and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-369. - Tow rotation list. 
(a)  Qualifications. The city police department shall establish and maintain a tow rotation list. Each tow company is required to complete any and all applications and provide required information necessary to apply for the tow rotation list. To be eligible for the rotation list, each tow company is required to comply with all of the following requirements: To qualify, a company must maintain a 24-hour tow service; have one telephone number which is answered 24 hours a day, seven days a week; and uses a VSF that meets or exceeds the Texas Accessibility Standards ("TAS") accessibility criteria, approved by the United States Department of Justice. To be eligible to be placed on the tow rotation list, a tow company shall certify in writing that the VSF meets or exceeds the criteria set forth by TAS, a copy of which will be provided by the city at the time the tow company applies for inclusion on the tow rotation list. Only those tow trucks that are included on the tow company's tow truck license and are permitted by the city are authorized to respond to an incident management rotation calls. Each tow company will maintain its own office within the city limits or the ETJ of the City of Nacogdoches. A tow company may not substitute a tow truck from a different tow company or utilize drivers employed by another tow company that is on the city rotation list to respond to an incident management call. Each tow company is required to maintain a minimum of two light-duty tow trucks with only one of the two tow trucks being a rollback/car carrier design. All conventional tow trucks must be equipped with hydraulic recovery boom and wheel lifts. 
(b)  Drivers. Each tow company must submit and maintain a list of operator/drivers, a minimum of two operator/drivers must be maintained to be eligible to be on rotation, which will be operating the tow trucks included on the company's license along with their address, phone number, Texas driver's license number and a criminal background for each driver. Drug related offenses, theft or crimes of morale turpitude can be grounds for denial. Each driver must possess a TDLR incident management license and submit to the city a copy of the license. 
(c)  License. Each tow company, requesting placement on the tow rotation list must possess a tow truck license, issued by the State of Texas that lists each tow truck operated by that tow company. 
(d)  Forfeiture of calls. Failure of any tow truck to check in route, by radio or phone, to the designated location within ten minutes of dispatch making contact with the listed phone number of the tow company or arriving at the designated location dispatched by the city within 25 minutes of being called will result in the forfeiture of that call and shall be considered a violation of this article. Three such forfeitures within 12 months will result in removal from the rotation list. 
(e)  Temporary removal from list. Should a tow company wish to be removed from the tow rotation list for a specific period of time, the tow company shall notify the city police department dispatch, in writing, fax or e-mail, if the time off requested is 24 hours or longer. It shall be the tow company's responsibility to notify dispatch in writing, fax or e-mail, when the tow company wishes to return to the tow rotation list. 
(f)  Unneeded calls. If a tow company is called to respond to a scene by a police officer and subsequently is not needed, that tow company will be placed as "next in line" on the tow rotation list. If a tow truck responds and performs minor service that enables the vehicle to be driven, and for which no fee is charged, that tow company will be placed as "next in line" on the tow rotation list. 
(g)  Method of receiving payment. Each qualified tow company must be able to accept cash or credit/debit card payments for services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-370. - Truck permits required for rotation non-consent tows. 
(a)  Unlawful to operate tow trucks without permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the tow truck business and make rotation non-consent and or police directed/initiated tows in the City of Nacogdoches unless such a person possesses a current, valid permit for that tow truck issued by the City of Nacogdoches Police Department. 
(b)  Truck permits. The permit shall be affixed to the front windshield so that it can be read from the exterior of the vehicle. Permits will be issued upon successful inspection of each vehicle according to prescribed standards and/or equipment listed in the application. Permits may be suspended and/or revoked by the chief of police or the designee. 
(c)  Issuance or renewal of truck permits. Permits, unless suspended or revoked, shall be issued/renewed by January 31 of each year and will expire the last day of January the following year. All tow truck inspections will be done in the month of January. Permits may be issued for tow trucks added to the tow truck business during the course of the year provided all necessary paperwork is completed. 
(d)  Tow truck permit fee. The permit fee charged by the Nacogdoches Police Department shall be $30.00 per tow truck, annually, to cover the cost of inspections and maintaining records regarding the ability to safely and adequately operate each tow truck. 
(e)  Paperwork information. Any applicant for a tow truck permit shall submit, on a form supplied by the Nacogdoches Police Department, a verified application form containing or accompanied by the following: 
(1)  The true trade name, true owner's name, address, and telephone number of the tow truck company. 
(2)  A detailed description of each tow truck proposed to be operated, including Texas tow truck license plate number. 
(3)  A copy of the state issued tow truck license. (Cab card) 
(4)  The original certificate of insurance that lists public liability, property damage, and any and all other amounts as prescribed by the State of Texas. Must show City of Nacogdoches as certificate holder. The original will be returned to the owner after a photocopy has been made. 
(5)  A photocopy of the vehicle storage facility license issued by the State of Texas which must include the physical address and phone number of the facility to be used. The VSF must be located within the ETJ of the City of Nacogdoches and must be publicly listed with local telephone companies. 
(6)  Written proof that the VSF meets TAS standards. 
(7)  A copy of an updated non-consent tow fee schedule. 
(8)  If a tow company owner does not own a VSF, a letter from the proposed VSF storage facility granting permission to store vehicles, to that company owner/business, is required. 
(f)  Inspection of tow trucks. Every tow truck to be used by the applicant for incident management tows in the tow truck business shall be inspected annually by the Nacogdoches Police Department delegate prior to the issuance of a permit to ascertain if it has met all state requirements along with the following items: 
(1)  Current TDLR license (listing all trucks permitted with TDLR). 
(2)  Current tow truck license plate registration. 
(3)  Current safety inspection certificate. 
(4)  The company name and phone number must be permanently displayed on both sides of the tow truck at least four inches in height. 
(5)  One fire extinguisher, type ABC dry chemical, at least ten pounds or equivalent. Each extinguisher shall have a number permanently affixed that correlates with the truck it belongs on. 
(6)  Light set sufficient to provide rear brake/turn lights and taillights for the towed load (tow lights). 
(7)  Three portable red emergency reflectors or reflective orange safety cones. 
(8)  Broom and scoop along with a container to contain any and all debris removed from a scene. Each shall have a number permanently affixed that correlates with the truck it belongs on. 
(9)  Amber-colored overhead rotating/flashing lights that are to be used only while under the direction of a law enforcement officer at the scene of an accident or while assisting/hooking up to a disabled vehicle on a roadway. 
    It shall be unlawful for any permitted tow truck to operate at any time without the required equipment stipulated by state law or this article. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Secs. 102-371-102-381. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-382. - Maximum fees to be charged for non-consent tows. 
    The maximum fees charged by tow companies for non-consent tows are hereby established by the city as set forth below and reflect fair value of towing services. Itemized receipts shall be provided to owners or operators at the time payment of tow related fees are made. Violations of this provision may result in suspension or removal from the tow rotation list, and criminal penalties against the offender. Towing fees may be reviewed by the City of Nacogdoches bi-annually. A towing fee study shall be performed in conjunction with this review. 
    (Fees listed below are for non-consent tows) 
    (Fees listed below do not include any charges other than tow, to include the use of dollies, go-jacks and clean-up of debris when called for) 
Light-Duty Tow Trucks Heavy-Duty Tow Trucks Incident Management-$150.00 Incident Management-$500.00 Private Property Tow-$150.00 Private Property Tow-$500.00 Drop Fee-$75.00 Drop Fee-$250.00 Stand-by Time over 1 hour-$125.00 per additional hour Stand-by Time over 1 hour-$250.00 per additional hour  
    Fuel surcharge. Due to the ever increasing prices of fuel a surcharge will be allowed for each cent past the price of $3.50 per gallon of fuel. Once it is determined that the price of fuel has surpassed the price of $3.50, the police department will, on a monthly basis, advise what amount can be added to a towing invoice in the amount of $0.30 for each cent over the amount of $3.50 as a surcharge. The police department will base the price of fuel on the lowest price of two local distributors at the beginning of each month once it is determined that the price is above $3.50 per gallon. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-383. - Driving tow trucks to scene of an incident prohibited. 
    No tow company shall drive, or cause to be driven, a tow truck to or near the scene of an incident on a street within the city unless such tow company has been called to the scene by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-384. - Soliciting towing business on a city street prohibited. 
    No tow company shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, a person owning/operating any vehicle which is involved in an incident on a public street. This prohibition applies regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, repairing, selling, or purchasing such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-385. - Impound tows. 
    Any police officer investigating an accident or offense within the city may order the impoundment of any vehicle involved therein when, in the judgment of such officer, criminal prosecution will be involved as a result of such event, or when it is necessary to impound such vehicle to secure evidence, or when the owner or occupant of the vehicle is unable or fails to have such vehicle removed, or when the vehicle is stopped for a traffic violation, to effect an arrest, or is involved in an accident on a public roadway or public property and the vehicle's owner or operator fails to show proof of financial responsibility as required under V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code, ch. 601 as amended. The fees to be charged for impound tows will not exceed the maximum rates allowed under this article or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-386. - Duties of tow companies. 
    It shall be the obligation of all tow companies under this section to operate the tow business in a safe manner, to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Taking direction from investigating officer. Upon arrival at the scene of a collision within the city, tow truck operators shall take directions on when to engage or tow from the police officer investigating the collision. 
(2)  Removing debris of collision. Tow truck operators that engage and tow any vehicle from the scene of a collision within the city shall remove all debris of the collision from the public street. This duty specifically includes the removal of vehicle parts, glass, and other debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner, which will keep it out of the gutters, storm sewers, streams, public rights-of-way, or property not belonging to the tow company. 
(3)  Disengaging. A tow trucks that removes a vehicle from the original location shall not disengage from the vehicle until the vehicle has been deposited with the appropriate VSF except when the vehicle is released to the owner or operator or when the owner or operator specifies the location of disengagement. This restriction is enacted to prohibit tow trucks from engaging an unauthorized vehicle in a parking facility and moving it to a close location, then returning for another unauthorized vehicle, ultimately towing all the relocated vehicles to a VSF. 
(4)  Drops. A tow truck that has hooked up to a vehicle for towing shall release the vehicle to its owner or operator upon receiving, a drop fee, payment and will not tow the vehicle, except when the vehicle is being taken into custody by a police officer. A vehicle is hooked up" if it is immediately ready for transport. A vehicle is not hooked up" unless it can be legally towed on a public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-387. - Report of towing of unauthorized vehicle to police dispatcher. 
    The VSF that receives a vehicle from a tow truck that removed the vehicle from private or public property within city and on a non-consent basis, except on police-generated tows, shall notify the police department dispatch office within one hour of receiving the vehicle. The information to be provided in such notification shall include: 
(1)  The general description (brand, model, color) of the vehicle towed, including the state and the license plate, if any; 
(2)  The tow company name that towed the vehicle; 
(3)  The location/address from which the vehicle was towed and reason; 
(4)  The date and time the vehicle was removed from the location; 
(5)  The date and time the vehicle was accepted at the VSF; and 
(6)  The street address and phone number of the VSF where the vehicle is located. 
Such reports shall be made by fax, e-mail or in person. A VSF must release vehicles during the time the VSF accepts vehicles. If the VSF accepts vehicles on a 24-hour-a-day basis, it shall release vehicles on the same basis, with one (1) hours' notice. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-388. - Administrative penalties for violations. 
    In addition to the criminal penalties imposed for violations of state law or this article, any tow company on the tow rotation list that violates this article or state law may be subject to sanctions by the chief of police or designee, depending upon the nature of infraction, number of infractions, and other circumstances. The sanctions shall range from written notification of violation with warning to, and including, removal from the tow rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-389. - Appeal of sanctions. 
    An individual who has been issued a sanction may appeal the chief of police's or designee's decision by submitting a written request to the city manager no later than the tenth day after the effective date of the decision. The individual must include a statement of the grounds for the appeal. The city manager shall schedule a hearing no later than the fifteenth day after receipt of the notice of appeal. The city manager shall give notice of the time and place set for the hearing to the chief of police and the appellant not less than five days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Sec. 102-390. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  At the appeal hearing under section 102-389 (appeal of sanctions), the chief of police and the appellant may present evidence, testimony, and argument. 
(b)  The city manager's decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 1570-4-11, 4-5-2011) 
Chapter 106 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city relating to public utilities, art. II, § 10 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; electricity, § 14-61 et seq.; plumbing, § 14-236 et seq.; gas code, § 14-326 et seq.; mechanical code, § 14-356 et seq.; storm drainage system, § 14-856 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 46; historic preservation, ch. 50; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; connection of water, sewer, electrical systems to mobile homes or manufactured home parks, § 66-40; solid waste, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; standards and specifications for alteration of utility lines, § 86-125; subdivisions, ch. 90; prerequisite requirements for existing residences, streets and utility services for subdivisions, § 90-65; standards and specifications for easements and utilities in subdivisions, § 90-276 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Inspections. 
    The fire marshal, building inspector, electrical inspector, police officers, and such other persons designated by the city shall examine and inspect from time to time all telegraph, telephone, electric light, or other poles; gas pipelines; pipes; and other fixtures in the public places within the city for the purpose of seeing that all of such are in a safe and suitable condition. Whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing, or maintaining the item shall be notified and required to replace the item in a safe and suitable condition. 
(Code 1971, § 30-12) 
Sec. 106-2. - Water system revenues. 
    All revenues arising from the water system shall constitute a special fund to be used first for the payment of all expenses of the water system. The city shall keep a separate account of such fund received and disbursed, and the warrants drawn against this fund shall state on their face that they are drawn against this fund and for what purpose. 
(Code 1971, § 31-1) 
Secs. 106-3-106-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-31. - Sinks or hoppers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying premises situated within 150 feet of the city sanitary sewer system, in which premises food is cooked or clothing is washed, to fail to have a suitable sink or hopper for the reception of wastewater. However, if the water closet is of the kind suited to such use, it may receive the wastewater, and the sink or hopper may be dispensed with. 
(Code 1971, § 31-2) 
Sec. 106-32. - Wash stands, slop stands. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying premises situated within 150 feet of the city sanitary sewer system to refuse or fail to connect all wash stands or slop stands in his house or yard with the sewer system or to allow any slops, washwater or wastewater of any kind to flow over the pavement or into any open gutter or into the street. 
(Code 1971, § 31-3) 
Sec. 106-33. - Installation and connection of water closets. 
    Every person owning or occupying premises where the property line of the land on which any building is within 150 feet of the city sanitary sewer system is required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on his property and connect the water closets with the city sewer, under the supervision of the city sanitary superintendent upon 60 days' notice from the city. 
(Code 1971, § 31-4) 
Sec. 106-34. - Maintenance of water closets. 
    It shall be the duty of any person who has a water closet connected to the city sewer system to keep and maintain such water closet and connection thereof in perfect condition, free from any obstruction. 
(Code 1971, § 31-5) 
Sec. 106-35. - Disposal of excreta generally. 
    All human excreta shall be disposed of so as not to pollute the soil; contaminate a water supply; be accessible to flies, mosquitoes, insects, rats or mice; or create a nuisance. All human excreta shall be disposed of in properly managed sewers, treatment tanks, chemical toilets, or other methods approved by the city sanitary superintendent. 
(Code 1971, § 31-6) 
Sec. 106-36. - Privies, privy vaults and cesspools prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any privy, privy vault or cesspool above or below the ground within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 31-7) 
Sec. 106-37. - Disposal of contents of septic tanks. 
    The contents of septic tanks shall be disposed of under the direction of the health inspector or the city sanitary superintendent. 
(Code 1971, § 31-8) 
Sec. 106-38. - Discharge of kitchen waste, sewage or wastewater. 
    No kitchen waste, laundry water, sewage or wastewater from any cellar or pit shall be allowed to discharge into any street, gutter or public place whatsoever or discharge on top of the ground on any private premises in such manner that flies and mosquitoes might breed or odors become obnoxious to nearby residents. 
(Code 1971, § 31-9) 
Sec. 106-39. - Public toilets. 
    Sufficient and suitable toilet accommodations, well lighted and ventilated, separated for each sex, shall be provided at all public buildings, filling stations, camps and all places of public assemblage, and they shall be kept in a thoroughly clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1971, § 31-11) 
Sec. 106-40. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligibly break, damage, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the city sewage works. The city may pursue all criminal and civil penalties to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person violating this section. 
(Code 1971, § 31-54) 
Secs. 106-41-106-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1581-11-11, adopted Nov. 1, 2011, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Div. 2, §§ 106-66-106-79, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1207-6-00, adopted June 6, 2000. 

Sec. 106-66. - Definitions. 
    The meaning of terms used in this division shall be as follows: 
    Act or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 3 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator means the administrator of the EPA, or any duly authorized official acting in his behalf. 
    Approval authority means the Executive Director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
(1)  Corporations. 
a.  A president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation. 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager according to corporate procedures. 
(2)  Partnerships. A general partner. 
(3)  Proprietorships. The proprietor. 
(4)  Governmental facility (federal, state, or local). A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the governmental facility, or a ranking elected official for the governmental entity. 
(5)  Any organization. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1), (2), or (3) above, provided: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual above; 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, or an equivalent position, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer, also called house connection, means the extension from the building drains to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams around any portion of an industrial user's pretreatment facility and into the sewage works. 
    Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, with chemical inhibition of nitrogenous oxygen demand, five days at 20E Centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (mg/1). 
    CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater, with testing conducted according to "Standard Methods", expressed in mg/l. 
    Chronic violation of wastewater discharge limits, also referred to as 66% rule, means a repeated violation of discharge limits for any one pollutant parameter, in which 66 percent or more of all measurements during a six-month period exceed the limit (daily maximum or average, as appropriate). 
    City means the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
    Composite sample means a sample obtained over a period of time by continuous collection or by multiple aliquot samples, proportioned according to varying flow over the period of time. Unless otherwise specified, a 24-hour composite sample shall be used, consisting of: 
(1)  A minimum of 12 effluent portions collected at equal time intervals over 24 hours and combined proportional to flow, or 
(2)  A sample collected continuously or at frequent intervals proportional to flow over a 24-hour period. 
    Control authority means the city as long as the city operates a pretreatment program approved by the approval authority; otherwise, the approval authority. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before discharge to a public sewer. 
    Direct discharger means a facility discharging industrial waste into a watercourse rather than into a public sewage works. 
    Director of public works means the Nacogdoches city official whose duties include oversight of all water and wastewater operations, as well as certain other city operations. 
    To discharge means to deposit, conduct, drain, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow any of these acts to occur. 
    Domestic sewage means water-borne wastes normally discharging into the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, free of storm and surface water and industrial wastes. 
    Dry industry means an industry discharging only domestic sewage into the sewage works and having no process or manufacturing operation discharging any type of industrial waste into the sewage works. 
    Emergency means an event in which an actual or imminent discharge into the sewage works requires immediate action to prevent (1) rapid deterioration of the sewage works, (2) major fire or explosion hazards, (3) severe danger to the health and welfare of persons, (4) severe blockage of major collection lines, or (5) severe interference with the treatment process. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or the administrator or other duly-authorized official of that agency. 
    Equivalent concentration limit means when: 
(1)  The concentration of any pollutant in the effluent from a specific process is limited by pretreatment standards or requirements, and 
(2)  That effluent is mixed with other sewage prior to discharge into the public sewer, a concentration limit for that pollutant in the mixed stream may be calculated. This equivalent concentration limit in the mixed stream represents the specified limit in the stream from the regulated process, as derived by a combined waste stream formula. 
    Establishment means a commercial or industrial facility under one management and located within the same premises. 
    Existing discharger means an industrial user which was discharging industrial wastes into the sewage works prior to the effective date of this division. 
    Existing source means any source of industrial waste which is in operation or under construction (as defined herein) at the date of publication of the applicable pretreatment standards in the Federal Register (provided such standards are thereafter promulgated). This definition excludes new sources as defined herein. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage, and sale of food products and produce. 
    Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes. 
    Indirect discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial sewer means a sewer transporting industrial wastes from one or more sources prior to discharge info the public sewer. 
    Industrial user means a user of the sewage works, regardless of amount of flow, who discharges any type of non-domestic wastes into the sewage works. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting fibril any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, business, or service, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or domestic sewage, as distinct from normal domestic sewage. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the treatment processes or operations (including sludge processing, use; or disposal) which [alone or in conjunction with discharge(s) from other sources]: 
(1)  Causes a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit; or 
(2)  Increases the magnitude or duration of such violation; and/or 
(3)  Prevents sewage sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with any of the following: 
a.  Section 405 of the Act; 
b.  The Solid Waste Disposal Act; 
c.  The Clean Air Act; 
d.  The Toxic Substances Control Act; 
e.  The Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act; 
f.  Any state or federal regulations more stringent than the Acts above; 
g.  Any federal, state, or local regulations, permits, or sludge management plans prepared or issued pursuant to any of the Acts above or to more stringent regulations. 
    Manager means water utilities manager for the city, or any person acting in this capacity, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative, whose duties include oversight of all water and wastewater operations, as well as certain other city operations. 
    Mass limit means any limit on the total amount of a pollutant which may be discharged from a specific source over a specific length of time. A mass limit may be imposed by a pretreatment standard or requirement, and may be a fixed amount or may be proportional to production of a specified product. 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/1) means a weight-to-volume ratio numerically equal to parts per million. The mg/1 value multiplied by 8.345 equals pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Minor industrial user, also minor user, means an industrial user subject to permit requirements but not a significant industrial user. 
    National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (or NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
    National pretreatment standard, also referred to as pretreatment standard, means either or both of the following: 
(1)  Also referred to as categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits and promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, for application to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Parts 405 - 471. 
(2)  Prohibited discharge standards contained in 40 CFR 403.5 as well as local limits for specific pollutants established by the city pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. The standards referred in this sub-item (2) applicable to all industrial users. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New discharger means an industrial user which begins discharging industrial wastes into the sewage works after the effective date of this division. 
    New source means any source of industrial waste which first comes under construction (as defined herein) after the date publication of the applicable pretreatment standards in the Federal Register (provided such: standards are thereafter promulgated). The source is defined as a new source only if it meets one of the following criteria: 
(1)  The facility is constructed at a site where no other source is located. 
(2)  The facility totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source. 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the new facility are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Normal domestic sewage means sewage (excluding industrial wastes) discharged into sanitary sewers with average concentrations of suspended solids and CBOD not more than 200 mg/I. 
    NPDES state means a state water pollution control agency with an NPDES permit program approved by the EPA. 
    O & M means operation and maintenance. 
    Overloading means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design-capacity. 
    Parts per million (ppm) means a weight-to-weight ratio numerically equal to mg/l. 
    Pass through means a discharge from the city's treatment plant which [alone or in conjunction with discharge(s) from other sources] causes a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit or increases the magnitude or duration of such violation. 
    Person means any individual. Except for references to the health and welfare of persons, the term also includes any corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. It shall be determined according to "standard methods." 
    Plumbing ordinance means the Nacogdoches City Ordinance adopting the standard plumbing code, or any other plumbing code; or the plumbing code so adopted; or any other ordinance regulating gas, water, and sewer plumbing. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-included alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in sewage to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging such pollutants into a treatment plant. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or process changes, or other means, except by dilution as prohibited in subsection 106-68(g) of this division. 
    Pretreatment coordinator means the city official administering the pretreatment program, or any person acting in this capacity, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Pretreatment program means a local program for monitoring and enforcing pretreatment standards and requirements; or a state program for performing or overseeing these duties. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
    Prohibited discharge standards means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as required by 40 CFR 403. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than two inches in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a publicly owned sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights and interest controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection; storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Qualified professional (when used in reference to items submitted by industrial users) means a person working in the field of industrial waste management and treatment, qualified by education and/or experience to provide technical assistance and certification for documents submitted by an industrial user. 
    Rate ordinance means the Nacogdoches City Ordinance establishing user charges (including pretreatment fees) as periodically updated. 
    Receiving stream means the watercourse into which the effluent from the sewage treatment plant is discharged. 
    Sanitary sewer, also sewer, means pipe or conduit which conveys domestic sewage, industrial sewage, or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes (except cooling water) are not passed intentionally. 
    Septage means any liquid, semi-solid, or solid domestic wastes pumped out of septic tanks. 
    Sewage, also wastewater, means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant, also treatment plant, means any components of the POTW as defined herein except for the collection and conveyance facilities. 
    Sewage works means all-components of the POTW as defined herein, plus sewers from users located outside the city and connected to the sewage works. 
    Shall, may. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. 
    Significant industrial user means any discharger meeting any of the following criteria and not excluded by other sections of this division: 
(1)  Any industrial user subject to categorical standards; 
(2)  Any discharger of a nondomestic waste stream (excluding unpolluted cooling water and boiler blowdown water) of 25,000 gallons per day or more; 
(3)  Any industrial user that contributes a nondomestic waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or pollutant capacity of the treatment plant; 
(4)  Any industrial user which has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the superintendent and the pretreatment coordinator, to: 
a.  Adversely affect the treatment plant through inhibition, pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination, or endangerment of treatment plant personnel; 
b.  Violate any pretreatment standard or requirement; or 
c.  Adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the sewage collection system through blockage; fire or explosion hazard, damage to facilities, or endangerment to personnel. 
This definition includes potential effects from accidental spills. 
    Significant noncompliance means an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of: wastewater discharge limits (66% rule) as defined in this section. 
(2)  Technical review criteria violations (33% rule) as defined in this section. 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit which the city determines has caused (alone or in combination with other discharges) interference or pass through. (Including endangerment to the health or welfare of persons). 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant which has: 
a.  Caused imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, or 
b.  Has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to stop or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone in a city-issued permit or enforcement order for starting or completing construction or for attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to submit required baseline monitoring reports, self-monitoring reports, compliance reports, etc., within 30 days after their due date. 
(7)  Failure to report noncompliance accurately. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program. 
    Significant violator means an industrial user with violations meeting any of the criteria for significant noncompliance as defined above. 
    Slug means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972 as revised 1987 or any later revision. The SIC number characterizes the type of industrial process or operation. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition; at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
    Storm sewer , also storm drain, means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "standard methods." 
    Technical review criteria (TRC) violation, also referred to as 33% rule, means a repeated violation of discharge limits for any one pollutant parameter, in which 33 percent or more of all measurements during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the limit (daily maximum or average, as appropriate) multiplied by the applicable TRC factor as follows: 
TRC = 1:4 for CBOD, suspended solids, fats, oil, and grease. 
TRC = 1.2 for all other pollutants excluding pH. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act, or other Acts. 
    Toxicity test means any test measuring the lethal or sublethal effects of the treatment plant effluent on designated species of aquatic life. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes, or other harmful substances. 
    Under construction, for purposes of defining existing sources and new sources, means a facility is under construction if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work (including clearing; excavation; removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities; or construction of an all-weather road), which is necessary for placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
c.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment intended to be used in the operation of the facility within a reasonable time. (This definition excludes options to purchase, contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies). 
    Unpolluted water or waste means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/1 each of suspended solids and CBOD, as determined by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in "standard methods". 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational errors, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or, careless or improper operation. 
    USC means United States Code. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city sewage works. 
    User charge means the charge made to all users for collection and treatment of wastes, including any charges for administering the pretreatment program. The definition excludes tap fees. 
    User charge ordinance means the Nacogdoches City Ordinance providing a system for establishing, assessing, and collecting user charges and other charges related to the sewer system. 
    Waste-activated sludge means sludge wasted from an activated sludge process for treatment of domestic sewage (or for similar wastes), whether in digested or undigested form. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Wholesale customer means any city, water, district, water supply corporation, or other similar entity which collects sewage from individual customers located outside the city and passes it on to the city for treatment. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § I, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-67. - Permits for industrial discharges. 
(a)  Permit required for industrial wastes. Any significant or minor industrial user discharging or proposing to discharge industrial wastes (including unpolluted process water) into the city sewage works shall obtain a permit from the city for this purpose. This is in addition to any permits required by the plumbing ordinance. 
    Any significant or minor industrial user proposing to discharge industrial wastes shall obtain a city permit before connecting to the city sewage works. This provision applies to (1) new or relocated establishments; (2) new sources of industrial waste within an existing establishment; and (3) direct dischargers wishing to divert any part of their industrial waste to the city sewage works. 
    Permitting requirements shall apply to all significant or minor industrial users receiving, or to receive, service from the city's sewage works, whether located inside or outside the city. No industrial user may be served through a wholesale customer unless the city and the wholesale customer first make an agreement giving the city the same authority over industrial users as provided in this division. 
    Any person (not already permitted) whom the city reclassifies as a significant or minor industrial discharger shall apply for a permit within 30 days after receiving notice from the city. 
    Each permit for a significant industrial user shall specify appropriate limits for (1) flow and (2) concentrations and/or mass limits for pollutants. Any significant industrial user who wishes to increase his flow, concentration, or mass of pollutants above the limits stated in his permit must obtain an amended permit from the city. 
(b)  Users subject to permit requirement. Each significant industrial user shall obtain a permit for the discharge of any industrial waste. Each minor user, including automobile repair and servicing: shops and car washes; dry cleaners and laundries; hospitals and nursing homes; restaurants and food dispensing services; schools with cafeterias; and dry industries with a risk for accidental spills of toxic or harmful substances into the city sewer system shall likewise obtain a permit. This requirement shall apply to such facilities even when included within a larger establishment, such as restaurant facilities within a supermarket. 
    In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the following types of business shall not be considered significant industrial users: automobile dealers and gas stations without repair or service facilities; and schools without cafeterias. 
(c)  Application requirements. Each application for a permit to discharge industrial waste into the sewage works shall be made on forms provided by the city or according to a format prescribed by the city. Each application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, as defined in section 106-66, and certified by a qualified professional. A permit application shall also be required for any new sources of industrial waste within a facility. 
    The city may require any information in the permit application which may be deemed necessary to evaluate the application and/or to administer the pretreatment program or any other necessary monitoring. Information which may be required includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name, address; location, applicable telephone numbers, and ownership of the industrial User (including major stockholders and/or parent corporations); 
(2)  Supervisors (including shift supervisors) and other contact persons, including all persons on whom legal notice could be served; 
(3)  List of any applicable environmental permits, including any permits related to transportation of waste materials; 
(4)  SIC number; 
(5)  Wastewater characteristics, certified by a reliable analytical laboratory, based on a sample which is representative of daily operations; 
(6)  Time and duration of discharge; 
(7)  Average daily, maximum daily, and peak flow rates for industrial wastes, along with any daily or seasonal variations. This shall apply separately to each waste stream regulated by categorical standards; 
(8)  Site plans, floor plans, and details of all sewers within the plant which carry industrial waste; 
(9)  Description and schedule for any facilities needed to meet pretreatment standards and/or requirements; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process(es) and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)  Justification for discharging unpolluted process water to the sewage works rather than to natural drainage; and 
(14)  Type and amount of any toxic pollutants brought into the plant, or generated within the plant, arid-scheduled for disposal outside the sewage works. 
If an industrial user considers any of the required information to be confidential in nature, he may request the city to withhold that information from the general public according to section. The user must be able to justify his request according to subsection (i). 
The city shall evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue the requested permit subject to all provisions of this division and any other applicable regulations. 
(d)  Permit modifications. 
(1)  Pretreatment standards. Within 45 days after the promulgation of any new or revised national pretreatment standard, the city shall revise the permits of all users subject to that standard. The revised permits shall require compliance with the standard within the time frame prescribed by that standard. 
Each existing user subject to any new or revised pretreatment standard shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator the baseline report required by subsections 106-69(c)(1)a-g., i., j. This information shall be submitted within 180 days after the later of (a) the promulgation of the standard and (b) the final administrative decision by the EPA that the standard (and/or one or more specific subcategories within the standard) is applicable to the user. 
New sources and sources which become subject to categorical standards after promulgation of the applicable categorical standard shall submit the required baseline report at least 90 days before beginning their indirect discharges. For these sources, the baseline report shall meet the requirements of subsections 106-69(c)(1)a-h. 
This requirement for submitting information applies to any user, regardless of whether that user at the time is classified by the city as a significant industrial user. 
(2)  Conditions warranting temporary relief. The city may modify existing permits to provide temporary relief from specific discharge limits when all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The city prohibits or limits by ordinance the discharge of a specific substance or parameter into the city's sewage works. 
b.  An industrial user which discharges such substance or parameter has asked the city from relief from such restrictions and has submitted justification for such relief. 
The city reasonably anticipates that the restrictive ordinance provisions will be eliminated or relaxed through pretreatment program modifications to be submitted by the city to the approval authority for approval. 
c.  Both the city and the approval authority concur that temporary or permanent relief is justified. 
(3)  Actions to provide temporary relief. In cases when the conditions above are met, the city may modify the permit of any applicable industrial user to include a compliance schedule for meeting the requirements for which temporary relief is warranted. Such compliance schedule shall at a minimum meet the following requirements: 
a.  Recognize the current status of the city's proposed pretreatment program modifications and the anticipated revisions to the requirements in question. 
b.  Require the industrial user to submit his own compliance schedule for meeting current (unmodified) requirements no later than six months after the time that the city is scheduled to submit the pretreatment program modifications to the approval authority for approval. 
c.  Note the possibility that the compliance schedule issued by the city may be changed before the expiration of the six-month period to reflect developments regarding the pretreatment program modifications. 
    The industrial user shall not be required to meet the requirements in question until the expiration of the six-month period, plus such additional reasonable time as may be required for compliance. 
(e)  Permit conditions. City permits for industrial waste discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and any other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the city. Permits shall contain conditions (1)-(6) below, or in the case of conditions (2) and (3) an explanation as to why these conditions are inapplicable (such as in the case of a dry industry or a minor industry). Permits may also contain any or all of the other conditions below, as applicable. 
(1)  Duration (in no case more than five years) and statement of non-transferability; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum waste constituents and characteristics, based on applicable general pretreatment standards (in 40 CFR 403), categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
(3)  Specifications for monitoring programs including list of pollutants to be monitored, sampling locations(s), sampling frequency, and sample type, along with reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements; 
(4)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to industrial waste discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access to those records; 
(5)  Requirements for notification to the city of any new introduction of pollutants or any substantial change in the volume or character of the pollutants being introduced into the sewage works; 
(6)  List of applicable civil and criminal penalties for permit violations, and any applicable compliance schedules (which may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law or regulations); 
(7)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the industrial waste to be discharged to the public sewer; 
(8)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(9)  Notice that the flow and/or pollutant loadings in the permit are temporary or subject to future modification, as in cases of limited reserve capacity in the city's treatment plant. 
(10)  Requirements for gradual phasing in and/or out of specified pollutants in the waste, when the city finds that sudden changes in concentration may interfere with treatment; 
(11)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities, including protection from flooding and any all-weather roads necessary for access; 
(12)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports according to subsection 106-69(c), (d); 
(13)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges as defined in section 106-66; 
(14)  Identification of specific permitted waste streams; 
(15)  Location of discharge point(s); 
(16)  Controls on batch dumping; 
(17)  Requirements for toxic organic plans and/or solvent management programs; 
(18)  Requirements for calibration of flow meters; 
(19)  Requirements for periodic cleanout (with documentation) of tanks, sumps, and grease traps; 
(20)  Requirements for operation of pretreatment facilities; 
(21)  Requirements for waste minimalization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewage works; 
(22)  Requirements for documenting the disposal of toxic pollutants outside the sewage works, where appropriate; 
(23)  Compliance schedules or a requirement for the user to submit a schedule; 
(24)  Stipulated administrative penalties up to $1,000.00 per violation for further violations; and 
(25)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division. 
(f)  Duration of permit. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subsection (e) are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(g)  Reporting of changes. The industrial user shall promptly notify the city in writing of any significant changes in the data which was required for the permit application. Items which must be reported include the following: 
(1)  Changes in ownership and mailing address; 
(2)  Significant changes in operations, processes, and products, including any change in the SIC number or any increase inflow of 20 percent or greater; 
(3)  Changes in strength or volume of industrial waste, including any new pollutants; 
(4)  Any changes in the layout of sewers carrying industrial wastes; 
(5)  Major changes in plant employment, production schedule, and pretreatment facility schedule; 
(6)  Any conditions which could increase the possibility of an accidental discharge; and 
(7)  Changes in type or amount of toxic pollutants scheduled for disposal outside the sewage works. 
A permit may not be assigned to a new owner or to a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner to which a permit is assigned shall comply with the conditions of that permit. Permits issued to new owners or due to changed operation shall be subject to the fee charged for a new permit. 
(h)  Suspension and revocation. Any industrial user who commits the following violations of this division is subject to having his permit revoked and services terminated according to the procedure of section 106-75: 
(1)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application; 
(2)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(3)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(4)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(5)  Refusal of reasonable and timely access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or examination of records; 
(6)  Violation of conditions of the permit, including effluent limits, other pretreatment standards, and compliance schedule; 
(7)  Failure to pay user charges (including pretreatment fees) when due; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines and penalties; or 
(9)  Refusal to comply with emergency notices issued by the city under section 106-77 of this division. 
The permit may also be revoked for cessation of operation with no evidence of intention to resume operation: 
The permit may be reinstated only after all violations have been corrected, any applicable fines or damages have been paid to the city, and provisions have been made to prevent recurrence of the violation. Any disconnection and reconnection shall be at the expense of the user. 
(i)  Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user: 
    When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the NPDES permit, state permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be immediately available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Waste constituents and characteristics and other effluent data defined in 40 CFR (2)302 will not be recognized as confidential information. 
    Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency (except as noted above) or to the general public by the city unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(j)  Inactive permit status. The city may place any permit in an inactive status in cases where no industrial wastes expected to be discharged over an extended period of time. Such cases include temporary suspension of existing discharges of industrial wastes, or long-term or indefinite postponements of proposed discharges. As long as a permit remains in inactive status, the city may suspend reporting, monitoring, and/or inspection requirements to the extent warranted by the circumstances. 
    The city may move any inactive permit back to active status at the request of the user, or in event of actual or imminent resumption of discharge of industrial waste. 
(k)  Cancellation of permits for former industrial users. The city may cancel a permit for an industrial waste discharge and allow discharge without a permit in cases where a permit is no longer required. Such cases are as follows: 
(1)  Industries which were permitted under previous ordinance requirements, but for which a permit is no longer mandatory because of adoption of this division or subsequent revisions. 
(2)  Industries which no longer meet any of the criteria under which a permit is mandatory because of: 
a.  Major changes in operations; 
b.  Diversion of waste streams away from the sewage works; 
c.  Changes in federal regulations and/or application of regulations which cause the industry to be no longer subject to categorical standards; and/or 
d.  Determination by the city that a non-categorical industry does not meet the criterion in item (4) of the definition of a significant industrial user in section 106-66. 
In such cases of permit cancellations; the user may continue to discharge as a non-industrial user unless his service is terminated according to other provisions of this division. 
The city shall notify the approval authority before or after such permit cancellations, as may be required by the approval authority. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § II, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-68. - Control of admissible wastes. 
(a)  General. Industrial wastes which do not violate the provisions of section 106-70, and which meet any pretreatment standards and requirements which may be applicable, may be discharged into the sewage works upon obtaining a permit according to section 106-67. 
    Septage, waste-activated sludge, or grease trap waste may be discharged at the treatment plant at designated locations according to subsection (i) below, provided the hauler meets all city requirements including permitting. 
(b)  Monitoring facilities. Each significant industrial user shall provide and maintain at his own expense one or more control manholes with such monitoring facilities as may be required for the type of operation and industrial waste involved. The purpose of these facilities shall be to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer(s). The monitoring facility(ies) should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility(ies) to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that they will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
    In cases where regulated waste streams are mixed with other regulated waste streams or with unregulated waste streams before discharge, the city may require the control manhole(s) to be upstream from the mixing point(s). The city may require more than one control manhole in cases where two or more industrial waste streams originate in the same establishment and, in the opinion of the city, require separate monitoring. There shall be ample room in or near such control manholes or facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
    Whether constricted on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Facilities shall be protected from flooding and shall have an all-weather access road. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
    All sampling and flow measurement equipment used in control manholes shall be calibrated at the expense of the user at least semiannually with written verification submitted to the city. This equipment shall also be subject to calibration by the city, unless other arrangements acceptable to the city are made. 
    Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, maintained in good working order, safe from flooding, and accessible at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility accessible and in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  Flow measurement. The following provisions shall apply to all users, whether residential, industrial, or other: 
    The water consumption for any user during the previous month from all sources shall ordinarily be the basis for computing the sewage flow. Water supplied by the city shall be determined from the meter records of the water department. If any user obtains all or part of his water supply from private wells, surface water, or other suppliers, he shall furnish the city with certified meter readings, copies of water billings, or other evidence of the amount of water consumption during the month. 
    Any user who wishes to measure his sewage flow directly may at his own expense install and maintain a recording flow meter. The reading obtained from this meter shall become the basis for computing the sewage flow, provided the meter: 
(1)  Is of a type approved by the city; 
(2)  Remains properly calibrated; 
(3)  Is accessible for reading and calibration by city personnel; and 
(4)  Is verified semi-annually for accuracy, with a verification report submitted to the city, at the user's expense. Verification and calibration shall be provided by a certified instrument technician at the user's expense. 
    Should meter readings indicate that the effluent flow meter is inaccurate, the city shall notify the user, in writing, and the user shall verify that the reading is correct or have the meter repaired, recalibrated, or replaced as necessary. The city shall adjust the billing immediately to reflect a predetermined percentage of water consumption for the sewer charge. 
    Should meter readings the next month indicate that the meter is still inaccurate; the city shall adjust the sewer charge to reflect 100 percent of water consumption. This charge shall remain in effect until the user provides written notification and verification that the meter has been repaired and recalibrated, and is recording effluent flow accurately. 
    In lieu of a permanent recording flow meter, a user may apply for a reduction in the volume of computed sewage flow by using separate water supply meters for water not returned to the sewer. The user shall provide all necessary verification to the city, including flow and piping diagrams as required. 
    If an unusually large amount of water has been used for watering lawns throughout the city because of dry weather, the city may adjust computed sewage flow to reflect the estimated amount of such usage. 
(d)  Sampling and analyses of wastes. 
(1)  All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the pretreatment coordinator or other parties approved by EPA. 
(2)  Detection limits for all applicable pollutants shall be no greater than specified in the appropriate criteria above. For sampling and testing required by specific instructions of the EPA or the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, the instructions from that agency shall govern. 
(3)  Samples shall be taken at intervals to be established by the city (1) to control the quality of industrial waste and/or (2) to determine surcharges. In all cases the sampling shall be performed often enough to be representative of average effluent quality. 
(4)  All routine sampling and testing shall be performed by (or at the expense of) the user unless the city specifies otherwise under contract or permit provisions. The city shall have the right to perform its own sampling and testing at any reasonable time in order to check the accuracy of the user's testing. The city shall also have the right to require sample splitting upon proper notice. 
(5)  For all required sampling performed by the user, chain of custody documents from sample collection through final analysis shall be maintained in the user's records with copies included with all laboratory reports submitted to the city. Records shall be retained for at least three years per subsection 106-69(i). 
(e)  Pretreatment. Industrial users must comply with any applicable pretreatment standards or requirements in accordance with sections 106-69 and 106-71. 
(f)  Traps. Where necessary to prevent the discharge of grease, oil, flammable substances, sand, or other harmful wastes into the sewage works, a user shall provide at his own expense a trap to intercept these substances. Traps shall not be required for private living quarters or dwellings, unless the city has observed problems in the sewage works resulting from the discharge from such dwellings. 
    Traps shall be required for all schools, restaurants, cafeterias, car washes, automotive services (including service stations), hospitals, nursing homes, and other commercial establishments for which, in the opinion of the city's pretreatment coordinator, a trap is necessary for protection of the sewage works. The owner or operator of an establishment shall have the right to appeal the pretreatment coordinator's decision to the water utilities manager. 
    The pretreatment coordinator may waive the requirement for a grease trap provided the user can verify that only domestic sewage is being discharged, with no floor drains or process water. The pretreatment coordinator may require testing by the user in connection with his request. 
    All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for easy cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil traps shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All traps shall be maintained by the user, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
    Each trap in active use shall be cleaned at least once every 60 days (unless the city specifies otherwise). Cleaning more frequently than 60 days may be specified by the city's pretreatment coordinator. Any user desiring a schedule less frequent than 60 days shall submit a request to the pretreatment coordinator along with testing (as required by the pretreatment coordinator) and copies of the cleaning records for the last four trap cleanings. 
    The user shall maintain written verification of the date when each trap is cleaned, with the location and identity of the trap clearly defined. Unless otherwise allowed by the city, such verification shall be provided by the commercial firm performing the cleaning. Such verifications shall be kept on site and available to the city for inspection and copying for a minimum of three years. 
    The city may assess penalties for grease trap violations according to the rate ordinance. 
    Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(g)  Dilution. Dilution of wastes by increased use of process water, or by any other methods, will not be acceptable as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this division or in the applicable national pretreatment standard or local pretreatment requirement. 
(h)  Slug discharges. Any industrial user experiencing a slug discharge, as defined in [section] 106-66 (definitions) of this division, shall immediately notify the city. 
(i)  Septage and other hauled wastes. 
(1)  Transporter registration. Any person wishing to: 
a.  Transport septage, waste activated sludge, or grease trap wastes from sources within the city; or 
b.  Dispose of any of these wastes at the city sewage works (regardless of source) shall obtain a permit from the pretreatment coordinator for each company or individual hauling such wastes. 
Haulers with city permits shall maintain copies of all city and state permits at their designated place of business and in each vehicle operated under the permit. These documents shall be available to the operating staff of the city treatment plant at the time of delivery. 
Each permit shall be for the term of one [year], with annual permit fee according to the rate ordinance. Application for permit renewal shall be made at least 30 days before expiration. The permit shall be non-transferable without the approval of the city. 
(2)  Vehicles/equipment. 
a.  Marking and identification. Owners or operators of vacuum pump trucks shall mark each truck to show the company name, city, telephone number(s), and city and state permit numbers. 
b.  Sanitation standards. All vehicles and equipment used for the collection and transportation of the waste shall be operated and maintained to prevent loss of liquid or solid waste materials to prevent health and safety hazards to operating personnel and the public. 
c.  Incompatible wastes. Mixing of incompatible wastes (wastes that have different processing, storage, or disposal requirements) within the same vacuum truck for disposal at the city treatment plant is prohibited. 
d.  Sight gauges. All vehicles used to transport wastes regulated by this permit shall be equipped with sight gauges to determine the volume of the waste delivered. Gauges shall show what percentage of the tank capacity is filled. The city may require proof of calibration of sight gauges. 
(3)  Inspection. All transport vehicles will be subject to inspection by the city for sight gauges, city and state registration, and truck marking. 
A sample of the waste may be taken at the plant prior to unloading the truck. If the sample results prove unacceptable, the hauler will be responsible for the proper disposal of the waste elsewhere. 
(4)  Recordkeeping. Persons who collect and transport waste under this permit shall maintain a record of each collection. Such records shall be in the form of a trip ticket, including: 
a.  Name, address, telephone number, city registration number, and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality registration number of transporter. 
b.  Name, signature, address, and telephone number of the person who generated the waste and the date and time collected. 
c.  Type(s) and amount(s) of all waste collected and transported. 
d.  Name(s) and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and disposing of the waste. 
e.  Name and signature of the facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the type(s) and amount of waste(s) received. This applies whether the wastes are disposed of at the city treatment plant or elsewhere. 
In cases where a load of waste is rejected by the city, the rejection shall be noted on the trip ticket or on a supplementary ticket. The treatment plant operating staff shall be provided with a copy of all relevant information concerning the rejected load. 
Copies of the trip tickets shall be retained for five years and shall be readily available for review by the superintendent and/or the pretreatment coordinator. 
(5)  Accidental discharge or spills. In the event of an accidental discharge or spill of waste, the collector or transporter must take appropriate action to protect human health and the environment. Transporters are responsible for cleanup and for reporting spills to the city's pretreatment coordinator; to the city health inspector, if health hazards exist; and to local law enforcement if there is a possibility of a traffic hazard. 
(6)  Time and place for wastes hauled to plant. Wastes shall be hauled to the treatment plant for disposal during hours designated by the city. The wastes shall be discharged into that portion of the plant designated by the city, provided: 
a.  The plant is capable, in the opinion of the plant operator, of receiving and treating the wastes without inconvenience to the operating staff, overloading, or degradation of plant effluent. 
b.  The city verifies by inspection that no toxic wastes, incompatible wastes (such as mixed septage and grease trap wastes), or other unacceptable wastes are present. The city reserves the right to require laboratory testing of the wastes at no cost to the city. 
c.  Grease trap wastes are delivered within 24 hours after pumpout.* 
*Grease trap wastes, if disposed of at the city treatment plant, must be delivered to the plant within 24 hours after pumping from grease traps. 
d.  Inspection and treatment fees are paid according to the rate ordinance and/or the user charge ordinance. 
(7)  Penalties. 
a.  The following may result in cancellation of the city permit and/or loss of authorization to dispose of waste at the city's facilities: 
1.  Failure of a transporter to maintain records, trip tickets, or other documents properly, without falsification; 
2.  Failure of a transporter to submit to the city's pretreatment personnel correct information on a permit application by the required due date; 
3.  Unauthorized discharge of waste; and 
4.  Failure of a transporter to maintain a current state permit and to comply with state regulations. 
b.  The city may also take any action authorized by law to secure compliance including: 
1.  Assessment of administrative penalties of $50.00 per violation per day up to $5,000.00 maximum for the violation. 
2.  Seeking civil penalties as prescribed by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § III, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-69. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Required pretreatment. Pretreatment of industrial wastes shall be required under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When an industrial user is subject to: 
a.  Unmodified national pretreatment standards; 
b.  Locally modified national pretreatment standards; 
c.  Local pretreatment requirements; 
d.  General prohibitions per subsection 106-70(b)(1); or 
e.  Local limits per section 106-70(d). 
and the industrial waste violates the applicable standard or requirement for one or more pollutants; 
or 
(2)  When the industrial waste is, in the opinion of the city: 
a.  Harmful to the structures; processes, or operations of the sewage disposal works; 
b.  Harmful to the receiving stream; 
c.  Detrimental to any existing or proposed method of sludge use or disposal; 
or, 
(3)  In cases where the treatment plant cannot safely accept the proposed pollutant loading from an industrial user because of limited treatment capacity. (In cases where there is adequate unused capacity, but that capacity is allocated or permitted to other industrial users or user classes for future growth, the city may reserve the right to require pretreatment when needed in the future.) 
When pretreatment of industrial wastes is required, the industrial user shall provide, operate, and maintain at his own expense such pretreatment facilities as may be necessary to render the wastes acceptable for discharge. The user may also be required to submit schedules for compliance and other reports in accordance with subsections (c) through (g). 
(b)  Applicable standards. The city shall notify any industrial user of any of the following requirements to which that user is subject: 
(1)  National pretreatment standard (with or without local modification). The notification shall include any schedule of compliance required in the standard. 
(2)  General prohibitions (subsection 106-70(b)(1)) or local limits (subsection 106-70(d)) to the extent that the city can determine such applicability. 
(3)  Any local pretreatment requirement, including a compliance schedule, to which that user is subject. The city shall also state the reasons for the requirement. 
(c)  Reporting requirements-categorical industries. The city shall require all industries subject to categorical standards to submit the following reports: 
(1)  Baseline report. This is the first report due, with the due date according to subsection 106-69(d). This report shall contain the following information (with subitems a-g. applicable to both existing and new sources): 
a.  Name, address, telephone number, location, and ownership of the industrial user; 
b.  Supervisors (including shift supervisors) and other contact persons. 
c.  List of any environmental permits held by or for the facility, including any permits related to transportation of waste materials. 
d.  Nature, average rate of production, SIC of the operation(s) carried out by the user, and schematic process diagram including points of discharge from regulated processes. 
e.  Average and maximum daily discharge from the user into the sewage works in gallons per day (1) from regulated process streams, (2) from other streams if necessary for use of combined formula, and (3) as totals for each discharge point. Discharges shall be measured unless otherwise allowed by the city. 
f.  The nature and concentration (determined according to subsection (h)) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process from the user, and identification of the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The concentration shall be reported as both an average and a daily maximum level. If an equivalent concentration limit has been calculated in accordance with the standard, this adjusted concentration limit shall also be submitted to the city for approval. 
If required by the applicable standard or by the city, the mass of regulated pollutants shall be reported in lieu of the concentration. 
Copies of the laboratory reports shall be provided. 
g.  Type and amount of any toxic pollutants brought into the plant, or generated within the plant, and scheduled for disposal outside the sewage works. 
New sources shall provide the best practical estimates of the information noted in subitems e. and f., above. In addition, new sources shall submit the information in subitem h. 
h.  Proposed method of pretreatment, if any, for meeting applicable pretreatment standards. 
In addition to subitems a-g., above; the city shall require existing sources to submit the following information: 
i.  A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user (as defined in section 106-66) and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating: 
1.  Whether standards and requirements are being met consistently, and if not, 
2.  Whether additional O & M and/or pretreatment will be needed to meet the standards and requirements; and 
j.  If additional pretreatment and/or O & M is required, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide these measures. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable standard. The schedule shall be prepared according to subsection (f). 
If a standard is modified for the user, either through an equivalent concentration limit or through a variance approved by the approval authority, all information in subitems i. and j. shall be based on the modified limits. If the modification occurs after the user submits the baseline report, the user shall submit amended information for subitems i. and j. within 60 days after approval of the modification. 
The baseline report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user (as defined in section 106-66) and certified by a qualified professional. The authorize user shall include the certification statement specified in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). 
(2)  Initial compliance reports. 
a.  Due date. This report shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator within 90 days after the following dates: 
1.  For an existing source, the date for final compliance with applicable standards and requirements; or 
2.  For a new source; the commencement of the introduction of industrial waste into the sewage works. 
b.  Contents. The report shall include the following information: 
1.  All information listed in subsection (c)(1) above (subitems e., f., and i.) 
2.  (For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city) Reasonable estimate of long term production rate. 
3.  (For other industrial users subject to pretreatment standards specifying pollutant quantities proportional to operation or production) Actual production during sampling period. 
c.  Certification. The compliance report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user: (as defined in section 106-66) and certified by a qualified professional. The authorized representative of the user shall include the certification statement specified in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). 
(3)  Periodic compliance reports. 
a.  Due dates. These reports are due periodically after the initial compliance report during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard, by the pretreatment coordinator, or by the approval authority. At the discretion of the pretreatment coordinator and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the pretreatment coordinator may agree to alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted. 
b.  Contents. 
1.  Type of facility; 
2.  Type of discharge; 
3.  Nature and concentration (determined according to subsection (h)) of pollutants in the industrial waste which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements. 
4.  The average and maximum daily flow of: 
i.  All process units in the user's facility which are governed by the standards and requirements; 
ii.  Any other streams if necessary for use of combined formula; 
iii.  Totals for each discharge point; and 
iv.  Any other streams if required by city. 
5.  Production rate (long-term or for sampling period, as specified in subsection (2) above). 
6.  Whether the applicable standards and requirements are being met consistently. 
7.  A description of its operations and/or any changes in operations since the previous report. 
8.  A description of any additional O & M modifications and/or pretreatment equipment necessary to achieve compliance for non-compliant discharges. 
9.  Proof that tanks; sumps, and/or grease traps have been cleaned according to the required schedule. 
10.  A copy of the laboratory report for the required sampling and analysis. 
11.  Documentation of any disposal of toxic pollutants outside the sewage works. 
12.  Any other items which the city may require under other provisions of this division: 
c.  Mass limitations. The pretreatment coordinator may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subitem b. above shall indicate the mass pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the industrial waste of the user. 
d.  Certification. The compliance report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user (as defined in section 106-66) and certified by a qualified professional. The authorized representative of the user shall include the certification statement specified in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). 
e.  Waiver. These reports may be waived to the extent that the city performs the sampling and analysis and otherwise gathers information for the reports. 
(d)  Reporting requirements - Permitted non-categorical industries. The city shall require initial and/or periodic (monthly, quarterly, or semi-annual) self-monitoring reports from any permitted industrial user. (The reports may be waived to the extent that the city performs the sampling and analysis and otherwise gathers the information.) The information required may include any or all of the following: 
(1)  Identification of the industrial user: 
(2)  List of any applicable environmental permits, including any permits related to transportation of waste materials. 
(3)  A description of its operations and/or any changes in operations since the previous report. 
(4)  Process flows at all points specified by the city (average and/or daily maximum as specified by city). 
(5)  Nature and concentration (determined according to subsection (h) below) of all pollutants required by the city to be reported. 
(6)  A certification statement by the industrial user indicating compliance or non-compliance with the applicable pretreatment requirements. The authorized representative of the user shall include the certification statement specified in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). 
(7)  A description of any additional O & M modifications and/or pretreatment equipment necessary to achieve compliance for non-compliant dischargers. 
(8)  Compliance schedules and related reports. 
(9)  Proof that tanks, sumps, and/or grease traps have been cleaned according to the required schedule. 
(10)  Proof of calibration of effluent meters and/or any other meters used for billing and/or monitoring reports. 
(11)  A copy of the laboratory report for the required sampling and analysis. 
(12)  Type and amount of any toxic pollutants brought into the plant or generated within the plant, and scheduled for disposal outside the plant. 
(13)  Documentation of any disposal of toxic pollutants outside the sewage works. 
(e)  Resampling requirements. In the event the sampling and analysis indicates non-compliance for one or more of the pollutant parameters, the industrial user shall notify the city of the violation within 24 hours after becoming aware of it. The user shall also resample for all non-compliant parameters. The repeat sampling and analysis must be completed and a report submitted to the city within 30 days after receipt of the laboratory report indicating non-compliance. The industrial user shall continue to monitor the non-compliant parameter on a 30-day schedule until compliance is achieved. The industrial user shall submit copies of all laboratory reports to the city. 
    Resampling will not automatically be required if the city samples the user's effluent either monthly, or between the time of the user's sampling and the time the user receives the corresponding test results. Resampling may be required, however, on the basis of the city's test results. 
(f)  Schedule for pretreatment facilities. In the event that any of the reports required by subsection (c) or (d) indicate the need for pretreatment facilities, the industrial user shall provide the city with a scheduled for facility installation. The following conditions shall apply to the required schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and/or requirements (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, beginning routine operation, etc.). 
(2)  No increment referred to in paragraph (1) shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the pretreatment coordinator including, as a minimum, (1) whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, (2) the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress; reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the pretreatment coordinator. 
(g)  Submission-of plans. Any industrial user required to construct pretreatment facilities shall submit to the city detailed plans for their construction and for their operating procedures. The city must approve these plans before construction begins. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(h)  Sampling and analysis for reports. The reports required by subsections (c)[(1)f., (2)b.1. (referring to (1)f.), (3)b.3.], (d)(4), and (e) shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the industrial waste, including the flow and the nature and concentration (or production and mass where applicable) of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable standard (or by the city in cases of sampling due to city requirements). The nature of the sampling (grab, flow composite, or time composite), the number of samples, sample preservation, and holding time shall be as directed by the city, but in no case less stringent than required by the standard or by 40 CFR 403. Sampling locations shall be as directed by the city. 
    Sampling for these reports shall be conducted during the reporting period and shall be representative of daily operations and conditions occurring during that period. If any pollutant is monitored (according to the requirements of this subsection) more frequently than required by the city, the results of the additional monitoring shall be included in the report. 
    All sampling and analysis procedures shall be as required in subsection 106-68(d). 
    The laboratory report shall identify the industrial facility and show all times, dates, sampling locations, and analytical methods. The industrial user shall certify that the sampling is representative of normal work cycles and operating conditions. The report shall include documentation of the chain of custody from sampling through testing. 
(i)  Recordkeeping. User subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities (a) required by this division or (b) undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall indicate the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates and by whom analyses were performed; lie analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records hall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall automatically be extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention time by the city. 
(j)  Operation of pretreatment facilities. 
(1)  General. Any industrial user who operates pretreatment facilities as a requirement for meeting pretreatment standards or requirements shall normally: 
a.  Keep the pretreatment facilities in full operation at all times during discharge of industrial waste to the sewage works, and 
b.  Route all designated industrial waste through such facilities prior to discharge. 
(2)  Applicability. This requirement shall apply only to those specific waste streams for which pretreatment is required by permit. Pretreatment operation is required only during periods of discharge of designated waste, plus such startup operations as are necessary to prevent inadequate treatment. 
(3)  Bypass. 
a.  Definitions. 
1.  Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
2.  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
b.  Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
c.  Notice. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
(4)  [Notice of bypass.] An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the city within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
a.  Prohibition of bypass. 
1.  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless; 
i.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
ii.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
iii.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under paragraph (3) of this section. 
b.  The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(k)  Public notification by city. The city shall annually publish in the Nacogdoches Daily Sentinel a list of industrial users in significant noncompliance with the city's pretreatment program (as defined in [section] 106-66) for the preceding 12-month period. The city may at its discretion publish information on permit violations, including any corrective or remedial measures by the violator, at any time. 
(l)  Annual inspection. The city shall inspect each significant industrial user which holds an active permit at least once per year. The city shall, in conjunction with the inspection, sample all waste streams containing industrial waste. Minor industries shall be inspected at least once every three years; although sampling need not be performed unless applicable to the permit. 
    All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § IV, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-70. - Prohibited or limited discharges. 
(a)  Infiltration/inflow sources. No person shall discharge any stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, foundation drains, subsurface drainage, downspouts, yard drains, ponds, or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer, or into any building sewer or industrial sewer connected thereto. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into storm sewers or to natural outlets approved by the city. 
    All building drains, building sewers, industrial sewers; and sanitary sewers leading to the public sewers, including connections thereto, shall be constructed and maintained so as to exclude any ground or surface water from entering the sewer. The city shall require the owner of any of these facilities to correct at his own expense any leaks or other conditions allowing the entry of groundwater or surface water into the sewage works. This provision shall apply to all such leaks or conditions whether they exist prior to the effective date of this division or occur at a later date. 
    The requirements of the plumbing ordinance, where applicable, shall govern the construction of these facilities. All sewer repairs shall be inspected by the city in the same manner as new facilities. Unpolluted industrial process water (if not returned to a process) may be discharged into storm sewers, natural outlets, or the sewage works, as agreed on by the user, the city, and any applicable state or federal regulatory agencies. Any new discharge of such water into the sewage works shall require the written approval of the manager and/or the pretreatment coordinator. The city may require written justification for any existing or proposed discharge of unpolluted water, based on factors such as economic considerations and regulatory requirements for direct dischargers. In the case of cooling water, the city may require cooling before discharge to the sewage works or otherwise. 
(b)  Prohibited discharges. 
(1)  General prohibitions. No user shall discharge or otherwise introduce into the sewage works any pollutant or sewage which causes pass through or interference. This prohibition applies to all industrial and nonindustrial users (regardless of whether they are subject to categorical standards, pretreatment requirements, and/or permitting) and also to all waste haulers. 
(2)  Specific. No person shall discharge either directly or indirectly any of the following described substances, materials, waters or waste: 
a.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the sewage works, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degree Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
b.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage treatment plant; 
c.  Any solids, slurries, or viscous substances of such character and amounts as to be capable of obstructing the flow in sewers, or otherwise interfering with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshlings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, grease trap cleanings, or bulk solids; 
d.  Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (CBOD, etc.), discharged at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either, singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference; 
e.  Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Centigrade), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case any sewage which raises the temperature at the upstream end of the treatment plant above 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Centigrade); 
f.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
g.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sewage works in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
h.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except for those wastes authorized in subsection 106-68(i) of this division, and then only at the treatment plant according to subsection 106-68(i); 
i.  Any water or waste which contain wax, grease, or oil, plastic or other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees to 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
j.  Any garbage except properly shredded garbage as defined in section 106-66; 
k.  Any noxious or malodorous substance, which either singly or by interaction with other substances is capable of causing objectionable odors, or hazard to life; or forms solids in concentrations exceeding limits established in subsections (c), (d), and (e); or creates any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual provisions, alteration, or expense to handle such material; or can prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; 
l.  Any wastes or waters containing suspended or dissolved solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant or in the public sewage works; 
m.  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance such as plating or heat treating wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to persons or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving stream of the sewage treatment plant; 
n.  Any materials causing excessive discoloration to the treatment plant effluent, unusual or immediate biochemical oxygen demand, or hydrogen sulfide concentrations sufficient to cause explosion hazards or structural corrosion; 
o.  Any antibiotics, bactericidal solutions, or bacteriostatic solutions, unless rendered ineffective by pretreatment; 
p.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
q.  Medical wastes, unless specifically authorized in a permit; 
r.  Sewage causing alone or in conjunction with other substances, the treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity test; or 
s.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the treatment plant 
(c)  Limited discharges (general). Except in concentrations, or with provisions stipulated herein, no person shall discharge either directly or indirectly to the sewer works waters or wastes containing any of the following: 
(1)  Free or emulsified oil and/or grease exceeding 100 ppm if, in the opinion of the city, it appears probable that such wastes: 
a.  Can deposit grease and oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
b.  Can overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
c.  Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving waters without being affected by normal sewage treatment processes; or 
d.  Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to the excessive quantities; 
(2)  Any radioactive wastes greater than the allowable releases as specified by current United States Bureau of Standards handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity; 
(3)  Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas on acidification in excess of 0.5 ppm by weight as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the public sewers; 
(4)  Chlorides in excess of 250 mg/1; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand. 
(d)  Technically-based local limits. The allowable concentrations of specified substances in mg/1, determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with "standard methods," are as follows. These limits are approved by the approval authority as being technically based local limits, derived according to procedures specified or approved by the EPA for protection of the receiving stream, the treatment process, and the city's sludge disposal method. These limits may not be modified without the approval of the approval authority. 
Not To Exceed Substance Monthly 
Average Daily 
Average Daily 
Composite Aluminum -- 2.9 2.9 Arsenic -- 0.3 0.3 Cadmium -- 0.025 0.05 Chromium (total) -- 3.4 3.4 Chromium (hexavalent) -- 0.0012+ 0.0012+ Copper 0.9 -- 2 Cyanide -- 0.1 0.25 Lead 0.04 -- 0.1 Mercury -- 0.000* 0.000* Nickel -- 1.5 3.1 Silver -- 0.25 0.5 Zinc 0.65 -- 0.7  
*For mercury, permit compliance/noncompliance determinations will be based on the minimum analytical level of 0.0002 mg/L. Monitored discharge concentrations measured as less than 0.0002 mg/L shall be deemed to be compliant with the mercury limit. Mercury concentrations measured below that value shall be reported as "<0.0002 mg/L" and shall be interpreted as zero values for compliance purposes. 
+For Hexavalent Chromium, permit compliance determinations will be based on the MAL (minimum analytical level). Monitored discharge concentrations measured as less than the MAL shall be deemed to be compliant with the limit. 
(e)  Other hazardous metals. The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals in mg/I, determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with "Standard methods," are: 
NOT TO EXCEED Metal Average Daily Composite Grab Sample Barium 1 2 4 Manganese 1 2 3 Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2  
(f)  Other hazardous materials. No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the city specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. Prohibited hazardous materials include, but are not limited to: Antimony, beryllium, bismuth, boron (greater than 1 mg/I), Cobalt, iron (greater than .5 mg/1), molybdenum, rhenium, strontium, tellurium, uranyl-ion, herbicides, fungicides, and pesticides; and any substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. 
(g)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  General. Each user as specified in subsection (2) below shall provide protection from (a) accidental discharge of materials prohibited or regulated by this division and (b) slug discharges. The user shall provide and maintain the necessary facilities at his own expense. 
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection (as specified in subsection (3) below) shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. No new user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. 
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
In the case of an accidental discharge; it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the treatment plant, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties; or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. Such notice shall be replaced promptly by updated notices as issued by the city. 
(2)  Applicability. The requirements of this subsection shall apply to each industrial user and also to each commercial (non-industrial) user, including dry industries, which the city has reason to believe may have the potential for accidental discharges of prohibited or regulated materials. Each existing user which the city determines to be subject to the requirements of this subsection shall submit the necessary plans upon 90 days' notice by the city. In lieu of the required plans, any user may provide verification to the satisfaction of the city that such plans are inapplicable. 
(3)  Requirements for plans. The plans required by this subsection shall address the following as a minimum: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
b.  Description, location, and storage facilities for stored chemicals; 
c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge, including names or positions of responsible personnel; and 
d.  Procedures and facilities to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such measures include, but are not limited to inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(4)  Periodic evaluation by city. At least every two years the city shall perform the following evaluations: 
a.  Adequacy of each existing plan for control of accidental discharges and slugs. 
b.  Possible need for such plans for users who have previously verified the inapplicability of such plans, or who have not previously been identified as needing them. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § V, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-71. - Establishment of standards. 
(a)  National pretreatment standards. Each existing national pretreatment standard (with any authorized local modification) shall be binding on those industrial users covered by that standard. Any new industrial users who are covered by one or more standards, or existing users who become covered by such standard(s) because of new or changed operations, shall be governed by the pretreatment standards in the same manner as existing users. If the EPA should subsequently revise any existing standards or promulgate new standards, these revisions or new standards shall automatically be binding in the same manner as existing standards. 
(b)  Modification of pretreatment standards. If the city's treatment works is found to achieve consistent partial removal of one or more pollutants limited by national pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the standards. Upon approval of the approval authority, the city may modify one or more pollutant discharge limits in the pretreatment standards. These modified limits shall be binding upon all industrial users subject to the specific standards which have been modified. The modified limits shall remain in effect as long as the approval authority does not withdraw the authorization for the modification or revise the extent of modifications. 
(c)  Local pretreatment requirements. The city may develop specific limits for the following prohibited discharges and may incorporate such limits into this division or may publish them as a separate ordinance. 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the collection or treatment works; 
(2)  Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the collection or treatment works; 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants amounts which will obstruct the flow in sewers or otherwise interfere with the operation of the sewage treatment plant; 
(4)  Any pollutant; including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge of such volume and strength as to cause interference in the sewage treatment plant; and 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage treatment plant or raises the temperature of the treatment plant influent above 104°F. 
The city may develop other local pretreatment requirements not covered by pretreatment standards if it is found necessary to prevent interference with the treatment process, overloading of the sewage treatment plant, interference with sludge disposal, or stream pollution. These pretreatment requirements shall be incorporated into this division or shall be published as a separate ordinance. 
(d)  Termination or revision of local modifications. If the approval authority should: 
(1)  Withdraw its approval of any local modifications to national pretreatment standards, or 
(2)  Revise the extent of such modifications, 
The pretreatment standards with any remaining modifications shall become binding on all users covered by those standards. The users will be required to achieve compliance within the time schedule specified by the approval authority. 
(e)  State pretreatment standards. In the event that Texas becomes an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program, all applicable state pretreatment standards shall become binding on industrial users in lieu of national pretreatment standards. In the event that the State of Texas develops state pretreatment standards without an approved state pretreatment program, all applicable state pretreatment standards shall become binding to the extent that they are more stringent than the applicable national pretreatment standards. 
(f)  City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the sewage works. 
(g)  Notification of industries. The city shall promptly notify all affected industries in writing of: 
(1)  Any pretreatment standards which are in effect on the effective date of this division; 
(2)  Any new pretreatment standards or requirements, or any revisions to existing standards or requirements; 
(3)  Any local modifications to national pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Termination or revision of any local modifications to pretreatment standards; 
(5)  Any applicable state pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Any new or revised sampling, monitoring, or reporting requirements; 
(7)  Reclassification of industry as significant industrial user or otherwise; 
(8)  Reclassification of industry as subject to pretreatment standards or otherwise; or 
(9)  Any changes in permit status, such changing to active or inactive status. 
(10)  The required notice to industries shall include any appropriate schedules of compliance as specified by the approval authority or by the city. 
(h)  Uniform application. Any limitation on quantity, concentration, or discharge rate of a specific pollutant shall be applied uniformly to all new or existing discharges within any industrial category. This applies to national pretreatment standards or any local modifications thereto; limitations on prohibited discharges as listed in subsection (c); any state pretreatment standards; and any other local pretreatment requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § VI, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-72. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligibly break, damage, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the city sewage works. The city may pursue all criminal and civil penalties to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person violating this section of the division. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § VII, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-73. - Substances not discharged into sewage works. 
(a)  No person may discharge any substances, whether normal domestic sewage, admissible industrial waste, prohibited substances, or unpolluted water, into the sewage works except through a building sewer or industrial sewer as authorized by the city. This provision shall not apply to city forces or contractors in the course of performing construction, maintenance, cleaning, or testing of the sewage works. This provision shall also not apply to liquid waste delivered to the treatment plant and accepted by the operating staff according to subsection 106-68(i) of this division. 
(b)  The city may require information from any industry within the city regarding the type and amount of toxic pollutants scheduled for disposal outside the city sewage works. This requirement shall apply to all industries whether dry industries or subject to permitting as industrial users. 
(c)  The city shall require documentation of the time and method of transportation and disposal of toxic pollutants outside the sewage works within ten days after removal from the plant, unless otherwise specified in the applicable discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § VIII, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-74. - User charges. 
    The following user charges shall be assessed and collected as prescribed by the rate ordinance and/or the user charge ordinance: 
(1)  Collection and treatment charges for-normal domestic sewage and for industrial wastes. 
(2)  Pretreatment fees for industrial users subject to mandatory pretreatment of wastes. 
(3)  Treatment charges for septage, waste activated sludge, and grease trap wastes. 
(4)  Surcharges for parameters outside allowable values, or for grease trap violations. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § IX, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-75. - Billing. 
(a)  Billing procedure. All user charges for normal domestic sewage and industrial waste, including pretreatment fees, as well as all surcharges, shall be assessed and collected according to provisions of the rate ordinance and/or the user charge ordinance. 
(b)  Grounds for disconnection. Any of the following violations shall be sufficient reason to disconnect any and all water and/or sanitary sewer service provided by the city, after the prescribed notification and hearing process is carried out: 
(1)  Failure to pay monthly bills for city services when due, including all user charges for the sewage works. 
(2)  Violations by industrial users, as listed in subsection 106-67(h). 
(3)  Any other violations of this ordinance, when termination of services is prescribed by injunction according to subsection 106-76(d). 
Before terminating water and/or sanitary sewer services for nonpayment, the city shall notify the user of its intention and shall allow a minimum of ten days to show cause why such services shall not be terminated. 
[(c)]  Restoration of service. Reconnection shall be made only after: 
(1)  Payment of: 
a.  All outstanding charges for city services; 
b.  Any charge for late payment which may be provided in the city ordinance prescribing user charges; 
c.  Any lawfully assessed fines and damages; and 
d.  Disconnection and reconnection expenses. 
(2)  Evidence satisfactory to the pretreatment coordinator that restoration of service will not result in hazardous discharges to the sewage works (if applicable). 
(3)  Reinstatement of the user's discharge permit (if applicable). 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § X, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-76. - Enforcement powers. 
(a)  Access. Authorized personnel (from the city, the approval authority, or the EPA) bearing credentials and identification shall be permitted to gain ready access (within 15 minutes) at all reasonable times to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, calibration, examining, and copying records in accordance with provisions of this division. When a user has security measures requiring proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall arrange with its security guards for the pretreatment coordinator to enter without delay upon presenting suitable identification. 
    Properties to which such access must be granted include, but are not limited to, effluent sources, pretreatment systems, monitoring facilities, flow meters (when used for billing and/or monitoring purposes), control manholes, and any areas where records are kept to satisfy federal, state, or local requirements to assure compliance with pretreatment standards. The city, the approval authority, or the EPA shall also have a right to install such devices upon a user's property as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. 
    Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user (at his own expense) at the written or verbal request of the pretreatment coordinator and shall not be replaced. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the pretreatment coordinator has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and can demonstrate: 
(1)  Probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or 
(2)  The need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed (a) to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or (b) to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate city or state court. 
(c)  Minimum procedures in event of violation. 
(1)  General. Any person discovered to be violating this division shall, at a minimum, be subject to the following enforcement proceedings. (In cases of emergency, as defined in section 106-66, section 106-77 will apply. Severe or recurring violations may result in measures listed in subsections (d) through (f) below.) 
Except in an emergency, the city shall not terminate water and/or sewer service without due process of law as provided in this section or in subsection 106-75(b). 
a.  Upon identification of an industrial user's permit violation, the city shall notify the violating user by telephone and/or letter of the violation and request corrective action. 
b.  If additional monitoring indicates that the violation has not been corrected, the city shall provide a written notice of violation to the industrial user, indicating that it is in violation of its permit. The notice of violation shall require the violating user to submit to the city a written report explaining the cause of the violation, describing corrective measures, and specifying a compliance schedule under which it will implement said corrective measures. 
c.  If the industrial user fails to respond within 30 days after the notice of violation, or if the city finds its response inadequate, the city shall attempt to meet with the management of the user to develop corrective actions and a compliance schedule. 
d.  If the industrial user fails to agree to adequate corrective actions and a compliance schedule within 90 days after the notice of violation or fails to implement corrective actions in accordance with its compliance schedule, the city shall: 
1.  Assess an administrative penalty against the user and/or 
2.  Initiate legal action to assess a fine against the user. 
If the violation creates a potential health hazard or an upset condition at the city's sewage works, the city shall also initiate action to discontinue water and/or sewer service to the user. 
2.  Flexibility of action. The city Indy [may] at its option shorten the time frames listed above within this subsection, and/or skip one or more steps in cases where deemed necessary or appropriate by the superintendent and/or the pretreatment coordinator. Such cases include, but are not limited, to significant violators (as defined in section 106-66); incidents of harm to the treatment works and/or the environment; obvious failure to undertake corrective action; failure to respond to communications from the city; falsification of information provided to the city; and users with a history of serious, prolonged, or recurring noncompliance. 
3.  Significant violations. All significant violators (as defined in section 106-66) shall incur at the minimum an administrative fine, a stipulated penalty, and/or legal action to assess a fine, in addition to requirements for correcting and/or remediating the violation(s). Notice shall be served on the user within 30 days after identification of significant violation. 
4.  Stipulated penalties. The provisions of this subsection shall not prevent the city from assessing any stipulated penalties and/or surcharges specified in other portions of this division, in the rate ordinance, or in the users permit. 
(d)  Injunctive relief. The city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief against violators of this division in such city, county, state, or federal courts as may be deemed appropriate, where such action is necessary to achieve compliance. Injunctive relief may include: 
(1)  Specific performance of the division with respect to discharge standards, reporting requirements, payment of user charges; access to industrial properties, repair of private sewer leaks; or other provisions; 
(2)  Termination of service where necessary for compliance; 
(3)  Liquidated damages for any illegal discharges which result in: 
a.  Damage to the sewage works; 
b.  Excessive treatment costs; and/or 
c.  Fines for stream pollution; 
(4)  Civil penalties designed to recover any economic benefits which the user may have received through noncompliance, including avoided or delayed costs for compliance; and/or 
(5)  Environmental remediation if needed. 
A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a barrier against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(e)  Miscellaneous remedies. The city may take any or all of the following actions where such action is necessary to achieve compliance. None of these actions shall be a barrier against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(1)  Administrative penalties not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or $2,000.00 per administrative order. These penalties will be assessed by the pretreatment coordinator along with an administrative order citing the applicable violations. The user shall have the right of appeal to the water utilities manager, then (if unsuccessful) in city court. 
(2)  Consent orders or similar documents establishing a judicially enforceable agreement with a user. 
(3)  Show cause hearings in the appropriate city, county, or state court in which the user must show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The city shall serve any authorized representative of the user (as defined in section 106-66) with a notice stating the time and place for the heating; the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and an opportunity to show cause why the action should not be taken. The notice shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least three days before the hearing. 
(4)  Compliance orders or administrative orders imposing a schedule for compliance and, if appropriate, specific measures designed to assure compliance. The order may state that sewer service will be discontinued if compliance is not achieved within the specified time. 
(5)  Cease and desist orders requiring in mediate compliance even to the extent of halting operations. 
(6)  The requirement of a performance bond as a prerequisite for permit issuance or renewal in an amount determined by the city as necessary to assure consistent compliance. 
(7)  Issuance of a permit with a duration less than the standard duration. 
(8)  Referral to the approval authority for further enforcement action. 
(f)  Severe violations. The city may seek injunctive relief or may assess a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per day per violation against persons falling in the following categories: 
(1)  Willful violators of any provisions of this division; 
(2)  Persons refusing access or placement of equipment under the provisions of subsection (a); 
(3)  Persons not complying promptly with duly issued notices or agreements to correct violations; 
(4)  Persons discharging pollutants which can: 
a.  Cause structural damage to the sewage works; 
b.  Obstruct the collection lines; 
c.  Interfere with the treatment process; 
d.  Create fire or explosion hazard; or 
e.  Cause a violation of stream standards. 
(5)  Persons not complying with emergency notices issued by the city under section 106-77 of this division; 
(6)  Persons failing to comply with reporting or notification requirements; or 
(7)  Persons making false or fraudulent statements in connection with their sewer use. 
For violations of a monthly average permit limit, each day of discharged during the month may be considered a day of violation. 
(g)  Limits of inquiry. No person acting for the city under subsection (a) may inquire into the processes of any industrial user beyond that point having a direct bearing on the type and source of discharge into the sewage works. 
(h)  Staying of enforcement pending ordinance modifications. The enforcement procedures listed in this section of the division shall be stayed to the extent that the requirements in question are covered by the city-issued compliance schedule specified in subsection 106-67(d)(3) of this division as long as the industrial user remains in compliance with such compliance schedule. 
(i)  Act of God defense. 
(1)  The act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense [Texas Water Code §7.251] in an action brought in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit. 
(2)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall demonstrate through relevant evidence that: 
a.  An event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the sole cause of the event was an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe; and 
b.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the pretreatment coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit under the ordinance (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the event; 
2.  The time period of the event, including exact dates and times or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the event. 
(3)  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall have the burden of providing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe. 
(j)  Affirmative defense for prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in subsections 106-75(b)(1) and 106-75(b)(2) (items c. through g.) of this division if it can prove that: 
(1)  It did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and 
(2)  Either: 
a.  Limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
b.  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city's treatment plant was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(k)  Uniform application. All provisions of this division shall be impartially enforced for all users, or for all users within a specific category when applicable. No distinction shall be made between existing and new dischargers, or between existing and new haulers of septage, waste-activated sludge, and/or grease trap wastes. 
    All retail users of the sewage works, whether located inside or outside the city, shall be subject to the provisions of this division. In the event that any user outside the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city requests services, the city shall require the execution of any necessary service contracts to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(l)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, and each day that the violation continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a maximum fine of up to $2,000.00. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this division, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall limit in any manner the authority of the city to seek any injunctive or other civil relief available under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § XI, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-77. - Emergency procedures. 
(a)  Severe emergencies. The city shall take immediate action to stop any actual or imminent discharge of corrosive, flammable, toxic, organic, or other substances which can cause: 
(1)  Rapid deterioration of the sewage works; 
(2)  Major fire or explosion hazards; and/or 
(3)  Severe danger to the health or welfare of persons. 
    In the event of actual or imminent discharge as described in this subsection, the city shall, if necessary, shutoff any or all water and/or sewer services immediately. The city shall make all possible efforts to notify the affected user prior to shutting off services, so that the user may begin shutdown operations so as to minimize damage to his property. The water utilities manager and/or the pretreatment coordinator may, at his discretion, notify the user to take immediate action to stop or prevent such discharges in lieu of immediate shutoff of city services, provided such action is effective in eliminating the hazards described above. If the user fails to eliminate the hazard immediately and effectively, the city shall proceed at once to shut off water and/or sewer services. 
(b)  Less severe emergencies. The city shall notify a user immediately if an actual or imminent discharge from that user contains corrosive, toxic, viscous, organic, or other substances which can cause: 
(1)  Severe blockage of major collection lines, or 
(2)  Severe interference with the treatment process. 
    The required notice shall inform the user of the nature of his violation and of the actual and potential consequences to the sewage works, the treatment process, and/or the environment. Such notice shall require the user to take immediate action to stop the discharge of substances described above, even to the extent of shutting down his operation if necessary. If the user fails to take immediate action, or if the action taken is ineffective, the city shall shut off water and/or sewer service. 
(c)  Restoration of service. If water and/or sewer service to any user is shut off by the city under subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the city shall not restore the service until the manager and/or the pretreatment coordinator is satisfied that restoration of service will not result in hazardous discharges to the sewage works. The manager and/or the pretreatment coordinator may at his discretion restore partial service to the extent required for cleanup and repair operations, withholding full service until the industrial process can be resumed without resulting in hazardous discharges. 
    Any disconnection and reconnection performed under this section of the ordinance shall be at the expense of the user. 
(d)  Penalties. If additional damages to the sewage works, to the environment, or to the health and welfare of persons results because the city: 
(1)  Allows a user to stop a hazardous discharge by his own procedures, or 
(2)  Restores all or part of city services to facilitate cleanup, the fact that the city took such discretionary action will not relieve the user of any applicable civil or criminal penalties for such additional damages. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § XII, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-78. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of state and federal statutes. if any person violates any provision of this division, and thereby violates a state or federal statute or injunction, the city may seek prosecution of that person in the appropriate state or federal court, and may seek such penalties as are prescribed by that statute or injunction. 
(b)  Fines. If any person violates any provision of this division and the violation is not punishable in state or federal courts, that person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction in the city court. Each offense shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Each day of such violation shall be deemed a separate offense. For violations of a monthly average permit, each day of discharge during the month may be considered a day of violation. 
(c)  Damages. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the city by reason of such violation. Such recoverable expenses shall include, but not be limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(d)  Federal or state prosecution. Any penalties imposed under this division, including penalties imposed by state or federal courts, shall not relieve the violator from further state or federal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § XIII, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 106-79. - Validity. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. In particular, this ordinance is intended to modify and replace Ordinance No. 1207 and to constitute an update of section 31, article III, sewer use provisions of the Nacogdoches Code. If any section or provision of this division, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances is invalidated or rendered unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any remaining parts of the division which can be given effect without the invalidated part or parts, or their application to other persons or sets of circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1581-11-11, § XIV, 11-1-2011) 
Secs. 106-80-106-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-321. - Water rates and general sewer rates. 
(a)  Generally. The charges for: 
(1)  Water sold and delivered to customers of the waterworks system of the City of Nacogdoches; and 
(2)  Sanitary sewer service for customers of the sanitary sewer system of the City of Nacogdoches (other than monitored users). 
(b)  Water rates. 
Effective 10/1/2016 
Water rates are hereby fixed and prescribed according to the following schedules: 
(1)  Minimum charges per meter size (0-2000 gallons). 
All User Classes (Inside) FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 5/8 " 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25 3/4" 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25 1" 19.88 19.88 26.50 26.50 33.13 1.5" 30.92 30.92 48.58 48.58 66.25 2" 44.17 44.17 75.08 75.08 106.00 3" 75.08 75.08 136.92 136.92 198.75 4" 119.25 119.28 225.25 225.25 331.25 6" 229.67 229.67 446.08 446.08 662.50 8" 362.17 362.17 711.08 711.08 1,060.00 10" 516.75 516.75 1,020.25 1,020.25 1,523.75 12" 958.42 958.42 1,903.58 1,903.58 2,848.75 Multi-Unit 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25 13.25  
All User Classes (Outside) FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 5/8 " 19.88 19.88 19.88 19.88 19.88 3/4" 19.88 19.88 19.88 19.88 19.88 1" 29.81 29.81 39.75 39.75 49.69 1.5" 46.38 43.38 72.88 72.88 99.38 2" 66.25 66.25 112.63 112.63 159.00 3" 112.63 112.63 205.38 205.38 298.13 4" 178.88 178.88 337.88 337.88 496.88 6" 344.50 344.50 669.13 669.13 993.75 8" 543.25 543.25 1,066.63 1,066.63 1,590.00 10" 775.13 775.13 1,530.38 1,530.38 2,285.63 12" 1,437.63 1,437.63 2,855.38 2,855.38 4,273.13 Multi-Unit 19.88 19.88 19.88 19.88 19.88  
(2)  Volumetric rates (per 1,000 gallons). 
Residential Water Inside FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 0-2,000 gallons min min min min min 2,001-10,000 gallons 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 10,001-30,000 gallons 3.62 3.62 3.75 3.75 3.85 30,001-75,000 gallons 3.91 3.91 4.20 4.20 4.43 75,001 gallons and over 4.22 4.22 4.71 4.71 5.10  
Irrigation Water Inside FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 0-2,000 gallons min min min min min 2,001-10,000 gallons 4.19 4.19 4.19 4.19 4.19 10,001-30,000 gallons 4.52 4.52 4.69 4.69 4.82 30,001-75,000 gallons 4.89 4.89 5.25 5.25 5.54 75,001 gallons and over 5.28 5.28 5.89 5.89 6.37  
Non Residential Water Inside FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 0-2,000 gallons min min min min min 2,001-10,000 gallons 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 10,001-20,000 gallons 3.35 3.62 3.75 3.75 3.85 20,001-30,000 gallons 3.62 3.62 3.75 3.75 3.85 30,001-75,000 gallons 3.62 3.91 4.20 4.20 4.43 75,001 gallons and over 3.62 3.91 4.71 4.71 5.10  
Heavy Industry Water Inside FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 0-2,000 gallons min min min min min 2,001 gallons and over 2.49 2.69 2.89 3.09 3.32  
Outside City Limits 11/2 times the inside rate that is applicable  
(3)  Wholesale (outside city). According to contract negotiated with each wholesale user. 
Where more than one residential, non-residential or industrial unit is served by the same meter (except for wholesale users): 
a.  The minimum monthly charge shall be equal to the sum of the minimum monthly charges that would apply to the various units if they were metered separately. 
b.  The minimum monthly meter charge shall cover the first minimum number of gallons (if any) times the number of units. 
c.  Charges for water in excess of the minimum as defined above shall be at the highest rate for any user class represented in the various units served by the meter. 
(c)  Sewer rates. 
Effective 10/1/2016 
(1)  Minimum charges. 
FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 Residential Inside 15.00 15.00 15.25 15.25 15.25 Residential Outside 22.50 22.50 22.88 22.88 22.88 Non-Residential Inside (1) 17.25 17.25 17.54 17.54 17.54 Non-Residential Outside (1) 25.88 25.88 26.31 26.31 26.31 Monitored Customers (2) 6.55 6.55 6.68 6.68 6.68  
(2)  Volumetric charges (per 1,000 gallons). 
FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 Residential Inside 5.01 5.01 5.05 5.05 5.05 Residential Outside 7.52 7.52 7.58 7.58 7.58 Non-Residential Inside (1) 5.76 5.76 5.81 5.81 5.81 Non-Residential Outside (1) 8.64 8.64 8.71 8.71 8.71 Monitored Customers (2) 3.28 3.28 3.35 3.35 3.35  
a.  Does not include monitored users such as poultry processors. 
b.  Charges for BOD 0.2002 per 100 mg/liter and suspended solids 0.1127 per 100 mg/liter shall be added to flow calculation, according to section VII. This charge is exclusive of any applicable pretreatment. 
Billing industrial and commercial sewer customers who treat their effluent and have a settling pond. 
Industrial and commercial sewer customers who are required to treat their effluent and have a settling pond for such shall be billed on one of the following basis: 
1.  Amount of water used or registered by the city water meter. 
2.  If such industrial or commercial customer as defined above shall install an approved flow measuring device to measure the amount of water returned to the city sanitary sewer for treatment, then the reading from such measuring device will be used for determining the city sewer charge rather than the water meter reading. 
(4)  Exemption from sewer charge. Customers who use water that is not deposited in the city's sewer lines for treatment shall comply with the following conditions to be eligible to be exempted from sewer charges: 
a.  Customers must have a separate water tap from the city's water main and a separate meter for water used but not deposited in the sewer. The customer will pay for such additional tap and meter cost. 
b.  If for any reason such service is disconnected or discontinued by said customer who later wishes to return this meter to service, a reconnect fee of $25.00 will be charged for each occasion. 
(d)  Other charges. Tap fees, reconnection charges and other miscellaneous charges shall be as prescribed in other city ordinances. 
(e)  Disconnection of service. The city may disconnect water service to any customer for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Written request of the customer. 
(2)  Failure to pay all water and sewer charges within a time limit prescribed in other city ordinances. 
(3)  Existence of a known dangerous condition resulting from water service to that customer. 
(4)  Service established through meter bypassing, unauthorized connection or unauthorized reconnection. 
(5)  Tampering with meter. 
(6)  Any reasons listed in the sewer use ordinance. 
    If disconnection is solely due to failure to pay bills the city must: 
(1)  Give ten calendar days notice prior to disconnection. 
(2)  Have city personnel available to collect delinquent bills and to make reconnection on the day of disconnection and on the following: 
All city water, sewer and sanitation bills are due upon receipt and are considered delinquent 15 days after billing date. A delinquent fee of ten percent shall be added to all water, sewer and sanitation bills that are not paid within the 15-day period after billing date. 
    The following charges shall also apply: 
Original service connect fee $25.00 Transfer of service fee 25.00 Re-connect service fee: Regular work hours 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 25.00 After regular work hours 45.00  
(Code 1971, § 31-16; Ord. No. 1221-9-00, § 31-23, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1263-9-01, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 1290-7-02, 7-23-2002; Ord. No. 1297-9-02, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 1333-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1373-9-04, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1386-9-05, 9-20-2005; Ord. No. 1436-9-06, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 1504-9-08, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 1554-9-10, 9-21-2010; Ord. No. 1658-3-14, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 1713-8-16 , 8-16-2016) 
Secs. 106-322-106-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSING AND COLLECTING SEWER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 106-351. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ammonia nitrogen means the quantity of nitrogen contained in any water or wastewater sample as a component of ammonia or ammonium ion, as measured according to Standard Methods, expressed in mg/l. 
    Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, with chemical inhibition of nitrogenous oxygen demand, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (mg/l). 
    Categorical industry means any industrial user subject to national pretreatment standards (categorical standards) promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater, with testing conducted according to Standard Methods, expressed in mg/l. 
    Cost parameter means any wastewater parameter which affects the cost of collection or treatment, and to which the city attributes a portion of the collection and treatment costs. Cost parameters shall include flow, CBOD, suspended solids, toxic pollutants, and any other qualitative parameters designated by the city. Costs recoverable through pretreatment fees shall not be considered in this definition. 
    Current capital improvements means those capital improvements to the city's sewage works which are financed through current operating revenues, taxes, and/or grants. 
    Debt service means periodic payments of principal and/or interest on indebtedness incurred for the purpose of constructing, improving, or rehabilitating the city sewage collection and treatment system, including necessary land or easement purchases. 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Food industry means any industrial user whose principal product is food for human consumption, or ingredients to be used in such food, and who is not classified as a categorical industry and does not discharge significant amounts of toxic substances. 
    High strength wastes means sewage with concentrations of ammonia, oil and grease, and/or any other relevant parameters in excess of limits specified in the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter or in relevant permits; or with pH values outside the range of values allowed in the sewer use ordinance and/or in relevant permits. 
    Incompatible wastes or mixed wastes means hauled liquid wastes of two or more types with different processing, storage, or disposal requirements. 
    Industrial user means a user of the sewage works, regardless of amount of flow, who discharges any type of nondomestic wastes into the sewage works. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, business, or service or from the development of any natural resource or any mixture of the waste with water or domestic sewage, as distinct from normal domestic sewage. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means a weight-to-volume ratio numerically equal to parts per million. The mg/l value multiplied by 8.345 equals pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Minor industrial user or minor user) means an industrial user subject to permit requirements, but not a significant industrial user. 
    Monitored user means any nonresidential sewer customer whose sewer rates are based on individual monitoring of effluent quality rather than representative quality for a user class. 
    Nonfood industry means any industrial user other than a food industry. 
    Normal domestic sewage means sewage, excluding industrial wastes, discharged into sanitary sewers with average concentrations of suspended solids and CBOD not more than 200 mg/l. 
    Oil and grease (O & G) means the total of material, primarily biological lipids and mineral hydrocarbons, recovered as a substance soluble in trichlorotrifluoroethane, expressed as milligrams per liter under standard laboratory procedures as specified in Standard Methods. 
    Operation and maintenance means the actual cost of operating and maintaining the city's sewage collection and treatment system, including a reasonable allowance for periodic replacement of major system components needed during the design service life of the system. 
    Permitted industry means any industrial user who is required by the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter to hold a permit for discharge of industrial wastes into the sewage works. 
    Pretreatment fee means any charge assessed to industrial users subject to mandatory pretreatment of wastes, to defray the city's cost of administering the pretreatment program. Pretreatment fees include annual permit fees; fees for inspection, sampling, and monitoring as described in section 106-355; and any other fees related to the program other than normal collection and treatment charges and surcharges for high strength wastes. 
    Pretreatment program means the city's program for monitoring and enforcing federal and/or local requirements for monitoring and/or pretreatment of certain industrial wastes before discharge into the city sewer. This program is governed by the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
    Rate ordinance means the city ordinance establishing user charges, including pretreatment fees, as periodically updated. 
    Septage means any liquid, semisolid, or solid domestic wastes pumped out of septic tanks. 
    Sewer use ordinance means the city ordinance governing sewer use, industrial wastes, and pretreatment of wastes in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
    Significant industrial user means any discharger meeting any of the following criteria and not excluded in accordance with the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter: 
(1)  Any industrial user subject to categorical standards. 
(2)  Any discharger of a nondomestic wastestream, excluding unpolluted cooling water and boiler blowdown water, of 25,000 gallons per day or more. 
(3)  Any industrial user that contributes a nondomestic wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or pollutant capacity of the treatment plant. 
(4)  Any industrial user which has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the city, to: 
a.  Adversely affect the treatment plant through inhibition, pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination, or endangerment of treatment plant personnel; 
b.  Violate any pretreatment standard or requirement; or 
c.  Adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the sewage collection system through blockage, fire or explosion hazard, damage to facilities, or endangerment to personnel. 
This definition includes potential effects from accidental spills. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. 
    User or customer means each residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial user of the city's sewage collection and treatment system. Where more than one residential, commercial, or motel unit per water meter receives sewer service, each such unit shall constitute a separate user. 
    User class means a class of sewer customers with similar wastewater characteristics, and with sewer charges based on pollutant concentrations selected by the city as representative of that class. A user class may consist of residential or nonresidential users. 
    Waste activated sludge means sludge waste from an activated sludge process for treatment of domestic sewage or for similar wastes, whether in digested or undigested form. 
(Code 1971, § 31-21) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-352. - Sewer rates generally. 
    Any user discharging wastes into the city sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the following charges: 
(1)  Collection and treatment charge per 1,000 gallons, determined according to subsections 106-361(a) and (b), with unit flow-related and pollutant-related costs as prescribed in the rate ordinance. This applies to all users. 
(2)  Pretreatment fees, where applicable, as outlined in section 106-355. This applies to all permitted industries. 
(3)  Surcharges for high strength wastes, where applicable, determined according to sections 106-354 and 106-361. This applies to monitored users only. 
(Code 1971, § 31-22) 
Sec. 106-353. - User charge formula. 
(a)  The following formula shall be used to assess each user's share of the cost of operation and maintenance, debt service, and current capital improvements under this division: 
C = Collection and treatment charge (dollars per thousand gallons) C = C f + BC;sub\sub; + SC s [+ unit costs for any other cost parameters (section 106-361)] C f = Flow related cost (dollars per thousand gallons) C;sub\sub; = CBOD related cost (dollars per thousand gallons for each mg/l of CBOD) C s = Suspended solids related cost (dollars per thousand gallons for each mg/l of suspended solids) Unit costs for other parameters-As prescribed by amended ordinance, in dollars per thousand gallons multiplied by parameter concentration as specified in amended ordinance B = CBOD concentration (mg/l) S = Suspended solids concentration (mg/l)  
(b)  The formula in subsection (a) of this section does not include surcharges for high strength wastes as prescribed in section 106-354 or pretreatment fees as prescribed in section 106-355. 
(c)  C f , C;sub ..... sub;, C s , and any other unit costs shall be determined according to section 106-361 so as to cover all capital and operating costs for the sewage collection and treatment system, excluding costs covered by grants, tap fees, pretreatment fees, and other miscellaneous sources. 
(d)  Flows shall be calculated according to section 106-359. 
(e)  B, S, and any other parameter values shall be determined according to section 106-359. B and S shall be taken at 200 mg/l for residential users and for nonresidential users not otherwise classified or subject to monitoring. 
(Code 1971, § 31-23) 
Sec. 106-354. - Surcharges for high strength wastes. 
(a)  If any user is found to be discharging high strength wastes, as defined in section 106-351, and in the opinion of the city these wastes are causing additional expense for collection and treatment, the city shall add a surcharge for that user based on a formula and/or a lump sum as follows: 
(1)  The formula shall be as follows: 
C sur = Monthly surcharge for user C sur = [sC pol ] V u sC pol = Sum of all pollutant surcharges assessed by city by formula C pol = C x (X - L x ) X = Concentration of specified pollutant in mg/l or other designated units L x = Maximum allowable concentration of specified pollutant (in same units as X) per sewer use ordinance or permit C x = Cost for treating one unit of pollutant concentration for 1,000 gallons, plus any additional transportation costs resulting from one unit of pollutant for 1,000 gallons due to clogging of sewers or other reasons V u = Monthly volume of usage for user  
When a surcharge is assessed for excessive COD, the corresponding CBOD loading shall be treated as 200 mg/l. 
(2)  Lump sum. The city may assess a lump sum for any designated parameter for each day that the parameter exceeds ordinance or permit limits. Such lump sum surcharges shall be as set forth in the rate ordinance per day per parameter, and shall be assessed only for days of verified violations. 
(b)  For any given parameter, surcharges shall be assessed on a uniform basis (formula or lump sum) for all users. 
(c)  Surcharges shall be applied only if, in the opinion of the city, (i) the additional revenue will outweigh the administrative and monitoring cost, (ii) surcharges are necessary in order to provide equitable charges for customers discharging normal domestic wastes, or (iii) surcharges are need to discourage violations or heavy pollutant loadings. The city shall select the pollutant parameters subject to surcharge (ammonia, COD, oil and grease, pH, temperature, or other) and shall apply all surcharges in an equitable manner. 
(Code 1971, § 31-24) 
Sec. 106-355. - Pretreatment fees. 
(a)  Pretreatment fees shall be assessed to each permitted industry, as defined in section 106-351. These fees shall cover the city's cost of monitoring, administering, and enforcing the pretreatment program, including periodic inspections. Pretreatment fees shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Annual permit fees, billed to each permitted industry, based on average daily water usage for the preceding calendar year. Industries may be grouped into flow rate brackets with a specified permit fee applicable to each bracket. The annual permit fee shall apply separately to each permit and shall be assessed in its entirety for a year for any permit which is in effect for more than 15 days during the year. If an industry allows its permit to lapse during the year because of cessation of operations, then has the permit reinstated before the end of the year, the industry shall be subject to double assessment of the annual permit fee. 
(2)  Inspection fees shall be assessed to cover costs of inspection, sampling, and monitoring by city personnel. The inspection fee shall apply to all permitted industries and shall be billed with the first billing cycle occurring 30 days or more after the annual inspection for an industry. Inspection fees shall be established for the following types of industries: 
a.  Categorical (according to number of sampling points). 
b.  Other significant industrial users, nonfood (according to number of sampling points). 
c.  Other significant industrial users, food industries, as well as all minor users (according to flow brackets). 
(b)  Pretreatment fees shall not be assessed for permits which remain on inactive status for the entire calendar year. 
(c)  All pretreatment fees will be as prescribed by the rate ordinance. 
(Code 1971, § 31-25) 
Sec. 106-356. - Service outside city limits. 
    The city may increase collection and treatment charges, including minimum charges, and/or surcharges for all retail customers located outside the city limits to not more than 200 percent of the corresponding rates inside the city, as provided in this division. For wholesale users outside the city collecting sewage from retail users, sewer charges shall be as negotiated between the city and the wholesale users, but shall in any case be adequate to cover the user's share of the city's costs. 
(Code 1971, § 31-26) 
Sec. 106-357. - Charges for hauled wastes. 
    The city shall charge an annual license fee according to the rate ordinance for each vehicle delivering septage, waste activated sludge, and/or grease trap wastes to the treatment plant for disposal. Inspection and treatment charges shall also be assessed according to the rate ordinance. 
(Code 1971, § 31-27) 
Sec. 106-358. - Miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  Miscellaneous sewer charges including initial customer deposits, reconnection of separate water meters for water not returned to the sewer, initial turn-on, disconnection/reconnection, sewer stoppages, and tap fees shall be assessed according to the rate ordinance and/or the city ordinances governing rates for water service. 
(b)  If an industrial user asks the city to perform routine sampling and/or monitoring which is normally the responsibility of the user, appropriate charges shall be negotiated between the city and the user. 
(Code 1971, § 31-28) 
Sec. 106-359. - Measurement. 
(a)  Volume. The volume of sewage flow used in computing sewer charges will normally be equal to the metered water flow supplied by the city. The flow will be computed according to the provisions of the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter if a customer: 
(1)  Disposes of substantial amounts of city water by means other than the sanitary sewer system; and/or 
(2)  Discharges water from other sources into the sanitary sewers. 
The minimum flow used in computing sewer charges shall be 4,000 gallons per month for any service account which includes sewer service. 
(b)  Concentration. Sewer customers shall be grouped into user classes in order to establish pollutant concentrations for each customer. These user classes shall include a residential class and appropriate commercial and industrial classes, grouped according to the nature of water usage, such as restaurants, carwashes, laundries, etc. Each customer who cannot be assigned to a specific or general user class shall be subject to individual monitoring. 
CBOD and suspended solids concentrations shall be taken at 200 mg/l for residential customers. Pollutant concentrations for other user classes shall be derived from one or more of the following sources: 
(1)  Acceptable values published by the state natural resource conservation commission or other state agencies; 
(2)  Other published literature; 
(3)  Reliable values used for other cities; and 
(4)  Special sampling of a representative number of users, conducted according to subsection (c) of this section. 
All concentrations for user classes shall be selected in a manner equitable for all classes. These concentrations shall be high enough to account for all pollutant loadings not attributable to other sources such as monitored users, septage, or infiltration/inflow. 
Any person objecting to the concentrations established by the city for his establishment may provide a control chamber and request actual sampling by the city. Alternately, if directed by the city, the user shall perform the sampling or have it done by a commercial laboratory approved by the city. All costs of the sampling shall be paid by the business so sampled. The results of the sampling shall become the established concentration for that business until the business or the city conducts further sampling, and determines a different concentration. 
The following classes of customers shall be subject to individual monitoring: poultry processing plants, meat processors, hatcheries, candy manufacturers, canneries and soft drink bottlers, significant industrial users, customers requesting and paying for individual monitoring, and any customers not assignable to a specific user class. Concentrations of CBOD, suspended solids, and any other cost parameters shall be determined according to subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Sampling. The concentration of CBOD, suspended solids, and other cost parameters in industrial wastes, including parameters for surcharges, shall be determined according to methods specified in the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter. The required sampling and testing shall be performed at intervals to be established by the city, but in all cases often enough to be representative of average effluent quality. Sampling shall be performed by the city and/or by the user as specified in the permits or otherwise agreed on between the city and the user. 
(d)  Multiple wastestreams. When two or more streams of industrial waste are discharged by the same customer through separate connections, and/or contributed by different customers and mixed before discharge into the city sanitary sewer, the volume and other cost parameters shall be determined separately for each discharge. Where two or more facilities within the same establishment produce wastewater with substantially dissimilar characteristics, the city may at its discretion apportion flows between facilities for determining sewer rates or may require separate flow measurement and/or monitoring. 
(Code 1971, § 31-29) 
Sec. 106-360. - Notification. 
(a)  The city shall notify each nonresidential sewer customer of: 
(1)  His user class, if any; 
(2)  Pollutant concentrations used in computing his sewer charge; 
(3)  Pollutant concentration used in computing his surcharges, if any, including dates of monitoring for lump sum surcharges; 
(4)  His sewer charge per 1,000 gallons, which may be average or typical values for users with variable unit charges; and 
(5)  An itemized billing of any lump sum surcharges, and the amount and basis of any pretreatment fees. 
(b)  Such notice shall precede the first monthly billing using these concentrations or the first monthly billing which includes pretreatment fees, if applicable. An updated notice shall similarly be furnished when any of this required information changes, but not less than annually. The notice requirement does not apply to concentrations reported to the city each month by monitored users, except for annual notice requirements. 
(c)  Each residential or nonresidential user shall also be notified annually of any revisions to the rate structure in the rate ordinance, either by individual notice or by newspaper publication. 
(Code 1971, § 31-30) 
Sec. 106-361. - Rate determination. 
(a)  Generally. Sewer rate determinations shall be made according to the following: 
(1)  The city shall review the sewer rates not less than once annually on the basis of expenditures incurred in providing service. Expenditures shall be calculated for sewer service, including collection, transportation, treatment, and disposal, and for operating the pretreatment program. Expenditures shall be broken out separately, as much as practical, for special facilities for hauled-in wastes such as grease treatment facilities. 
(2)  Sewer expenditures shall be separated into components attributable to flow, to CBOD, to suspended solids, to any other cost parameters, to services covered by miscellaneous charges, to special facilities, and to the pretreatment program. 
(3)  Calculated expenditures for sewer services shall include the following: 
a.  Direct operation and maintenance expense; 
b.  Allowances for replacement of major system components; 
c.  Allowances for vehicle replacement; 
d.  Administration and billing expenses; 
e.  Monitoring and sampling of industrial wastes; 
f.  Debt service; and 
g.  Current capital improvements. 
(4)  Sewer rates shall be determined on the basis of calculated expenditures attributable to flow, to other cost parameters, and to the pretreatment program. Allowances shall be made for inflation, for anticipated changes in operation and in capital improvements, for contingencies, and for excess or deficient revenues collected during the previous year. Unit costs shall be determined for each parameter (C f , C;sub ..... sub;, C s , etc.) as specified in section 106-353. Unit costs shall be based on total estimated contributions from all users, excluding infiltration/inflow. 
The charge per thousand gallons for residential users shall be as follows: 
C = C f + 200C;sub\sub; + 200C s 
The collection and treatment charge, exclusive of surcharges and/or pretreatment fees, per thousand gallons for nonresidential customers shall be as follows: 
C = C f + BC;sub\sub; + SC s + unit costs for any other cost parameters (subsection (b) of this section) 
For users who are assessed a surcharge for COD loading, B shall be set at 200. 
Formula values are as follows: 
C = Sewer charge (dollars per thousand gallons) B = CBOD concentration (mg/l) S = Suspended solids concentration (mg/l)  
(5)  These concentrations shall be established for user classes or for monitored users according to section 106-359. User class groupings shall be reviewed as appropriate, and may be revised in one or more of the following manners: 
a.  Adding classes so as to distribute costs more equitably; 
b.  Combining classes with closely similar characteristics; 
c.  Reclassifying individual users who were inappropriately classified, or whose nature of business or wastewater characteristics have changed; and/or 
d.  Revisions to the concentrations used for each user class. 
(6)  If any user class is found to have been substantially overcharged or undercharged, a special rate adjustment shall be made for the class for the following year. 
(b)  Effects of other cost parameters. During the periodic review required by subsection (a) of this section, the city shall determine whether there are any additional cost parameters, including toxic pollutants, in the treatment plant influent which are increasing the costs of sewage treatment and/or sludge disposal. If any such parameters can be identified, along with their sources, the city shall determine the costs attributable to each of these parameters. The city shall compute charges for these parameters on a similar basis to CBOD and suspended solids charges. The city may assess charges on all measurable concentrations of each such parameter or, if appropriate, may assess surcharges on all concentrations in excess of a specified amount. 
If the city can establish a reliable correlation between COD and unit treatment costs for a specific category of industrial wastes, the city may assess a COD surcharge, but shall limit CBOD charges to 200 mg/l for that category. COD charges shall be applied only to monitored users. 
If the city determines between periodic reviews that one or more cost parameters are increasing the costs of sewage treatment and/or sludge disposal, the city may take immediate action to assess charges as prescribed in this subsection. 
(c)  Pretreatment fees. After determining the annual costs for the pretreatment program, the city shall apportion these costs among all users covered by the program. This apportionment shall consider general costs to be divided among all users, and variable costs depending on the amount of monitoring needed for each user. Industrial classifications, flows, and number of sampling points shall be considered as specified in section 106-355. 
(d)  Other charges. The city shall review all other charges including charges for hauled-in wastes and miscellaneous charges and shall revise them if appropriate. 
(Code 1971, § 31-31) 
Sec. 106-362. - Enactment of user charges. 
    Each year, following the review process prescribed in section 106-361, the city shall amend, replace, or sustain the rate ordinance so as to provide adequate revenue for operations, maintenance, current capital improvements, and debt service. 
(Code 1971, § 31-32) 
Sec. 106-363. - Other municipalities. 
    The city shall not accept wastes from any municipality outside its own boundaries unless that municipality adopts or agrees to adopt an acceptable user charge system covering such wastes. The existing collection and treatment facilities having been previously upgraded with the help of construction grants, such user charge system must meet the requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency construction grant regulations and/or any requirements imposed under any successor program to the construction grants program. 
(Code 1971, § 31-33) 
Sec. 106-364. - Billing procedures. 
(a)  The city shall issue an itemized monthly bill to each water and/or sewer customer, indicating the amounts due for refuse collection, water service, sewer charges, and pretreatment fees. The entire bill shall be payable to the city on or before the billing cycle due dates of the fifth or the 20th day of each month. Payment of water and refuse collection charges shall not be accepted without payment also of sewer charges and pretreatment fees. 
(b)  If a customer fails to pay his bill for city services by the due date, the city may disconnect any and all water and/or sanitary sewer services to that customer upon ten days' notice. Services may be reconnected only upon payment of all outstanding charges, plus a reconnection fee as prescribed in the rate ordinance. Reconnection may also be withheld pending satisfaction of other requirements of the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 31-34) 
Sec. 106-365. - Uniform application. 
    All sections of this division shall be uniformly and impartially applied and enforced for all users, or for all users within a specific category or user class where applicable. No distinction shall be made between existing and new dischargers or between existing and new haulers of septage or other hauled-in wastes. 
(Code 1971, § 31-35) 
Secs. 106-366-106-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INDUSTRIAL SEWER RATES 

Sec. 106-391. - Definitions. 
    The meaning of terms used in this division shall be as defined in section 106-351 of the user charge ordinance in division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 31-41) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-392. - General rates. 
    The charges for sanitary sewer service for customers of the city's sanitary sewer system, other than monitored users, located within the city limits, are fixed and prescribed as set out in section 106-321. 
(Code 1971, § 31-42) 
Sec. 106-393. - Permitted industries. 
    Any permitted industry discharging industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewer system shall be subject to the following charges: 
(1)  For monitored users only, collection and treatment charge per thousand gallons shall be based on unit prices for flow, CBOD, and suspended solids as prescribed in section 106-321. Minimum values used in calculating collection and treatment charges shall be 4,000 gallons per month flow and 200 mg/l concentrations of CBOD and suspended solids. For any user who is being assessed a surcharge for COD, the CBOD concentration shall be treated as 200 mg/l. 
(2)  Surcharges for conventional pollutant measurements outside allowable values shall be as follows. Both daily and unit surcharges, when listed, apply. 
_____ 
Parameter Allowable Value* Daily 
Surcharge Unit of 
Violation Unit Surcharge per 1,000 Gallons** Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand 200 mg/l *** 100 mg/l *** Total suspended solids 200 mg/l *** 100 mg/l *** Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 300 mg/l max. *** 100 mg/l *** Oil and grease 100 mg/l max. *** 100 mg/l *** pH 5.5 min., 9.5 max. *** 0.1 unit on pH scale *** Ammonia nitrogen 20 mg/l max. *** 1 mg/l *** Temperature 65° Celsius (149° Fahrenheit), max. *** 1° C ***  
 * Or permitted limit, if different. 
 ** Surcharge per 1000 gallons = (Unit surcharge per 1,000 gallons) × (number of units of violation). 
*** On file in the city secretary's office. 
_____ 
The daily lump sum surcharges for parameters listed in this subsection shall be applied only to days on which the parameter is found out of compliance by sampling/monitoring performed by the city or by self-reporting data, if applicable. 
(3)  For significant users only, the minimum penalty shall be $200.00 per day not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for violating any permit limit for metals, priority pollutants per Environmental Protection Agency list (40 CFR 122), or any parameter designated in the permit as representing hazardous or toxic substances. This applies separately at each point of monitored discharge. This stipulated penalty shall not prevent the city from pursuing additional remedies including fines, except that it will apply toward the maximum legal limit for fines imposed directly by the city. 
(4)  There shall be a penalty of $25.00 per day for each grease trap for each of the following violations: 
a.  Not having the trap cleaned at intervals prescribed by the city in accordance with the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
b.  Not having the required trap cleaning records available for the city in updated form. 
c.  The trap not meeting the requirements of plumbing ordinance. 
(5)  Pretreatment fees shall be as prescribed in section 106-395. 
(Code 1971, § 31-43) 
Sec. 106-394. - Rates for service outside city limits. 
    Sewer rates for retail customers located outside the city limits, including the minimum monthly rates and charges for CBOD and suspended solids, shall be 11/2 times the rates prescribed in section 106-392 and subsection 106-393(1) for service within the city limits. Sewer rates for wholesale customers, such as water districts or water supply corporations serving individual customers, shall be negotiated between the city and the wholesale customer. 
(Code 1971, § 31-44) 
Sec. 106-395. - Pretreatment fees. 
(a)  Permit fees. Under this division, each permitted industry shall pay an annual permit fee for each separate permit which is to be maintained in active status during 15 days or more of the next 12 months following the permit issuance or anniversary date. The fee shall be based on the average daily sewered water usage from the preceding year or from the portion of the year while the facility was in operation. The fee is on file in the city secretary's office. For a new or reactivated permit, the fee shall be based on the permitted average daily flow, or for the estimated average flow in cases of minor users with no specified flow. If actual flows during the year fall in a different range from those used in setting the permit fee, a corresponding adjustment shall be made in the next annual permit fee. 
(b)  Inspection fees. An annual inspection fee to defray costs of inspection, sampling, and monitoring shall be assessed to each permitted industry according to the schedule on file in the city secretary's office. 
(c)  Billing schedules. The permit fees for the first 12 months of the term of the permit shall be paid with the application for a new or renewed permit. Each succeeding permit fee for the duration of the permit shall be billed with the first monthly billing following the anniversary of permit issuance. Inspection fees shall be billed with each monthly billing for which the permit was on active status, with each monthly billing being 1/12 of the annual fee. The inspection fee shall be billed in this manner regardless of the number of inspections performed. 
(d)  Transition period. Since permit and inspection fees are billed on an annual basis, payable after the end of the year for permit fees and after the annual inspection for inspection fees, the city shall make adjustments as necessary so that each permitted user will pay his prorated share of fees under the old or new schedule. 
(Code 1971, § 31-45) 
Sec. 106-396. - Charges for hauled-in wastes. 
(a)  Annual license. A license fee on file in the city secretary's office, per year, shall be charged for each vehicle transporting septage, waste activated sludge, or grease trap wastes as follows: 
(1)  To the city treatment plant for disposal; and/or 
(2)  From establishments within the city to any disposal site. 
(b)  Charges per load. Charges, on file in the city secretary's office, for the following shall be made for each load of hauled-in wastes in addition to the annual license fees: 
(1)  Inspection charge for verifying that no toxic wastes, incompatible wastes, such as mixed septage and grease trap wastes, or other unacceptable wastes are present. 
(2)  Treatment charges. 
(Code 1971, § 31-46) 
Sec. 106-397. - Miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  Service charges, on file in the city secretary's office, for the following shall be assessed when appropriate: 
(1)  Tap fees for new sewer connections: 
a.  Four-inch standard service line. 
b.  Six-inch standard service line. 
Proposed taps larger than those described in this subsection or involving unusual construction requirements shall be performed by the developer or property owner at his expense, when directed by the city. If the city elects to perform such taps, the developer or owner shall pay the city for the total cost prior to installation of the tap. 
(2)  Reconnection of separate water meter for water not returned to the sewer. 
(3)  Delinquent fee: ten percent of the bill. 
(b)  Sampling and/or monitoring of industrial wastes by city forces at the request of user, when such tasks are the user's responsibility, are to be negotiated between the city and the user. 
(Code 1971, § 31-47) 
Secs. 106-398-106-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER RATE SYSTEM FOR DEBT SERVICE AND OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLICLY OWNED WATERWORKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-426. - Definitions 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Block rate means the unit price per 1,000 gallons for any specified range of monthly water usage. 
    City means the city or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
    Current capital improvements means those capital improvements to the city's water system which are financed through current operating revenues and/or taxes. 
    Debt service means periodic payments of principal and/or interest on indebtedness incurred for the purpose of constructing, improving, or rehabilitating the city's water production, treatment, storage, transmission, and distribution system, including necessary land or easement purchases. 
    Operation and maintenance means the actual cost of operating and maintaining the city water system, including a reasonable allowance for periodic replacement of major system components needed during the life of the system. Also included are necessary administrative costs allocable to the water system and any costs for purchasing treated or untreated water from outside the system. 
    Retail user or customer means each residential, commercial, governmental, school, or industrial customer who is supplied water directly through the city water system. This definition excludes fire departments taking water through hydrants for fire fighting, fire drills, or related purposes. Also excluded are any neighboring communities or other water systems which may be supplied with water on a regular or emergency basis through interconnections between water systems, or customers of such systems. A retail user may be located either within or outside the city. Where more than one residential or commercial unit is served by the same water meter, each unit shall constitute a separate user. 
    User class means a class of residential or nonresidential users with similar fundamental characteristics governing their rate of consumption. 
    Wholesale user or customer means any water district, water supply corporation, or other entity which purchases water from the city on a regular or emergency basis for the purpose of distribution and resale to individual customers located outside the city. 
(Code 1971, § 31-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-427. - Objectives. 
(a)  Water rates, in combination with other water-related income such as tap fees, shall be sufficient to pay for all operation and maintenance, current capital improvements, and debt service attributable to the water system, except as provided otherwise by ad valorem taxes, grants, or other revenue sources. 
(b)  Fixed expenses not attributable to volume of usage may be recovered through a fixed minimum charge which covers not more than the first 2,500 gallons per month for each user. 
(c)  Water rates for any user class shall be designed to discourage excessive usage. Monthly volumes of usage for any user may be grouped in blocks so that the unit price increases with the volume of usage. Except as noted in subsection (b) of this section, the unit price shall never decrease with increased volumes of usage. 
(d)  The legitimate needs of each user class shall be considered in establishing usage blocks so that no user will be penalized unfairly for using the amount of water he needs to carry on his operations. 
(e)  Charges for water shall be distributed as equitably as possible among user classes consistent with the objectives of this section. 
(f)  No user shall be allowed to circumvent the intent of this article by using water from several meters on the same premises. 
(Code 1971, § 31-72) 
Sec. 106-428. - User classes. 
(a)  The city may, by separate ordinance, group all users into classes with similar water usage characteristics. Such classes shall include residential; various types of commercial, government, school; and various type of industrial classes. Each class may also be grouped into subclasses according to meter size. 
(b)  The city shall assign each existing user to the appropriate class and/or subclass and shall notify all users in writing. Each new user shall also be assigned to the appropriate class and/or subclass. All users shall be notified of the right to appeal their classification to the city manager and to the city council. 
(c)  User classes and/or subclasses may be altered by subsequent ordinance as appropriate. 
(Code 1971, § 31-73; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-429. - Block rates. 
(a)  For each user class or subclass, the city may by separate ordinance establish two or more blocks representing monthly volume of usage, with corresponding water rates as follows: 
Block Block Rate 0 through B 1 b 1  = Minimum bill divided by B 1 B 1 through B 2 b 2 B 2 through B 3 b 3 B n -1 through B n b n  
Where: 
B 1 through B 3 = Upper limits of first three blocks in 1,000 gallons. (B 1 not to exceed 2.5) B n = Upper limit of nth block in 1,000 gal. b 1 through b 3 = Block rates for first three blocks b n = Block rate for nth block  
(b)  Each block rate shall be larger than the preceding block rate so that unit price is increases by volume, except that the minimum bill, B 1 , may be set high enough to recover fixed expenses plus the gallonage rate included in the minimum bill. The gallonage rate should remain the same or increase in each succeeding block rate. 
(Code 1971, § 31-74) 
Sec. 106-430. - Establishment of user charges 
(a)  The city shall, by separate ordinance to be enacted on a yearly basis, establish the terms, B 1 , B 2 , B 3 , B n , b 2 , b 3 , b n , etc., for each user class and/or subclass in this article. These terms shall be designed so as to generate sufficient revenue for all operation and maintenance, current capital improvements, and debt service for the city water system, except as provided from other sources. These terms shall also be designed to be equitable for the various user classes, but may allow for differing needs of different classes. 
(b)  For any users located outside the city, the city may increase water rates by a uniform percentage to not more than 200 percent of the corresponding rates for users within the city. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to establish surcharge rates for any or all user classes to be used during water shortage emergencies. Such emergencies may be declared only by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 31-75; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-431. - Frequency of meter reading. 
    Water meter reading shall be recorded at approximately the same time each month. If the period covered by a meter reading varies by more than seven days from a calendar month, block rates shall be adjusted to what they would have been for a month at the average daily usage for the reading. 
(Code 1971, § 31-76) 
Sec. 106-432. - Metering requirements. 
(a)  Single-family residences and single-occupancy commercial or industrial facilities shall be served by an individual water meter. Multifamily units, such as apartments, condominiums, townhouses and trailer parks, or commercial or industrial complexes which house two or more businesses, such as shopping malls and strip centers, may be served by a master water meter or by individual meters. If individual meters for each unit are desired, all meters shall be placed on the right-of-way of a public street or alley. 
(b)  No user may obtain water on the same premises from more than one meter for the purpose of avoiding the increasing block rate for a higher volume of usage. If separate meters are allowed for the purpose of separating the volume of water not returned to the sewer system, the meter reading may be combined for the purpose of calculating water charges. 
(Code 1971, § 31-77) 
Sec. 106-433. - Wholesale users. 
(a)  The sections of this division pertaining to block rates, user charges, meter reading, and metering requirements shall not apply to the individual customers served through wholesale users. These sections shall apply to each wholesale user as an individual customer. Wholesale users shall not be required to develop water conservation programs or to adopt user charge systems conforming to the requirements for water conservation programs. 
(b)  The city shall notify each existing or new wholesale user that water conservation programs and/or user charge systems may be required for each wholesale user in the future by the state water development board if circumstances warrant. 
(Code 1971, § 31-78) 
Sec. 106-434. - Wasteful use. 
    No person shall use city water wastefully and without purpose, even though he pays the prescribed charges for such water. 
(Code 1971, § 31-79) 
Secs. 106-435-106-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES 

Sec. 106-461. - User classes. 
    All customers who receive water service from the city shall be grouped into the following classes: 
(1)  Retail within city: 
a.  Residential. 
b.  Commercial. 
c.  Governmental, including schools. 
d.  Light industrial. 
e.  Heavy industrial. 
(2)  Retail outside city: 
a.  Identical to retail within the city. 
b.  Service outside the city shall be provided to the various classifications in accordance with city policy. 
(3)  Wholesale outside city: 
a.  A light industrial user shall be defined as an industrial user with an average monthly usage of less than 500,000 gallons for the last 12 monthly billing periods before the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derives. When such prior usage data is inapplicable, usage shall be based on projected usage as submitted by the user and accepted by the city. 
b.  A heavy industrial user shall be defined as an industrial user with an average monthly usage of 500,000 gallons or more as defined for light industrial users. 
c.  Where more than one residential, commercial, governmental, or industrial unit is served by the same water meter, each unit shall constitute a separate user, except for wholesale users. 
(Code 1971, § 31-91) 
Sec. 106-462. - Prescribed charges. 
(a)  Minimum monthly water charges for all retail customers within the city and outside the city, per 2,500 gallons, are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Charges for water in excess of 2,500 gallons per month shall be the charges on file in the city secretary's office for the following various classes of customers: 
(1)  Retail within the city, per 1,000 gallons: 
a.  Residential. 
b.  Commercial. 
c.  Government. 
d.  Light industrial. 
e.  Heavy industrial. 
(2)  Retail outside the city: 11/2 times the applicable rate for retail within the city. 
(3)  Wholesale outside the city: according to contracts negotiated with each wholesale user. 
(c)  Where more than one residential, commercial, governmental, or industrial unit is served by the same meter, except for wholesale users: 
(1)  The minimum monthly charge shall be equal to the sum of the minimum monthly charges which would apply to the various units if they were metered separately. 
(2)  The minimum monthly charge shall cover the first minimum number of gallons, if any, times the number of units. 
(3)  Charges for water in excess of the minimum as defined in this subsection shall be at the highest rate for any user class represented in the various units served by the meter. 
(Code 1971, § 31-92) 
Sec. 106-463. - Other charges and tap fees. 
(a)  Water and sanitary sewer tap fees shall be on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  A new split on a tap that has already been split will require special pricing at the time of the request. It is possible that a second split on the same tap may not be allowed. A split cannot have a meter set larger than the original tap size. A split on a tap located in or around concrete or asphalt paving, or in an area of difficult accessibility will require special pricing. Multiple splits (more than two meters) on the installation of a single larger tap will require special pricing at the time of the request. Any splits on larger taps will require pricing at the time of the request. 
(c)  Proposed taps that are larger than those described in the tables on file in the city secretary's office or that involve unusual construction requirements shall be performed by the developer or property owner at his expense, when directed by the city. Prior approval for construction and inspection by the city will be required. If the city elects to perform such taps, the developer or owner shall pay the city for the total cost prior to installation of the tap. 
(d)  A charge on file in the city secretary's office shall be added to the customer's account each time a payment received is returned unpaid from an institution. 
(e)  Reconnection charges and other miscellaneous charges shall be as prescribed in other sections of this Code or city ordinances. 
(f)  The fees and policies for water and sanitary sewer taps should be reviewed annually with changes made as directed by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 31-93; Ord. No. 1240-12-00, § 31-93, 12-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-464. - Sufficiency of revenue. 
    The city council has determined that the water charges prescribed in this division are necessary and sufficient to cover all costs of debt service and operation and maintenance of the city's water production, treatment, and distribution system, after adjusting for the following factors: 
(1)  Other revenue sources such as sewer charges, ad valorem taxes, grants, and interest income. 
(2)  The portion of that revenue required for debt service and operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  The portion of that other revenue required for current capital improvements to water and sewer systems. 
(Code 1971, § 31-94; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-465. - Disconnection of service. 
(a)  The city may disconnect water service to any customer for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Written request of the customer. 
(2)  Failure to pay all water and sewer charges within a time limit prescribed in other sections of this Code or city ordinances. 
(3)  Existence of a known dangerous condition resulting from water service to that customer. 
(4)  Service established through meter bypassing, unauthorized connection, or unauthorized reconnection. 
(5)  Tampering with the meter. 
(6)  Any reasons listed in the sewer use ordinance in division 2 of article II of this chapter. 
(b)  If disconnection is solely due to failure to pay bills the city must: 
(1)  Give ten calendar days' notice prior to disconnection. 
(2)  Have city personnel available to collect delinquent bills and to make reconnection on the day of disconnection and on the following day. 
(Code 1971, § 31-95) 
Secs. 106-466-106-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 106-491. - Area of jurisdiction. 
    This article shall apply to all users of the city water system. 
(Code 1971, § 31-101) 
Sec. 106-492. - Penalties. 
    Penalties for violating this article shall be according to other sections of this Code or city ordinances governing plumbing installations. 
(Code 1971, § 31-106) 
Sec. 106-493. - Requirements for new or replacement plumbing. 
(a)  All hot water lines shall be insulated. 
(b)  All new swimming pools shall have recirculating filtration equipment. 
(c)  The requirements in subsections (a) and (b) of this section and the requirements of appendix J of the Standard Plumbing Code adopted in section 14-236 shall apply to any new plumbing and to any replacement of existing plumbing, regardless of the reason for replacement. 
(d)  The following water use limits are placed on certain fixtures in lieu of limits specified in appendix J of the Standard Plumbing Code: 
(1)  Toilets: 3.5 gallons per flush for tank type, three gallons per flush for flush valve type. 
(2)  Urinals: three gallons per flush for tank type, one gallon per flush for flush valve type. 
(3)  Kitchen faucets: 2.75 gallons per minute. 
(Code 1971, § 31-102) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1265-9-01, adopted Sept. 4, 2001 amended the Standard Plumbing Code to International Plumbing Code. 
Sec. 106-494. - Retrofit items. 
(a)  The city may require the following retrofit items to be installed on existing plumbing where applicable, upon proper notice to the owner of the building as specified: 
(1)  Displacement devices in toilet tanks, with a minimum reduction of 0.5 gallons per flush, made of a material which will not disintegrate or flake off in water. 
(2)  Flow restrictors for showerheads, with a maximum flow of three gallons per minute. 
(3)  Insulation for hot water lines, for accessible portions of existing lines. 
(b)  Displacement devices shall not be required for toilet tanks designed for low flow in their existing form. 
(c)  Retrofit devices shall not be required where they are impractical or expensive to install. 
(d)  The city shall impose retrofitting requirements as soon as practical under either of the following circumstances: determination by the city council that such retrofit devices are needed because of an existing or imminent water shortage. In either event, the city shall notify the owner of each single-family residence, multiple-family residence, nonresidential building, or other water-using facility within the area of jurisdiction. The notice shall specify a period between 90 days and one year during which the specified retrofit items must be installed. 
(e)  If retrofitting is imposed, it shall apply to all residential and nonresidential users of the city water system uniformly. 
(Code 1971, § 31-103; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-495. - Permits. 
    Permit requirements for any work required by this article shall be according to governing sections of this Code or city ordinances. 
(Code 1971, § 31-104) 
Sec. 106-496. - Inspection. 
    All plumbing work constructed according to this article shall be inspected by city personnel or by any other persons authorized by the city according to the International Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1971, § 31-105) 
Secs. 106-497-106-525. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER USAGE DURING EMERGENCIES 

Sec. 106-526. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    User, except as provided in section 106-534, includes only retail customers served directly by the city water system, whether located within or outside the city, and not customers of wholesale users such as water supply corporations. Where more than one residential or commercial unit is served by the same water meter: 
(1)  For surcharging or rationing purposes, each unit shall constitute a separate user. 
(2)  For disconnection purposes, the person responsible for the master meter shall be considered the user. 
(Code 1971, § 31-121) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-527. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any section of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  In addition to the fines, the city may terminate water service to any user for repeated or flagrant violations of this article. Reconnection may be made only after the user pays all outstanding bills and fines, plus the current reconnection charge. Reconnection of a commercial, industrial, or recreational user may be postponed by the city if, in the opinion of the city, such postponement is necessary to conserve water in an acute emergency. 
(c)  The city also may, at its option, install a flow restrictor in the service line of any user for repeated or flagrant violations of this article. Such restrictor may be set at any amount of flow equal to or larger than the amounts listed in section 106-531. The city may charge the user for the cost of the flow restrictor, including installation, and may disconnect service for failure to pay for this item. 
(Code 1971, § 31-132) 
Sec. 106-528. - Declaration of emergency. 
    The city council may, at any properly posted, convened, and conducted meeting, declare the city to be in a water usage emergency requiring one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Water waste. Prohibition of all water waste as defined in section 106-529. 
(2)  Outdoor water usage. 
a.  Alternate days for usage. 
b.  Prohibition of usage. 
c.  Other restrictions. 
(3)  Control measures for indoor usage. 
a.  Surcharge system. 
b.  Rationing. 
c.  Flow restrictors, for violators only. 
(4)  Variances. 
a.  Variances for certain commercial users as prescribed in section 106-533. 
b.  Overriding of any standing variances which may have been previously granted. 
(Code 1971, § 31-122; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-529. - Water waste and outdoor water usage. 
(a)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, prohibit all water waste defined as follows: 
(1)  Washing vehicles, buildings, and other similar items unless a bucket or a hose with a cutoff device at the downstream end of the hose is used. 
(2)  Allowing water from vehicle washing, building washing, or plant watering to run excessively onto streets or sidewalks. 
(3)  Recreational use of sprinklers or hoses. 
(4)  Using water for ornamental fountains. 
(5)  Any other water use, indoor or outdoor, which is obviously wasteful. 
(b)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, prohibit any or all of the following outdoor water usages: 
(1)  Watering of grass, lawns, flowers, trees, gardens, or shrubbery. 
(2)  Washing vehicles, buildings, or swimming pools. 
(3)  Recreational purposes, including filing swimming pools. 
(4)  Ornamental fountains. 
(c)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, restrict any or all of the outdoor water usages listed in subsection (b) of this section to alternate days as follows: 
(1)  Even-numbered house, business, lot, or premises: Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays only. 
(2)  Odd-numbered house, business, lot, or premises: Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays only. 
(3)  Houses, business, lots, or premises with no visible number or no number known to city: same as even numbers. 
(d)  On or after the date when the city council shall meet and declare a water usage emergency requiring any or all of the restrictions described in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of these restrictions, unless the city council grants a variance and has not overridden such variance for the specific emergency. 
(Code 1971, § 31-123; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-530. - Surcharge system. 
(a)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, impose surcharges not to exceed the amounts on file in the city secretary's office on all water usage by any user. 
(b)  No surcharge for any bracket may be less than the surcharge for the next lower bracket. 
(c)  These surcharges shall become effective for each user as soon as the city can read the meter serving that user and notify that user. 
(Code 1971, § 31-124; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-531. - Rationing. 
(a)  The city council may, after declaring a water usage emergency, impose rationing on any or all user classes. The daily amount which each user may be permitted to use shall be equal to or not greater than the following amounts: 
Residential 50 gallons School 100 gallons (plus 5 gallons/student on days classes are held) Commercial 100 gallon Government, other than schools 100 gallons Recreational facility 300 gallons Industrial 300 gallons  
(b)  Rationing shall become effective for each user as soon as the city can read the meter serving that user and notify that user. 
(Code 1971, § 31-125; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-532. - Commercial use. 
    The city manager may, in a water shortage emergency, direct any or all commercial, industrial, governmental, and recreational users to suspend use of city water for purposes other than domestic use. Such official may take this action regardless of whether the city council has declared a water usage emergency. 
(Code 1971, § 31-126; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-533. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the city shall notify all nonresidential users of the following facts: 
(1)  Businesses which use outdoor water in their primary business functions, such as commercial carwashes, may be considered for variances from emergency restrictions or prohibitions of outdoor water usage. 
(2)  The city may restrict or prohibit such outdoor usage, even if a business qualifies for a variance, if the water shortage emergency is severe enough to impose such restriction or prohibition. 
(3)  Any business which feels that it may qualify for a variance is encouraged to request, preferably in nonemergency time, that the city grant a standing variance. 
(4)  Such business shall show to the city sufficient cause for granting the variance. 
(5)  The city may grant a specific variance during a water shortage emergency or may override a standing variance. 
(b)  The city shall notify all new nonresidential customers of the facts in subsection (a) of this section at the time they apply for or receive service. 
(Code 1971, § 31-127) 
Sec. 106-534. - Notification of users. 
    The city shall notify all users promptly when a water supply emergency is declared. For prohibition of outdoor water usage, such notice may be through local news media. For surcharges or rationing, such notice shall be in writing for each user if practical, preferably delivered along with the meter reading. The individual notice shall, if practical, show the date and amount of the meter reading. 
(Code 1971, § 31-128) 
Sec. 106-535. - Applicability of restrictions. 
(a)  Water use restrictions and surcharges contained in this article shall apply to all water supplied by the city water system to its retail customers, whether located within or outside the city. 
(b)  The following rules shall govern wholesale users and their customers: 
(1)  Restrictions on outdoor usage shall not apply to customers of wholesale users unless provided in the contract between the city and the wholesale user. 
(2)  Surcharges shall not apply to wholesale users or to their customers unless provided in the contract between the city and the wholesale user. If the surcharges are to be applied, they shall become effective for each customer of the wholesale user as soon as the wholesale user can read that customer's meter. The surcharges prescribed by emergency resolution shall be collected by the wholesale user in its billing cycle and passed on directly to the city. Nothing in this article shall prevent the wholesale user from assessing an additional surcharge to defray its own expenses. 
(3)  Rationing shall not apply directly to customers of wholesale users unless provided in the contract between the city and the wholesale user. Otherwise, each wholesale user shall be rationed to the total amount of water to which its individual customers would be entitled under the emergency resolution. 
(4)  Any restrictions, surcharges, or rationing adopted under authority of this article shall be applied uniformly to the city's retail customers and to such wholesale users and/or their customers as may be applicable. 
(Code 1971, § 31-129) 
Sec. 106-536. - Duration of restrictions. 
    All restrictions contained in this article shall remain in effect until terminated by further city council action, unless, at the time the council initiates the restrictions or at a subsequent meeting: 
(1)  The council sets a specific time limit; or 
(2)  The council delegates authority to the city manager to terminate the restrictions at his discretion. 
(Code 1971, § 31-130; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-537. - Procedural requirements. 
    The city council may initiate and terminate water usage emergencies and accompanying restrictions by means of simple motions recorded in the minutes, so long as the intent of the action is made clear. Any rules requiring reading at two or more meetings are automatically suspended for all actions authorized by this article. 
(Code 1971, § 31-131; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 106-538-106-565. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLANS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 106-566-106-590. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WHOLESALE SUPPLIER DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, adopted July 19, 2005, amended the former Div. 2, §§ 106-591-106-601, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1971, §§ 31-133-31-143. 

Sec. 106-591. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
    In order to conserve the available water supply and/or to protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Nacogdoches (hereinafter referred to a "city") adopts the following drought contingency plan (the plan) for wholesale water customers. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-592. - Wholesale water customer education. 
    The city will periodically provide wholesale water customers with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each state. This information will be provided by means of providing copies of the plan and/or changes to the plan, and scheduled meetings to discuss the plan and any changes. 
    Title 30 TAC Chapter 288.30(4) states: Wholesale public water suppliers shall submit a drought contingency plan meeting the requirements of Subchapter B of this Chapter to the executive director not later than September 1, 1999, after adoption of the drought contingency plan by the governing body of the water supplier. Thereafter, any new or revised plans shall be submitted to the executive director within 90 days of adoption by the governing body of the wholesale public water supplier. Wholesale public water suppliers shall also provide a copy of the drought contingency plan to the regional water planning group for each region within which the wholesale water supplier operates. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-593. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
    The water service area of the city is located within the East Texas Regional Water Planning Region 1, and the city has provided a copy of the plan to the East Texas Regional Water Planning Committee. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-594. - Authorization. 
    The water utilities manager (hereinafter referred to as "manager") or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to authority to initiate or terminate drought or water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-595. - Application. 
    The provisions of this plan shall apply to all customers utilizing water provided by the city. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-596. - Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
(a)  The manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each state of the plan. Customer notification of the initiation or termination of drought response states will be made directly by telephone, followed by certified mail. The news media will also be informed. 
(b)  The triggering criteria described below are based on a statistical analysis of the vulnerability of the water source under drought of record conditions. 
(1)  Stage 1-Mild water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation-The city will recognize that a mild condition exists when total daily water demand equals or exceeds 90 percent of the daily water plant production for four consecutive days or 92 percent of the daily water plant production for a single day. 
b.  Requirement for termination-Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 14 consecutive days. The city will notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of Stage 1 in the manner described above. 
(2)  Stage 2-Moderate water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation-The city will recognize that a moderate water shortage condition exists when daily water demand equals or exceeds 92 percent of the daily water plant production for four consecutive days or 94 percent of the daily water plant production for a single day. 
b.  Requirements for terminations-Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of seven consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 2, Stage 1 becomes operative. The city will notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of Stage 2 in the manner described above. 
(3)  Stage 3-Severe water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation-The city will recognize that a severe water shortage condition exists when total daily water demand equals or exceeds 94 percent of the daily water plant production for four consecutive days or 96 percent of the daily water plant production for a single day. 
b.  Requirements for terminations-Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of five consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 3, Stage 2 becomes operative. The city will notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of Stage 2 in the manner described above. 
(4)  Stage 4-Emergency water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation-The city will recognize that an emergency water shortage condition exists, when: 
(i)  Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
(ii)  Manmade contamination of the water supply source(s) has occurred. 
b.  Requirements for termination-Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 24 consecutive hours (one day). The city will notify its wholesale customers and the media of the termination of Stage 4 in the manner described above. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-597. - Drought response stages. 
    The manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 106-596, shall determine that mild, moderate, or severe water shortage conditions exist, or that an emergency condition exists, and shall implement the following actions: 
A.  Stage 1-Mild water shortage conditions. 
1.  Goal: Achieve a voluntary five percent reduction in total daily water use. 
2.  Supply management measures: 
(a)  In order to manager a limited water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will implement the following supply management measures: 
(1)  Reduce or discontinue flushing or water mains. 
(2)  Discontinue fire hydrant testing; 
(3)  Implement measures to return any system component to full production capability (i.e. water wells, booster pumps, etc.); 
(4)  Repair all existing main breaks. 
(b)  Demand management measures: 
(1)  The manager, or his/her designee, will contact wholesale water customer to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and will request that wholesale water customers initiate voluntary measures to reduce water use (e.g., implement Stage 1 of the customer's drought contingency plan). 
(2)  The manager, or his/her designee, will provide a weekly report to news media with information regarding current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought conditions persist, and consumer information on water conservation measures and practices. 
B.  Stage 2-Moderate water shortage conditions. 
1.  Goal: achieve a seven percent reduction in total daily water use. 
2.  Supply management measures: 
(a)  In order to manage a limited water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will implement the following supply management measures: 
(1)  All of the measures described for Stage 1; 
(2)  Alternatively, discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas, including parks and ball fields. 
(b)  Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water uses restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9). The irrigation of landscaped areas is further limited to the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five gallons or less, or drip irrigation system. 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such watering, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
(3)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wadding pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(4)  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposed is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
(5)  Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting and related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city. 
(6)  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. However, if the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these regulations. 
(7)  All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to its patrons except when requested. 
(8)  The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited: 
(i)  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas. 
(ii)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(iii)  Use of water for dust control; 
(iv)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; and 
(v)  Failure to repaired a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
3.  Demand management measures: 
(a)  The manager, or his/her designee, will initiate weekly contract with wholesale water customers to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and the possibility of pro rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries. 
(b)  The manager, or his/her designee, will request wholesale water customers to initiate mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use (e.g., implement the appropriate stage (usually Stage 2) of the customer's drought contingency plan). 
(c)  The manager, or his/her designee, will initiate preparations for the implementation of pro rata curtailment of water diversions and/or allocation baseline for each wholesale customer according to the procedures specified in section 106-598 of the plan. 
(d)  The manager, or his/her designee, will provide a weekly report to news media with information regarding current water supply and/or demand conditions. Projects water supply and demand conditions if drought persists, and consumer information on water conservation measures and practices. 
C.  Stage 3-Severe water shortage conditions. 
1.  Goal: Achieve a nine percent reduction in total daily water use. 
2.  Supply management measures: In order to manage a limited water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will continue implementing all of the measures described for Stage 1 and Stage 2. Irrigation of public landscaped areas, included parks and ball fields shall be discontinued. 
3.  Demand management measures: 
(a)  The manager, or his/her designee, will contact wholesale water customers to discuss water supply and/or demand conditions and will request that wholesale water customers initiate additional mandatory measures to reduce nonessential water use (e.g., implement the appropriate stage (usually Stage 3 of the customer's drought contingency plan). 
(b)  The manager, or his/her designee, will initiate pro rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries for each wholesale customer according to the procedures specified in section 106-598 of the plan. 
(c)  The manager, or his/her designee, will provide a weekly report to news media with information regarding current water supply and/or demand conditions, projected water supply and demand conditions if drought conditions persist, and consumer information on water conservation measures and practices. 
D.  Stage 4-Emergency water shortage conditions. Whenever emergency water shortage conditions exist as defined in section 106-596 of the plan, the manager shall; 
1.  Assess the severity of the problem and identify the actions needed and time required to solve the problem. 
2.  Inform the utility director or other responsible official of each wholesale water customer by telephone or in person and suggest actions, as appropriate, to alleviate problems (e.g., notification of the public to reduce water use until service is restored). 
3.  If appropriate, notify city, county, and/or state emergency response officials for assistance. 
4.  Undertake necessary actions, including repairs and/or clean up as needed. 
5.  Prepare a post-event assessment report on the incident and 
6.  Critique of emergency response procedures and actions. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-598. - Pro rata water allocation. 
    In the event that the triggering criteria specified in section 106-596 of the plan for Stage 3-Severe water shortage conditions have been met, the manager is hereby authorized to initiate allocation of water supplies on a pro-rate basis in accordance with V.T.C.A., Water Code § 11.039 and according to the following water allocation policies and procedures; 
(1)  A wholesale customer's monthly allocation shall be a percentage of the customer's water usage baseline. The percentage will be set by resolution of the Nacogdoches City council based on the manager's assessment of the severity of the water shortage condition and the need to curtail water diversions and/or deliveries and my be adjusted periodically by resolution of the council as conditions warrant. Once pro rata allocation is in effect, water diversions by, or deliveries to, each wholesale customer shall be limited to the allocation established for each month. 
(2)  A monthly water usage allocation shall be established by the manager, or his/her designee, for each wholesale customer. The wholesale customer's water usage baseline will be computed on the average water usage by month for the last five-year period as shown in the example given below. If the wholesale water customer's billing history is less than five years, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for which no billing history exists. 
_____
Example Calculation of Monthly Allocation For a Hypothetical Wholesale Water Customer 
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 SUM AVE Allocation 
Percentage Monthly 
Allocation Jan. Feb. March April May June July August Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total  
(3)  The manager shall provide notice by certified mail to each wholesale customer informing them of their monthly water usage allocations and shall notify the news media and the Executive Director of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission upon initiation of the pro rate water allocation. 
(4)  Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the manager, the allocation may be reduced or increased if: (1) the designated period does not accurately reflect the wholesale customer's normal water usage; (2) the customer; agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another wholesale customer; or (3) other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the Nacogdoches City council. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-599. - Enforcement. 
    During any period when pro rata allocation of available water supplies is in effect, wholesale customers shall pay the following surcharges on excess water diversions and/or deliveries 
(1)  Two times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for water diversions and/or deliveries in excess of the monthly allocation up through five percent above the monthly allocation. 
(2)  Three times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for water diversions and/or deliveries in excess of the monthly allocation from five percent through ten percent above the monthly allocation. 
(3)  Five times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for water diversions and/or deliveries in excess of the monthly allocation from ten percent through 15 percent above the monthly allocation. 
(4)  Ten times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for water diversions and/or deliveries more than 15 percent above the monthly allocation. 
(5)  The above surcharges shall be cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-600. - Variances. 
(a)  The manager, or his/her designee, may in writing, grant a temporary variance to pro rata water allocation policies provided by this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the public health, welfare, or safety and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this plan shall file a petition for variance with the city within five days after pro rata allocation has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the manager, and shall include the following 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Detailed statement with supporting data and information a to how the pro rata allocation for water under the policies and procedures established in the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this division. 
(3)  Description of the relief requested. 
(4)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(5)  Alternative measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date. 
(6)  Other pertinent information. 
(d)  Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the manager or its designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(e)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005) 
Sec. 106-601. - Severability and violations. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Nacogdoches City council and the sections, paragraphs, sentences, claused, and phrases of this plan are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this plan shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree or any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not effect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this plan, which shall remain in full force and effect, since the same would not have been enacted by the Nacogdoches City council without the incorporation into this plan or any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
    That any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in Ordinance No. 1252-4-01 of the Nacogdoches Code. Each day such violation shall continue, or be permitted to continue, shall be deemed a separate offense. Since this article has a penalty for violation, it shall become effective ten days after its publication. 
(Ord. No. 1370-7-05, § 1, 7-19-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 106-603-106-630. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RETAIL SUPPLIER DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1583-12-11, adopted Dec. 6, 2011, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Div. 3, §§ 106-631-106-641, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1369-7-05, § 1, adopted July 19, 2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, adopted Nov. 11, 2009. 

Sec. 106-631. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of the drought contingency plan the following definitions shall apply. 
    Aesthetic water use : means water use for ornamental or decorative purpose such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
    Best practices: means a technique or methodology that, through experience and research, has been proven to reliably lead to effective water conservation. 
    Commercial and institutional water use means water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
    Conservation means those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water, or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
    Customer means any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city. 
    Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
    Even-number address means street addresses, box number, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and locations without addresses. 
    Odd-numbered address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
    Industrial water use means the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
    Landscape irrigation use means water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
    Non-essential water use means water uses that are neither essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; and 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-632. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Nacogdoches (hereinafter referred to as "city") hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
(b)  Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 106-641 of this plan. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-633. - Public education. 
    The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated, and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-634. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
    The service area of the city is located within the East Texas Regional Water Planning, Region I and the city has provided a copy of this plan to the East Texas Regional Water Planning Committee, Texas Water Development Board and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-635. - Authorization. 
    The city council is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. City council shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-636. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
    In the event the triggering criteria specified in section 106-637 of the plan for Stage 3 - severe water shortage conditions have been met, the city council may initiate allocation of water supplies on a pro rata basis in accordance with Texas Water Code Section 11.039 and according to the following water allocation policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-637. - Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
(a)  The city manager, or designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by press releases. 
(b)  The triggering criteria described below are based on a statistical analysis of the vulnerability of the water source under drought of record conditions. 
(1)  Stage 1 - Mild water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to prescribed restrictions on certain water uses, defined in section 106-631, definitions, when total daily water demand equals or exceeds 90 percent of the daily water production capacity for four consecutive days or 92 percent of water capacity production on a single day. 
b.  Requirements for termination - Stage 1 of the Plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 14 consecutive days. 
(2)  Stage 2 - Moderate water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses defined in section 106-631 of this plan when total daily water demand equals or exceeds 92 percent of the daily water production capacity for four consecutive days or 94 percent of the daily production capacity on a single day. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 7 consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 2, Stage 1 becomes operative. 
(3)  Stage 3 - Severe water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for Stage 3 of this plan when total daily water production capacity equals or exceeds 94 percent of the daily production capacity for four consecutive days or 96 percent of the daily water production capacity on a single day. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of five consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 3, Stage 2 becomes operative. 
(4)  Stage 4 - Critical water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for Stage 4 of this plan when total daily water production capacity equals or exceeds 96 percent of the daily water production capacity for four consecutive days or 98 percent of the daily water production capacity on a single day. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 4, Stage 3 becomes operative. 
(5)  Stage 5 - Emergency water shortage conditions. 
a.  Requirement for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with requirements and restrictions for Stage 5 of this plan when the city manager, or designee, determines a water supply emergency exists based on: 
1.  Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
2.  Natural or manmade contamination of water supply source(s). 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when all conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 24 consecutive hours (one day). 
c.  The city council may initiate any phase of plan when circumstance warrant, irrespective of triggering thresholds. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-638. - Drought response stages. 
    The city manager, or designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 106-637 of the plan, shall advise the city council a mild, moderate, severe, critical, or emergency condition exists and the city council may implement the following actions after public notice: 
(1)  Stage 1 - Mild water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve voluntary ten-percent reduction in landscape irrigation. 
b.  Supply management measures: In order to manage a limited water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will implement the following supply management measures: 
1.  Reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains; 
2.  Discontinue fire hydrant testing; 
3.  Implement measures to return any system component to full production capability (i.e. water wells, booster pumps, etc.); 
4.  Repair all existing main breaks. 
c.  Voluntary water use restrictions: 
1.  Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9), and to irrigate landscape only between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on designated watering days. Landscape irrigation should be reduced by at least ten percent per month. 
2.  All operations of the city shall adhere to water use restrictions prescribed for Stage 1 of the plan. 
3.  Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use for non-essential purposes. 
(2)  Stage 2 - Moderate water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a 30-percent reduction in landscape irrigation. 
b.  Supply management measures: In order to manage a limited water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will implement the following supply management measures: 
1.  All of the measures described for Stage 1; 
2.  Reduce or discontinue irrigation of public landscaped areas, including parks and ball fields. 
c.  Water use restrictions: Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (1, 2, 4, 6, or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9). The irrigation of landscaped areas is further limited to the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means of a hand-held hose with a positive shutoff nozzle, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five gallons or less, or drip irrigation system. Landscape watering shall be reduced by at least 30 percent per month. 
2.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
3.  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
4.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life, or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
5.  Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting and related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city. 
6.  All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except when requested. 
7.  The following uses of water are defined as non-essential and are prohibited: 
i.  Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
ii.  Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
iii.  Dust control; 
iv.  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; and 
v.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
(3)  Stage 3 - Severe water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a monthly 50-percent reduction in landscape irrigation. 
b.  Supply management measures: In order to manage a limited water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will continue implementing all of the measures described for Stage 1 and Stage 2. Irrigation of public landscaped areas, including parks and ball fields shall be discontinued. 
c.  Water use restrictions: All requirements of Stage 2 shall remain in effect during Stage 3 except: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and shall be by means of hand-held hoses with a positive shutoff nozzle, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation, or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times. Landscape watering shall be reduced by at least 50 percent per month. 
2.  Watering golf course tees is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the city. 
3.  Use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under special permit is to be discontinued. 
(4)  Stage 4 - Critical water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a 90-percent reduction in landscape irrigation. 
b.  Supply management measures: In order to manage a limited water supply and/or reduce water demand, the city will continue implementing all of the measures described in Stages 1, 2, and 3. 
c.  Water use restrictions: All requirements of Stage 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during Stage 4 except: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated water days between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and shall be by means of hand-held hoses with a positive shutoff nozzle, hand-held buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at all times. Landscape watering shall be reduced by at least 90 percent per month. 
2.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat trailer, airplane, or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial service station and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety and welfare is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
3.  The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
4.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life, or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a re-circulation system. 
5.  No applications for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed or approved. 
(5)  Stage 5 - Emergency water shortage conditions. 
a.  Goal: Achieve a 75-percent reduction in total daily water use. 
b.  Supply management measures: In order to manage limited water and/or reduce water demand, the city will continue implementing all of the measures described in Stages 1, 2, 3, and 4 above. 
1.  In addition, the city will use any or all alternative supply sources available, and will implement the usage of reclaimed water for non-potable purpose where available. 
c.  Water use restrictions: All requirements of Stage 2, 3, and 4 shall remain in effect during Stage 5 except: 
1.  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
2.  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited. 
3.  All water usage except what is required to protect health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-639. - Drought contingency plan water rates. 
    The following rates shall apply to all residential customers and all landscape irrigation meters. Said rates shall be 1.5 times for customers outside city limits: 
Stage 2 
First 2,000 gallons $11.03 2,001 to 10,000 gallons   3.01 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 20,000 gallons   6.00 per 1,000 gallons 20,001 to 30,000 gallons   8.00 per 1,000 gallons Over 30,001 gallons  10.00 per 1,000 gallons  
Stage 3 
First 2,000 gallons $11.03 2,001 to 10,000 gallons   3.01 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 20,000 gallons   8.00 per 1,000 gallons 20,001 to 30,000 gallons   10.00 per 1,000 gallons Over 30,001 gallons  12.00 per 1,000 gallons  
Stage 4 
First 2,000 gallons $11.03 2,001 to 10,000 gallons   3.01 per 1,000 gallons 10,001 to 20,000 gallons  10.00 per 1,000 gallons 20,001 to 30,000 gallons  12.00 per 1,000 gallons Over 30,001 gallons  14.00 per 1,000 gallons  
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-640. - Commercial and industrial customers. 
    The commercial and industrial community is critical to the local economy. Many enterprises use water to create a value added product and practice sound water conservation practices. The city manager, or designee, shall monitor water usage for best practices of commercial and industrial water customers. Failure to adhere to best practices for water conservation shall be a violation of the plan, and subject commercial and industrial customers to the penalties in section 106-641. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-641. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan. 
(b)  Any person who violates this Plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $2,000.00. Each day one or more of the provisions in this plan is violated it shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of the plan, the city manager shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of reconnection charges, hereby established at $75.00, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city manager that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in district court. 
(c)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates, shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation. 
(d)  Any city police officer, or other city employee designated by the city manager, may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this article. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charges, and shall direct him/her to appear in the Nacogdoches Municipal Court on the date shown on the citation. That appearance date shall not be less than three days, nor more than five days from the date citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member of the violator's immediate family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in Nacogdoches Municipal Court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in Nacogdoches Municipal Court. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-642. - Variances. 
(a)  The city manager, or designee, may in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance, and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article shall file a petition for variance with the city. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s); 
(2)  Purpose of water use; 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief; 
(4)  Detailed statement specifying how the provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner and what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article; 
(5)  Description of the relief requested; 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date; 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(c)  Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city manager, or designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance; 
(2)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(d)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Sec. 106-643. - Severability. 
    It is herby declared to be the intention of the Nacogdoches City Council, the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this plan shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this plan, since the same would not have been enacted by the Nacogdoches City Council without the incorporation into this plan of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
(Ord. No. 1583-12-11, 12-6-2011) 
Secs. 106-644-106-670. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXTENSION OF WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1392-11-05, adopted Nov. 15, 2005, repealed the former Art. VIII, §§ 106-271-106-679, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1971, §§ 31-61-31-69. 

Sec. 106-671. - Definitions. 
    City. The City of Nacogdoches, Texas, a municipal corporation acting by and through its governing body or its city manager. 
    Developer. A person, firm or corporation, whether one or more, that improves, sells or uses land for the purpose of constructing residential, commercial or industrial facilities or other improvements thereon. A developer may or may not be the owner of the land. 
    Institutional development. Church, hospital, school, government facility, service organization or similar development as determined by the city. 
    Main. A water or sanitary sewer pipeline that is intended for public use and meets the minimum requirements of this article. 
    Oversize. When, in accordance with the provisions of this article, a water or sanitary sewer line or facility is required to be designed and constructed larger than minimum city standards. 
    Owner. The record titleholder of premises served or to be served with a connection to a city water or sanitary sewer main. 
    Service line. A water or sanitary sewer pipeline that is intended for the private use of a developer or property owner. 
    Sewer. A sanitary sewer facility for transporting or treatment of municipal wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-672. - Main extensions within the city limits. 
(a)  On-site extensions, totally within property to be developed. 
(1)  A developer shall be responsible for the design, construction and all related costs of extensions to the city water and sewer systems that lie totally within a development, except that the city may refund the oversize cost as established in this article. 
(b)  Along-site extensions, lying along one or more sides or street frontages of a property to be developed and serving property other than the tract for which the extensions are made. 
(1)  A developer shall be responsible for the design, construction and all related costs of extensions to the city water and sewer systems that lie along side the property being developed. Such extension shall be required to extend at least to the mid-point of the developer's frontage. The developer may be refunded any oversize cost as established in this article. 
(c)  Off-site extensions, totally outside of and not along-site of property to be developed. 
(1)  A developer shall be responsible for the design, construction and all related costs of line extensions to the city water and sewer systems that lie outside the boundaries and frontages (off-site) of the property being developed. Such extension shall be required to extend at least to the mid-point of the developer's frontage. 
(2)  The city shall be responsible for the design, construction and related costs of line extensions to the city water and sewer systems that are within the boundaries of city-owned property other than street rights-of-way, dependent upon city priorities and funding availability. 
(d)  Exception for the first 100/500 feet of line extension. 
(1)  To provide new service to an individual single-family residence, the city may be responsible for the design, construction and related costs of the first 100 feet of a line extension. To provide new service to a commercial, industrial, institutional, multi-family or subdivision (two or more lots) development, the city may be responsible for the design, construction and related costs of the first 500 feet of a line extension. Such extension shall be accomplished at the discretion of and in an order of priority set by the city council and only if sufficient funds are available. Such extension shall be placed within public rights-of-way or in an easement to the city in a form acceptable to the city to be provided by the developer or owner. Such extension by the city shall be one time only for a particular developer or owner to serve a specific area, lot, or tract of within the city. If the area, lot or tract to be served requires a line extension from the existing line in excess of 100 feet then the entire extension shall be accomplished by the developer or owner at its cost and to city standards. The city will then consider reimbursement to such developer or owner for the cost of the first 100 feet of an individual single-family residence or 500 feet of a development extension at the discretion of and in an order of priority set by the city council and only if sufficient funds are available. 
(e)  Easements. If easements are necessary to extend a water or sewer main to the area, lot or tract of land to be developed, then the owner or developer of the property seeking a connection or extension shall secure the easements in accordance with city requirements. Minimum easement width shall be 20 feet. All easements shall be granted to the city in a form acceptable to the city and with satisfactory independent proof of fee title. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall apply only for the extension of a main to serve an area, lot or tract within the corporate limits of the city. With approval of the city, main extensions may be made to serve property outside the corporate limits, however, the developer or owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with the extension and must perform all design, construction and easement acquisition in accordance with city standards. There shall be no reimbursement or cost sharing provided by the city for extensions to serve property or facilities outside the corporate limits. 
(g)  The intention of sections 106-671 through 106-679 shall not be defeated by an owner or developer of multiple lots or a large or subdivided tract making multiple requests or successive subdivision in a manner which results in multiple exceptions for the first 100/500 feet of line extension. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-673. - Determination of city participation in oversize cost. 
    For water and sewer mains larger than six inches nominal pipe size required by the city to be installed by the developer, the developer may be refunded the difference between the cost of such larger mains and the cost of a six-inch main, or such larger size as may be necessary to serve the development for which extensions are required. Size of mains necessary for adequate service shall be as required by the city engineer. To determine this difference in costs generally, actual low bid prices obtained in accordance with city and state purchasing regulations shall be used subject to the city's review for reasonableness. The bids shall be unit price bids for the various items of work involved and shall include prices for both the six-inch system (or larger if required by the city) and the approved oversize system. The city will make refunds, subject to the availability of funds, within 30 days of acceptance of the main. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005) 
Sec. 106-674. - Refunding procedure. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for reimbursement, a developer must make every effort to obtain a minimum of three independent bids for each extension project. The bidding process shall follow city and state purchasing regulations and the bids shall be reviewed with a representative of the city engineering department. Reimbursement by the city shall be based on actual quantities installed at the low bid prices. The developer shall provide the city with a breakdown of the actual, installed quantities and costs upon completion of the main installation. Consultant fees paid by the developer or owner related to the extension of lines eligible for city cost participation may be considered by the city for reimbursement. The city share of such costs may be pro-rated to the total cost of construction and are subject to review and final approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 106-675. - Article not to affect previous contracts. 
    This article shall not affect or change any agreement or contract for providing water and sewer services that was entered into by the city on or before the effective date of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005) 
Sec. 106-676. - Standards and procedures. 
(a)  Minimum standards and procedures. 
(1)  The owner or developer shall present for approval to the city engineer a minimum of two sets of detailed construction plans, cost estimates and specifications prepared, completed, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas. The subdivision and platting of the property to be served must be in full compliance with the city ordinances governing and regulating the platting, subdivision and development of land (see chapter 26 of the City of Nacogdoches Code of Ordinances). The plans, specifications and contract documents must be in accordance with the city standards and ordinances. 
(2)  The size and type of water and/or sewer lines placed by the owner/developer on its said property shall be subject to all standards and requirements of the city. All metering, whether individual or central, shall be done adjacent to water mains laid in an easement to be granted by the owner or developer to the city. 
(3)  Any changes in originally submitted plans and specifications must have prior approval of the city engineer. 
(4)  All such extensions and improvements covered by this section shall be inspected by the city and shall be warranted by the owner/developer for a period of one year as to workmanship and materials. A bond or other guarantee approved by the city shall be given by each such owner/developer with two good and sufficient sureties signing thereon, to guarantee the city the work done on water and sewer facilities by the said owner/developer. Such bond or guarantee shall specifically name the city as the beneficiary or payee thereof, be in a monetary amount equal to the total cost of such facility installation, and shall be subject to the approval of the city as to form and content. The city may, in its sole discretion, require a corporate surety on any bond or guarantee. The bond or guarantee shall warranty the materials and workmanship of such facility installation and shall extend such warranty for a period of one year from and after the date of acceptance by the city. 
(5)  Each word, phrase, paragraph and section of this article is hereby declared to be an individual section or provision, and the holding of any word, phrase, paragraph or section to be void, ineffective or unconstitutional for any cause whatever, shall not be deemed to affect any other word, phrase, paragraph or section to circumstances or facts not connected with such holding. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005) 
Sec. 106-677. - Appeals. 
    The owner of a property affected by the provisions of this article may appeal a decision of the city to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever one of the following conditions are alleged: 
(1)  The provisions of this article do not apply to a specific case. 
(2)  The true intent and meaning of this article has been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
    The decision of the construction board of adjustment and appeals cannot alter the city's financial responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005) 
Sec. 106-678. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $2,000.00. Each violation of a provision and each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1392-11-05, 11-15-2005) 
Secs. 106-679-106-689. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-690. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of Nacogdoches citizens by regulating the installation, maintenance, operation and repair of irrigation systems within the corporate limits of the city as well as the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction to conserve water, avoid wasteful use, and improve the overall quality of life for the citizens of Nacogdoches. The provisions in this article are cumulative of all city ordinances. In the event of a conflict, the more stringent provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-691. - Adoption of Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules. 
    Chapter 344 of Title 30 of the V.T.C.A. Administrative Code relating to landscape irrigation, as amended, is hereby adopted as if set forth word for word in this article. In the event of conflict or inconsistency in the wording of this article and Chapter 344 of Title 30 of the V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, the more stringent provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-692. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Air gap means a complete physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time, it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
    Backflow prevention means the mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source. 
    Backflow prevention assembly means any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition. 
    Completion of irrigation system installation means when the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly. 
    Consulting means the act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems. 
    Cross-connection means an actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process. 
    Design means the act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. 
    Design pressure means the pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source. 
    Double check valve means an assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
    Emission device means any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters. 
    Employed means engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, § 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks. 
    Head-to-head spacing means the spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head. 
    Health hazard means a cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
    Hose bib means an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout. 
    Hydraulics means the science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system. 
    Inspector means a licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor. 
    Installer means a person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation inspector means a person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation plan means a scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system. 
    Irrigation services means selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply. 
    Irrigation system means an assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A. Agricultural Code, § 251.002 or connected to a groundwater well used by a property owner for domestic use as defined by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 551.006(e). 
    Irrigation technician means a person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation zone means a subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control. 
    Irrigator. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Title 30, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigator-in-charge means the irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to, obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system. 
    Landscape irrigation means the science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf. 
    License means an occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) under Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations) to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 30. 
    Main line means a pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves. 
    Maintenance checklist means a document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed. 
    Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service means any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere. 
    Master valve means a remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline 
    Matched precipitation rate means the condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate. 
    New installation means an irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist. 
    Non-health hazard means a cross-connection or potential cross-connection from a landscape irrigation system that involves any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable if introduced into the potable water supply. 
    Non-potable water means water that is not suitable for human consumption. Non-potable water sources include, but are not limited to, irrigation systems, lakes, ponds, streams, gray water that is discharged from washing machines, dishwashers or other appliances, water vapor condensate from cooling towers, reclaimed water, and harvested rainwater. 
    On-site sewage disposal system means a sewer treatment system as defined in Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 285. 
    Pass-through contract means a written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system. 
    Potable water means water that is suitable for human consumption. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker means an assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a pressure vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
    Reclaimed water means domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation. 
    Records of landscape irrigation activities means the irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve. 
    Static water pressure means the pressure of water when it is not moving. 
    Supervision means the on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or, beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system. 
    Water conservation means the design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. 
    Zone flow means a measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure. 
    Zone valve means an automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-693. - Water conservation. 
    All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation and preserve the integrity of the public water supply as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-694. - Metering. 
    All new irrigation systems and renovations to existing systems that replace more than 25 percent of the irrigation piping by length, shall be connected to the city's water system through a separate irrigation-only meter obtained from the city. Existing systems must remain connected to irrigation-only meters if already in place. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGN, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 106-695. - Valid license required. 
(a)  Any person who connects an irrigation system to the public water supply within the city or in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) must hold a valid license, as defined by Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 30, and required by Chapter 1903, V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, or as defined by V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, ch. 365, tit. 22 and required by Chapter 1301, V.T.C.A. Occupation Code. 
(b)  Exceptions to valid license holder requirement: 
(1)  A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, Title 12, § 1903.002(c)(1), if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's own residence. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, and isolation valves; 
(2)  An irrigation system that is used for an on-site sewer disposal system; 
(3)  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code, § 251.002; 
(4)  Drip or micro-spray irrigation devices connected to a hose bib. The installation of an atmospheric vacuum breaker or other approved backflow prevention device, upstream of the irrigation system is still required; or 
(5)  An irrigation system connected to a private water well. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-696. - Permit required. 
(a)  Any person installing an irrigation system connected to the city's water system is required to obtain a permit from the city, which permit will remain valid for six months from the date of issuance. If completion and written request for city inspection of irrigation system installation, as provided in this article, are not both performed within six months, then permit renewal will be required. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this article. If the permit includes installation of a new water meter, then a meter tap fee and installation fee may be required under this chapter. Permits may be obtained from the City of Nacogdoches Inspections and Permitting Department. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code, § 355.002; or 
(2)  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code, § 251.002; or 
(3)  An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-697. - Fees. 
    The city council may create a schedule of fees for obtaining and renewing an irrigation permit. These fees will be in amounts sufficient to cover the city's costs in issuing and renewing the permits, including, but not limited to, staff time and other overhead costs. This schedule will be kept at the City of Nacogdoches Inspections and Permitting Department. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-698. - Backflow prevention methods and devices. 
(a)  Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, or the University of Southern California, or applicable plumbing codes adopted by the City, or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies, as determined by the building official. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approved standards or the manufacturer's current published recommendations. 
(b)  If conditions exist that present a health hazard, one of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow: 
(1)  An air gap may be used if: 
a.  There is an unobstructed physical separation; and 
b.  The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if: 
a.  The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and 
b.  Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve. 
(3)  Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure condition will occur; and 
b.  The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler. 
(4)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure will be present; 
b.  There are no shutoff valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker; 
c.  The device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler; 
d.  There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and 
e.  A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls. 
(c)  Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. 
(d)  If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation, and: 
(1)  Backpressure caused by an elevation of pressure in the discharge piping by pump, or elevation of piping above the supply pressure which could cause a reversal of the normal flow of water or back-siphonage conditions caused by a reduced or negative pressure in the irrigation system, exist; and 
(2)  Test cocks are used for testing only. 
(e)  If a double check valve is installed below ground: 
(1)  Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested; 
(2)  Test cock plugs must be threaded, water-tight, and made of non-ferrous material; 
(3)  A Y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve; 
(4)  There must be a clearance between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to allow space for testing and repair; and 
(5)  There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check valve. 
(f)  If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly. 
(g)  The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested prior to being placed in service, and the test results shall be provided to the city and to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-699. - Specific conditions and cross-connection control. 
(a)  Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap. 
(b)  Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap. 
(c)  Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(d)  If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage disposal facility, as defined in Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Chapter 285, then: 
(1)  All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage facility system as required for a private water line in V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Title 30, § 285.91(10); 
(2)  Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, Title 30, § 344.50; and 
(3)  Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the on-site sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the on-site sewage facility system from operating effectively. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-700. - Irrigation plan design: minimum standards. 
(a)  A licensed irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed except as listed under section 106-695(b). A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the jobsite at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is to be provided to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original irrigation plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the irrigation plan does not: 
(1)  Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; 
(2)  Violate any requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan. 
(b)  The irrigation plan must include 100 percent coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide 100 percent coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan. 
(c)  All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing; 
(2)  All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered; 
(3)  A north arrow; 
(4)  A legend; 
(5)  The zone flow measurement for each zone; 
(6)  Location and type of each: 
a.  Controller; and 
b.  Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze); 
(7)  Location, type, and size of each: 
a.  Water source, such as, but not limited to, a water meter and point(s) of connection; 
b.  Backflow prevention device; 
c.  Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays; 
d.  Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves; 
e.  Pressure regulation component; and 
f.  Main line and lateral piping. 
(8)  The scale used; and 
(9)  The design pressure. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-701. - Design and installation. 
(a)  No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component. 
(b)  All new irrigation system installations, and renovations of existing systems which would include the replacement of a controller or over 25 percent of the system piping, shall install rain and freeze sensors to prohibit the system from watering during a storm or when temperatures are below freezing. 
(c)  Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads. 
(d)  Irrigation systems shall be installed to minimize spraying water over impervious surfaces such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, driveways, etc. 
(e)  The length of watering time, the time of day when the system is engaged, and the flow rate of each emitter shall be designed and installed to minimize over saturation resulting in excess runoff. Irrigation water flowing down driveways, sidewalks, over curbs, and along street gutters as a result of overwatering, shall be considered a nuisance and a violation of this article. 
(f)  All components of the irrigation system including sprinkler heads, emitter devices, pipes, lines, controllers and wiring must be installed within the owner's private property. Irrigation systems shall not be installed in public rights-of-way or easements without written consent of the building official. 
(g)  A master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations. 
(h)  Electrical wiring. 
(1)  Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground, and buried a minimum of six inches under compacted fill. 
(2)  Wiring and electronic components of an irrigation system, other than the controller, must be low voltage applications (24 volt or similar) 
(3)  Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation; 
(4)  Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer. 
(i)  Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be non-potable. No drinking or domestic water usage, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "non potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system. 
(j)  Unless excepted by the provision of this article or existing statutory authority, a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not on site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-702. - Completion of irrigation system installation. 
    Upon completion of irrigation system installations where a licensed installer was required, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to: 
(1)  Provide a final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system; 
(2)  Provide a maintenance checklist and operational instructions to the owner or owner's representative. The items on the provided to the owner shall include: 
a.  The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic; 
b.  The number and labeling of all zones shall be listed, and a copy of this list shall be placed within the controller; 
c.  A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors; 
d.  A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and 
e.  A written certification stating that the irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders, and that the system has been tested and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time. 
(3)  Provide a permanent label which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the information shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The irrigation layout plan indicating the final as-built configuration of the system, must be provided to the owner or owner representative. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-703. - Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems. 
(a)  Irrigation systems shall be inspected and repaired immediately when any part of the system fails to function properly. When evidence of leaks or excessive watering are observed, the owner shall shut off the failed zone until such time as a repair can be performed. 
(b)  Alterations of existing irrigation systems exceeding 25 percent of the pipe network by length shall trigger the installation or retrofitting of rain and freeze sensors and a separate irrigation water meter. The replacement of a controller will also require the installation of rain and freeze sensors if they do not already exist. 
(c)  When maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-704. - Reclaimed water. 
    Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if: 
(1)  There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption; 
(2)  The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the irrigation system's owner; 
(3)  The irrigation system is installed using purple components; 
(4)  The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with Title 30, V.T.C.A. Administrative Code, § 290.47(i); 
(5)  A minimum of an eight inch by eight inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, "RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK" and "AGUA DE RECUPERACIÓN - NO BEBER"; and 
(6)  Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the city's plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 106-705. - Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors. 
    A city inspector shall enforce this article, and shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed; 
(2)  Inspecting the irrigation system; 
(3)  Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this article; 
(4)  Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test results provided to the city; 
(5)  Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and 
(6)  Maintaining records according to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 106-706. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Any person, firm, entity, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this article, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a misdemeanor fine. Each day that a provision of this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $500.00. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this article and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this article or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with this article; and 
(2)  Other available relief. 
(Ord. No. 1727-3-17 , § II, 3-21-2017) 
Secs. 106-707-106-720. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATIONS 

Sec. 106-721. - Findings. 
    The City Commission of the City of Nacogdoches makes the following findings: 
(a)  Due to limited quantity and low quality, there are areas of shallow groundwater supplies within the city and its ETJ that are not valuable as potable water sources, and therefore are not utilized for potable water; 
(b)  A number of commercial and industrial properties in Nacogdoches and its ETJ are underlain with unusable groundwater that has become contaminated by historical on-site or off-site sources; 
(c)  The City of Nacogdoches uses groundwater from the downdip portion of the Carrizo Aquifer as part of its public water supply, but the outcrop of the Carrizo Aquifer does not extend into the corporate limits or ETJ of the city; 
(d)  The use of municipal setting designations within Nacogdoches and its ETJ allows for a state-evaluated corrective action process for groundwater that is directed toward protection of human health and the environment balanced with the economic welfare of the citizens of the city; 
(e)  Where public drinking water is available, the potable use of groundwater in MSDs should be prohibited to protect public health and welfare when the quality of the groundwater presents an actual or potential threat to human health; and 
(f)  The City of Nacogdoches' inhabitants should be given the opportunity to comment on proposals to designate an area as a MSD, and public input should be considered when deciding whether to grant a MSD application. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 1, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-722. - Definitions. 
    Affected community means those persons entitled to notice in section 106-724(b)(7) below. 
    Authorized representative means, for purposes of signing an application requesting MSD designation, if the applicant is a corporation, the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; and if the applicant is a local government, the chief executive officer or his authorized designee. 
    Chemical of concern means any chemical that has the potential to adversely affect ecological or human receptors due to its concentration, distribution, and mode of toxicity. 
    Environmental risk assessment means the qualitative and quantitative evaluation performed in an effort to define the risk posed to human health and/or the environment by the presence or potential presence and/or use of pollutants. 
    Groundwater means water below the surface of the earth. 
    Municipal settings designation ("MSD") means a designation as provided by V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code ch. 361, subch. W, which authorizes the commission to certify municipal setting designations in order to limit the scope of or eliminate the need for investigation of or response actions addressing contaminant impacts to groundwater that has been restricted from use as potable water by ordinance or restrictive covenant. 
    Potable water means water that is used for irrigating crops intended for human consumption, drinking, showering, bathing, or cooking purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 2, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-723. - Use of groundwater in municipal setting designation area as a potable water source prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a municipal setting designation area as a potable water source. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a municipal setting designation area for a purpose prohibited in the ordinance creating that municipal setting designation. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 3, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-724. - Application for city commission approval of municipal setting designation. 
(a)  A person, including the City of Nacogdoches, seeking city commission approval of a MSD for property within the corporate limits of the Nacogdoches or within its ETJ shall file eight copies of a MSD application with the city manager. An application may be filed in person, by United States mail, or by a document delivery service. 
(b)  An application shall be on a form provided by the city manager, and shall contain: 
(1)  Applicant's name and address, and the name, address, daytime telephone number, and email address of a contact person; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the proposed outer boundaries of the MSD; 
(3)  A statement as to whether the applicant has filed an application with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) requesting a MSD designation for the property; 
(4)  A statement, and supporting documentation, as to whether a public drinking water supply system exists that satisfies the requirements of V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code Chapter 341, and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to the property for which the MSD is sought, and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to property within one-half mile of the property for which the MSD is sought; 
(5)  A description of the groundwater sought to be restricted, including the identified chemicals of concern therein and the levels of contamination known to the applicant, and the identified vertical and horizontal area of the contamination; 
(6)  Identification of the person(s) responsible for the contamination of the groundwater, if known; 
(7)  A listing of: 
a.  All owners of real property lying within one-half mile of the subject property, as the ownership appears on the last approved tax roll; 
b.  All state-registered private water wells within five miles from the boundary of the property for which the designation is sought, including a notation of those wells that are used for potable water purposes (if known), and a statement as to whether the applicant has provided the owners with notice as provided in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 361.805; 
c.  Each retail public utility that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought, and a statement as to whether applicant has provided the utilities with notice as provided in V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 361.805; and 
d.  Each municipality, other than the City of Nacogdoches, with a boundary located not more than one-half mile from the property for which the MSD is sought; or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought; and a statement as to whether applicant has provided the municipalities with notice as provided in Texas Health and Safety Code Section 361.805; 
(8)  A copy of the application to the executive director of TCEQ, if one has been filed; 
(9)  A site map, drawn to scale, including a metes and bounds description of the property, the boundary of the proposed MSD, the location of groundwater on the property, and the extent of groundwater contamination to the limits that it has been defined. The map shall include a statement by a professional land surveyor registered by the Texas Board of Professional Surveying attesting to the accuracy of the metes and bounds property description; and 
(10)  Any other information that the city manager deems pertinent. 
(c)  The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant and shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in a manner designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(d)  An application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A set of printed mailing labels with the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(7) above; 
(2)  An electronic file of the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (b)(7) above, in a format acceptable to the city manager and compatible with city information systems; and 
(3)  An application fee in the amount of $2,000.00. 
(e)  An applicant may withdraw its application in writing by letter sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city manager, and withdrawal shall result in forfeiting the application fee. If the city manager has not issued public notice of the public hearing prior to the receipt of the withdrawal letter, the applicant may reapply at any time. If public notice of the public hearing has been issued when the withdrawal letter is received, a new application is subject to the limitations of section 106-730 below. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 4, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-725. - Staff review. 
(a)  Upon receiving an application for an MSD approval, the city manager will distribute a copy to his/her designee within the engineering department and to other city departments for staff review. The purpose of the review is to determine whether the application is complete, and whether any current or future city property or any of the city's other interests have the potential to be impacted by the proposed MSD. City staff shall not be tasked with conducting an environmental risk assessment of the application. 
(b)  City staff must send a written report to the city manager within ten calendar days of receiving the application, and advising of any city interests that may potentially be impacted by the proposed MSD. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 5, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-726. - City manager action following staffs application review. 
(a)  Following staff review of the application, if the city manager determines that the application is administratively complete, he/she will schedule a public meeting, and a public hearing before the city commission. The public meeting must be held prior to the public hearing. 
(1)  A public meeting will be scheduled at a time no later than 45 days following the day the application was received by the city, and 
(2)  A public hearing before the city commission will be scheduled at a time no later than 60 days following the day the application was received by the city. 
(b)  The date that an application is deemed to have been received by the city is the date the application was received by the city manager, as indicated by the file date stamped on the application package by the city manager's office. 
(c)  If the city manager determines the application is incomplete, he/she will return the application to the applicant, noting the deficiencies in writing. The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of the deficiency letter to correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application. If the applicant fails to submit a corrected application within the allotted time, the application shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 6, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-727. - Notice of public meeting and public hearing. 
(a)  Notice of the public meeting and the public hearing on an MSD application may be combined and must include the date, time and location of the two events, the identity of the applicant, the location and legal description of the property for which the MSD is sought, the purpose of the MSD, the type of contamination identified in the groundwater of the property for which the MSD is sought, and a statement that a copy of the application is available for public viewing at a specified Nacogdoches Public Library facility. Notice will be made as follows: 
(1)  The city manager will provide published notice of a public meeting and a public hearing for a proposed MSD by means of a legal advertisement appearing in a paper of general circulation. Not less than 15 days before the date set for the public meeting or the public hearing, published notice must be made of the public meeting and/or public hearing. 
(2)  The city manager will provide posted notice of a public meeting and a public hearing by requesting that the city secretary post the notice at City Hall, in a place readily accessible to the general public at all times, not less than 15 days before the date set for the public meeting and/or the public hearing; and 
(3)  The city manager will serve written notice of a public meeting and a public hearing for a proposed MSD not less than 15 days before the date set for the public meeting and/or the public hearing. Such notice shall be deemed served when it is deposited, properly addressed and regular postage paid, in the United States mail. Notice will be served to: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  The list provided by the applicant of owners of real property lying within one-half mile of the subject property, as the ownership appears on the last approved tax roll; 
c.  The list provided by applicant of persons who own private registered water wells within five miles of the subject property; 
d.  The list provided by applicant of each retail public utility that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought; and 
e.  The list provided by applicant of each municipality with a boundary located not more than one-half mile from the property for which the MSD is sought or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought. 
(b)  The city manager will direct the applicant to erect at least one sign upon the property for which an MSD has been requested. Where possible, such sign or signs must be located in a conspicuous place or places upon such property at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property. Such sign(s) must be so erected not less than 15 days before the date set for the public meeting. Any such sign(s) will be removed subsequent to final action by the city commission on the MSD application. The sign(s) must state that an MSD has been requested for the site and that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the number listed thereon or visiting the web site address listed thereon. The erection and/or the continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public meeting or public hearing or to any official action concerning the MSD application. 
(c)  The city manager will send a copy of the application to the Nacogdoches Public Library and request it be displayed for public review. The librarian for the facility will display the application in a publicly accessible area of the library until at least the completion of city commission action on the application, or the withdrawal of the application by applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 7, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-728. - Conduct of public meeting. 
(a)  The purpose of a public meeting is for the applicant to provide information to the affected community about MSDs and the application, and to obtain input on the application prior to a formal hearing before the city commission to consider the MSD application. 
(b)  The public meeting will be held in the evening at a location convenient to the affected community. 
(c)  The applicant or applicant's representative must appear at the public meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the public meeting either in person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee shall be forfeited. 
(d)  The city manager's designee will be responsible for the conduct of the meeting. He/she will give the applicant or the applicant's representative the opportunity to present its reasons for requesting an MSD, and will give members of the affected community the opportunity to ask the applicant questions or to make verbal comments on the application. 
(e)  The city secretary will make a tape recording of the public meeting available for the public. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 8, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-729. - Conduct of public hearing. 
(a)  Prior to the public hearing before city commission to consider the MSD application, the city manager will provide the city commission with a written report summarizing the request for the MSD, including any concerns raised by the reviewing departments and by persons attending the public meeting, and will attach a copy of the application to the report. 
(b)  The applicant or applicant's representative must appear at the hearing and present the request for an MSD. If the applicant fails to appear at the hearing either in person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee shall be forfeited. 
(c)  Persons wishing to speak either in favor of or against the application will be provided the opportunity in accordance with city commission rules or guidelines for public hearings. 
(d)  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the city commission may deliberate the matter of the application, and then may either: 
(1)  Vote to approve or disapprove the application; or 
(2)  Postpone action on the application to a future date. 
(e)  In order to approve an application, the city commission must: 
(1)  Adopt a resolution supporting the application to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality; and 
(2)  Enact an ordinance prohibiting the potable use of designated groundwater from beneath the property. The ordinance must include a metes and bounds description of the property to which the ordinance applies; a listing of the contaminants; and a statement that the ordinance is necessary because the contaminant concentrations exceed potable water standards. 
(f)  In the ordinance enacted pursuant to subsection (e)(2) above, city commission may place other reasonable restrictions on the use of designated groundwater from beneath the property. 
(g)  City commission approval of an application shall not be deemed to waive the city's right to comment on a MSD application that has been filed with TCEQ as provided by V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code § 361.805. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 9, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-730. - Limitation on reapplication. 
    If after public hearing the city commission disapproves a MSD application, or if the applicant has withdrawn its application after public notice of the public hearing has been issued, no new MSD applications for the property shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a hearing by the city commission within a period of 12 months of the date of disapproval or withdrawal. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 10, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-731. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  A person who has received approval of an MSD from the city, shall, upon issuance from the commission, provide the city manager with a copy of the certificate of completion or other documentation issued for the property by TCEQ, showing that response actions have been completed. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if they fail to provide the city manager with the documentation required in subsection (a) above, within thirty (30) days of its issuance by TCEQ. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 11, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-732. - Conflicting provisions. 
    This article shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances and of the Code of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, as amended, except where the provisions of this article are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances and such Code, in which event conflicting provisions of such ordinances and such Code are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 12, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-733. - Ordinance is severable. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in this article of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 13, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-734. - Amount of fine. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than $2,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 14, 11-3-2009) 
Sec. 106-735. - Preservation of rights and remedies. 
    All rights and remedies of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, are expressly saved as to any and all violations of the provisions of the ordinances amended by this article, which have accrued at the time of the effective date of this ordinance and, as to such accrued violations and all pending litigation, both civil and criminal, whether pending in court or not, under such ordinances, same shall not be affected by this article but may be prosecuted until final disposition by the courts. 
(Ord. No. 1533-11-09 , § 15, 11-3-2009) 
Secs. 106-736-106-750. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ROADWAY MAINTENANCE FEE 

Sec. 106-751. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Benefitted property means a single family residential units, multifamily residential units, commercial units, and industrial units within the city limits. 
    City limits shall mean the city limits of the City of Nacogdoches as they exist on the effective date of this article and as they may be amended from time to time. 
    Commercial utility service customer shall, for purposes of this article, mean a benefitted property city utility service account or the person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, non-profit organization, governmental entity or other entity responsible for the payment of the road maintenance fee for any location other than a single or multi-family dwelling or industrial property. 
    Industrial utility service customer shall, for purposes of this article, mean a benefitted property city utility service account or the person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, non-profit organization, governmental entity or other entity responsible for the payment of the road maintenance fee for any location which is defined by section 106-351 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Nacogdoches, Texas, as an industrial user. 
    Residential utility service customer shall, for purposes of this article, mean a benefitted property city utility service account or the person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, non-profit organization, governmental entity or other entity responsible for the payment of the road maintenance fee for a single or multi-family dwelling. 
    Roadway maintenance fee shall mean the fee that is established by this article which is assessed against, and collected from owners or occupants of benefitted property within city limits for the purpose of planning, constructing, operating, monitoring and maintaining the transportation system of the city. 
    Transportation system or road system shall mean the structures, traffic controls, streets and other facilities in the public right-of-way, such as bridges, sidewalks and alleys which are dedicated to the use of motor vehicles, transit, bicycles and pedestrians, all of which are owned and/or controlled in whole by the city and which are dedicated to the transportation system service of the city, including provisions for additions, improvements and extensions to such system. 
    Utility customer shall mean the holder of a city utility service account or the person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, governmental entity or other entity responsible for the payment of the road maintenance fee. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § II, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-752. - Establishment and revision of roadway maintenance fee. 
(a)  The city council hereby establishes a roadway maintenance fee to be paid by benefitted property utility customers within the city limits of Nacogdoches, Texas. Such roadway maintenance fee shall be set in amounts which will provide sufficient funds to properly maintain the transportation system. 
(b)  Collection of the roadway maintenance fee against each benefitted property shall be made by a monthly charge to be added to the benefitted property utility customer's utility bill for such property. 
(c)  The city council has established a fee schedule based upon the cost of maintaining the transportation system as follows: 
(1)  Single family residential benefitted property utility service customers shall be charged $5.00 per month for each such property. 
(2)  Multi-family residential benefitted property utility service customers shall be charged $2.50 per month for each dwelling unit located on each such property. 
(3)  Commercial benefitted property utility service customers shall be charged $7.50 per month for each such property. 
(4)  Industrial benefitted property utility service customers shall be charged $15.00 per month for each such property. 
(d)  The above stated fee schedule may be amended by the city council based upon changes in the cost of maintaining the transportation system. 
(e)  The roadway maintenance fund shall not be used to supplant funding of $500,000.00 annually from the general fund of the city for roadway maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-753. - Roadway maintenance fund. 
(a)  A separate fund shall be created effective January 1, 2018, known as the roadway maintenance fund. All roadway maintenance fees shall be deposited in the roadway maintenance fund. It shall not be necessary for the expenditures from the roadway maintenance fund to specifically relate to any particular property from which the roadway maintenance fees were collected. 
(b)  An annual report of the roadway maintenance fund and the roadway maintenance fee program will be provided to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-754. - Billing and collection of fee. 
    The roadway maintenance fee shall be billed and collected with the monthly utility bill. All such bills shall be rendered monthly and shall be due upon receipt. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-755. - Recovery of unpaid fee. 
    Any roadway maintenance fee due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered in action at law by the city. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this Ordinance or the Code of Ordinances, City of Nacogdoches, Texas, failure of any utility customer to pay the roadway maintenance fee promptly when due shall subject such utility customer to the discontinuance of utility services provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-756. - Administration; rules and regulations. 
    The city manager or designee shall be responsible for the administration of this article. The city manager or designee shall be responsible for developing rules, regulations and procedures for the administration of fees and the consideration of petitions for modification and appeals pertaining to the fees charged hereunder; developing maintenance programs; establishing transportation system criteria and standards for the operation and maintenance of the transportation system. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-757. - Disposition of fees and charges. 
(a)  The roadway maintenance fee shall not be used for the general government proprietary purposes of the city, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government thereof. 
(b)  Other than as described above, the roadway maintenance fee shall be used solely to pay for the costs of operation, administration, planning, engineering, development of guidelines and controls, inspection, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement and reconstruction of the transportation system and costs incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-758. - Exemption. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to exempt benefitted properties from provisions of this article through city council action. 
(b)  The following benefitted properties are immediately exempted from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Benefitted property owned or controlled by the Nacogdoches Independent School District. 
(2)  Benefitted property owned or controlled by Stephen F. Austin State University. 
(3)  Benefitted property owned or controlled by Nacogdoches County. 
(4)  Upon verification of proper governmental status and issuance of written approval by the city manager or city manager's designee, benefitted property owned or controlled by the State of Texas. 
(5)  Upon verification of proper governmental status and issuance of written approval by the city manager or city manager's designee, benefitted property owned or controlled by the Federal Government. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017; Ord. No. 1768-04-18 , § II, 4-17-2018) 
Sec. 106-759. - Appeals. 
(a)  A utility customer may appeal the roadway maintenance fee established herein pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section and as set out in any process developed by the city manager pursuant to section 106-756 herein. 
(b)  An appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the city manager or her/his designee within 14 calendar days after the date of the public utility billing statement containing the matter to be disputed. 
(c)  Appeals may be submitted for the following reasons: 
(1)  The utility customer's exempt property has been assessed a roadway maintenance fee; 
(2)  A roadway maintenance fee for the utility customer's benefitted property is assessed in duplicate on multiple utility accounts; 
(3)  A roadway maintenance fee is assessed to the utility customer's property outside the city limits; 
(4)  A roadway maintenance fee assessed against the utility customer's benefitted property is incorrect due to improper property characterization; or 
(5)  A roadway maintenance fee is assessed for a benefitted property unaffiliated to the utility customer's utility account. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within a reasonable time after receipt of a timely written notice of appeal from the utility customer. This decision will be final. 
(e)  During all periods of appeal the utility customer shall be responsible for payment of roadway maintenance fee charges in full. 
(f)  A utility customer appealing the roadway maintenance fee may not receive a refund resulting from the appeal except for a road maintenance fee paid within six months of the date of the utility customer's notice of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-760. - Determination and amendment of fee. 
    The roadway maintenance fee may be determined and amended by resolution of the city council based upon the costs to provide an efficient, reliable road system within the city limits of the City of Nacogdoches. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Sec. 106-761. - Liability. 
    This article does not imply that a benefitted property will be free from roadways in need of maintenance and, therefore, does not create additional duties on the part of the city. This chapter does not waive the city's immunity under any law. 
(Ord. No. 1756-12-17 , § III, 12-5-2017) 
Chapter 110 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 110-1-110-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate vehicles for hire, art. II, § 22[13]. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate vehicles used for carrying passengers for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-26. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    Chauffeur's license shall be obtained by each taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver from the chief of police before operation of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle in the city. 
    Chief of police shall refer to the chief of police or his designated officer. 
    Driver shall include every person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle, whether as owner or agent, servant or employee of the owner. 
    Franchise or license to operate shall mean an authority issued by the city council after a finding that the public convenience and necessity so require it, which may be issued to an owner or owners of taxicab, limousine or shuttle services. The term "franchise" shall apply to an owner or operator of taxicab, limousine or shuttle services which authorizes such owner or operator to engage in the business of transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle. The term "license", when used alone, shall apply to the authorization made to the franchise holder, which is a license to operate one or more taxicabs, limousines or shuttles, and although a franchise may be held by an owner and taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator for a designated number of licenses to operate a specified number of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles, an application must be made by the franchise holder for placing more taxicabs, limousines or shuttles within his license to operate. The term "franchise" shall mean the award of a certificate of public convenience and necessity within a franchise is tantamount to an amendment of the franchise by granting additional licenses for additional taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
    Limousine shall mean a luxury sedan with a manufacture's rated seating capacity of not more than 15 passengers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city, having a driver furnished as part of the service, and which operates on a pre-arranged basis only whereby such pre-arrangement is made not less than one hour in advance of the time transportation is to begin. Expressly excluded from this definition are limousines used exclusively in connection with funeral services and free shuttle services offered by hotels, motels and area attractions. 
    Manifest shall mean a daily record prepared by a taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver of all trips made by said driver showing time and place of origin, designation, number of passengers, driver's name, date, hours of operation, total miles and the amount of fare of each trip. The manifest for taxicab drivers shall also include the taxi number, meter number, paid miles, units, trips and extras. 
    Owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or society who has the control, direction, maintenance and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles on or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as owner or otherwise, except "drivers" as hereinafter defined. 
    Public convenience and necessity shall mean a public convenience which is fitting and suited to public need and a public necessity which embraces a great and urgent public convenience. This term as applied to a proposed service by an applicant shall mean that the applicant is fit, able, and willing to perform transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and that public convenience and necessity require the service proposed by such applicant. 
    Taxi stand shall mean and include the taxi depot at which place the taxicabs shall be housed or parked, and at which place the telephone calls and requests for service shall be made, and at which place a dispatcher shall control the movements of the taxicabs to the points of request for such service. This term shall likewise be synonymous with taxi terminal and shall mean and embrace that space and area of land and buildings off of the streets of the city and upon private property, and shall be and constitute the main office of the owner and taxicab operator. 
    Taxicab shall mean every automobile or motor propelled vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city not over a defined or fixed route, and irrespective of whether or not the operations extend beyond the city limits of the city, at rates for distance traveled, or for wait time, or for both, or at rates per hour, per week or per month, which such vehicles is routed to destinations under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or such person or persons hiring the same; provided however, that the term "taxicab" shall not apply to motor buses operated within the city under a franchise from the city over a fixed or definite route, nor shall such term apply to motor buses regularly operated in the city along with fixed routes to and from points outside the incorporated limits of the city, nor shall such term apply to motor vehicles regularly engaged in interstate commerce, nor shall such term apply to limousines or shuttles as defined in this section. 
    Shuttle shall mean a sedan or van with a manufacture's rated seating capacity of not more than 15 passengers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire from a location in the city to another location either inside or outside the city, having a driver furnished as part of the service, and which operates on a pre-arranged basis only whereby such pre-arrangement is made not less than one hour in advance of the time transportation is to begin. Expressly excluded from this definition are shuttles used exclusively in connection with free shuttle services offered by hotels, motels and area attractions. 
    Taximeter shall mean a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically/electronically the distance driven and waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
    Taxicab, limousine or shuttle license means the approval under the terms of division 3 of this article of the vehicle to be operated as a taxicab, limousine or shuttle and shall be obtained from the chief of police before operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle in the city. 
    Waiting time shall mean such time as may be consumed or lost at the special instance and request of a passenger after such passenger has first entered the taxicab to make a trip and before reaching his final destination; and no charge shall be made against a passenger for any other time lost on account of any other delay whatsoever. 
(Code 1971, § 28-1; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-27. - Duties of city council generally. 
(a)  To make reasonable orders respecting character, extent, quality and standard of service. 
(b)  To recommend such rates as are not in conflict with the express provisions hereof and to make reasonable orders respecting the same. 
(c)  To prescribe, via original franchise, the number of vehicles to be operated by such grantee, applying thereto the principles of public necessity and convenience. Subsequent requests by grantee for additional vehicles shall be approved by the city manager and are subject to appeal to city council if denied. 
(d)  To require examination and recommend the advisability of the licensing of all drivers or operators of any vehicle operated or maintained by such grantee under the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1971, § 28-6; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Secs. 110-28-110-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE AND BUSINESS LICENSE AND REGULATIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 110-56. - Declaration of public convenience and necessity prerequisite for issuance of license. 
    No business license to operate a taxicab, limousine or shuttle and/or franchise shall be issued by the city council, until the city council shall first, after a hearing, declare by certificate that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed service for which application for license or franchise is made; provided, however, that such declaration of public convenience and necessity shall not be necessary in the following instances: 
(1)  For the annual renewal of the same number of licenses in force. 
(2)  For the renewal of licenses to the applicant for the number of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles for which the city council shall have, at any time prior to the application for such renewal, made a declaration of public conveniences and necessity; provided, however, that said taxicabs, limousines or shuttles shall have been duly licensed and operated by such applicant during the previous year for which such renewal is sought. 
(Code 1971, § 28-31; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-57. - Criteria for determination of public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of taxicab, limousine or shuttle services for which application may be made; the city council shall take into consideration: 
(1)  Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require such proposed taxicab, limousine or shuttle service within the city. 
(2)  Kind and type of equipment or vehicles and color scheme to be used by the applicant. 
(3)  Increased traffic congestion on the streets of the city which may result from licensing taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
(4)  Whether the safe use of the streets of the city by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be unduly endangered by the granting of such license. 
(5)  Whether the applicant is fit, able and willing to perform transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle. 
(6)  Other relevant facts as the city council may deem advisable or necessary, which may throw light on public necessity and convenience. 
(b)  No application will be granted and no finding shall be made of public convenience and necessity unless and until there is a finding that such applicant is fit, able and willing to perform transportation by taxicab, limousine or shuttle as provided by this chapter and that there is public demand and need for the type of service proposed. 
(c)  A refusal on the part of the holders of franchises to meet public convenience and necessity shall constitute just cause for a finding of additional need of public convenience and necessity and thereby authorize the city council to issue additional franchises and additional certificates of public convenience and necessity, over and above those granted pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1971, § 28-32; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 110-58. - Notice to holders of certificates. 
    When an application is filed purporting to reflect fitness, willingness and ability, as well as a need for transportation service by taxicabs, limousines or shuttles in the city, the city secretary shall provide copies to the holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity, being the franchised taxicab, limousine or shuttle operators in the city, giving and granting to the franchised operators of such services an opportunity to reply both on the question of convenience and necessity, prior to and at the hearing to be held by the city council, as provided for in section 110-60. 
(Code 1971, § 28-33; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-59. - Notice of application and hearing. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise, the city secretary shall cause a notice to be published in the daily newspaper of the city, and the cost of publishing shall be advanced in full by the applicant. Said notice shall set out the facts that an application has been filed for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle service, the name of the applicant, the kind of equipment, and all other pertinent data from such application which the city secretary may deem necessary. Such publication shall constitute a notice to all holders of existing taxicab, limousine or shuttle licenses and to the public that a public hearing will be held by the city council at a public place in the city, and at a designated time given in such notice, which designated time shall not be less than five days nor more than 15 days after the date of the publication of such notice. 
(Code 1971, § 28-34; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-60. - Hearing on application. 
    All holders of existing taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchises or any other citizens shall be entitled to file any complaints or protests that such party may have to the issuance of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise. At the time of the holding of the investigation and hearing, with reference to whether public convenience and necessity require operation of such vehicle or vehicles covered in the application for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise, city council shall consider all complaints and protests and in conducting the hearing shall have the right to call such witnesses as they see fit. In all such hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear, cogent and convincing evidence that the public convenience and necessity require such operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which such application has been made and that the applicant is fit, able and willing to perform such transportation of persons and property by taxicab, limousine or shuttle as proposed in such application. 
(Code 1971, § 28-35; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 110-61. - Notice to applicants. 
(a)  If the city council finds from the investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the vehicles for which a taxicab, limousine or shuttle license is desired, they shall notify the applicant thereof of their findings. Within five days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the chief of police any and all relevant information which may be required. 
(b)  If the city council finds from such investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which a taxicab, limousine or shuttle license is desired, they shall forthwith notify the applicant of their finding. 
(Code 1971, § 28-36; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-62. - Issuance of certificate. 
    If the city council finds that there is a need of transportation by taxicabs, limousines or shuttles that is not being furnished by the franchised operators of such services and the insurance policy required by this article has been filed and deposited with the chief of police and that such vehicle or vehicles comply with and the applicant has complied with all relevant provisions of this Code and relevant ordinances of the city and all of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police to more effectively carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter and such ordinances, they shall issue a written certificate to the city secretary, not more than ten days after their findings have been declared, certifying that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such taxicab(s), limousine(s) or shuttle(s) or any less number thereof which the applicant desires and proposes to operate, and that the applicant is entitled to have such vehicle or vehicles licensed as taxicabs, limousines or shuttles and franchises to operate taxicabs, limousines or shuttles upon complying with all or other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 28-37; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-63. - Sale, transfer of certificate. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise may be sold and transferred without the written approval of the city expressed by a resolution. No resolution shall be drafted approving the sale and transfer of a certificate of public convenience and necessity for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle franchise without a hearing first held before the city council, followed by a finding of the city council that the person proposing to purchase such franchise is fit, able and willing to carry on the transportation of persons by taxicab, limousine or shuttle in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. In the event that the person seeking to purchase a franchise is a person holding a franchise and a certificate of public convenience and necessity, and being a then licensed operator of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles in the city, then and in that event, the applicant asking authority to purchase shall be deemed to have introduced a prima facie case of fitness, willingness and ability. 
(Code 1971, § 28-38; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-64-110-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Franchise 

Sec. 110-91. - Required. 
    No person shall be permitted to engage in the transportation of persons for hire in the operation of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles in the city unless a franchise to permit such operation of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles is first obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 28-39; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-92. - Applications. 
    It shall be the duty of the city secretary to receive all applications for franchises to operate taxicab, limousine or shuttle services. 
(Code 1971, § 28-40; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-93. - Liability and casualty insurance. 
(a)  No franchise shall be issued under this article, nor shall such franchise be valid after issuance, nor shall any transportation service be operated unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance meeting the requirements of Texas law for automobile liability insurance, providing for payment of damages to property, injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the operator and/or vehicle driver would be liable on account of liability imposed by law, regardless of whether the vehicle was being driven by the operator or driver. 
(b)  The maximum amount of recovery in a policy of insurance required by this article shall not be less than the state minimum. 
(c)  Every insurance policy or contract of insurance required under this section shall contain a provision that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured, and every such policy shall contain a provision making the city an additional insured under such policy or contract of insurance. 
(d)  Every insurance policy or contract of insurance required under this section shall contain a provision for the insurer to give not less than 30 days' written notice to the city and to the named insured before any cancellation or termination of any such policy or contract of insurance shall automatically revoke and terminate the permit unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(e)  A certificate of insurance showing compliance with insurance required under this section shall be filed with the chief of police, and no permit granted under this section shall be valid unless and until such certificate shall have been so tendered. Such certificate shall be replaced when it expires. 
(f)  Any operator shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against all liability arising out of the operator's permitted activities hereunder. 
(g)  All policies or contracts of insurance shall be approved by the city and shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas. 
(Code 1971, § 28-41; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-94. - Street rental charge. 
    An annual street rental charge is hereby levied upon the owner and operator of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles operating within the city limits in the sum of $25.00 per taxicab, limousine or shuttle for which the franchise is granted or held. The holder of a franchise or the operator of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be required to pay to the city at the office of the city secretary, in lawful money of the United States, such amount or amounts, which remittance shall be made annually on or before the first day of each February, for the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1971, § 28-42; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-95. - Duration. 
    Any franchise granted to operators of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles shall continue for a period of five years, unless sooner revoked by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 28-43; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-96. - Organization of business. 
    In the performance of his duties and privilege under this chapter, the grantee of a franchise may provide for the conduct of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle service by operating the same through divisions, or units, under trade names or trademarks, or through operating companies, provided each such operation shall first be approved by the city council by resolution duly adopted, and provided no such operation shall diminish the obligation of the revenue accruing to the city under this grant. 
(Code 1971, § 28-44; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-97. - Assignment, subletting. 
    No person granted a franchise shall assign or sublet his franchise. 
(Code 1971, § 28-45; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-98. - Payment of taxes, levies, etc. 
    Any grantee of a franchise shall promptly pay all lawful ad valorem taxes, and such other levies and assessments, if any, that may be lawfully imposed upon it. 
(Code 1971, § 28-46; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-99. - Amendments. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to modify, amend, alter, change or eliminate any of the provisions of the franchise, during the life of the same, for the following purposes: 
(1)  To eliminate or delete from the same such conditions as then prove obsolete or impractical. 
(2)  To impose such additional conditions upon the grantee as may be just and reasonable, such conditions to be those as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of insuring adequate service to the public. 
(Code 1971, § 28-47; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-100. - Suspension or termination of franchise/business license. 
    The franchise and business license granted under this division shall be subject to suspension and/or termination for: 
(1)  Neglect, failure or refusal of such owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator to comply with the terms of such franchise of this division. 
(2)  Failure of a taxicab franchise owner to operate taxicab(s) at least five days per week. This requirement does not apply to limousine or shuttle operations. 
    In the event of complaint or upon its own motion the city council may set a public hearing, giving the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator at least seven days' notice of the hearing and the given nature of the complaint or concern. 
    Should the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator be found at such hearing to have violated the term of this article or its franchise or business license, the city council may, by written notice to the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator, suspend for a period of time or revoke the rights of the owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator under such franchise or business license or admonish such owner or taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator. 
    Notice shall be effective when sent certified mail return receipt required, properly addressed and postage paid to the recipient. Notice of the decision of the city council upon the hearing shall be sent within five business days of such hearing. Appeal of such suspension, revocation or admonition shall be to the State District Court of Nacogdoches County, Texas. 
(Code 1971, § 28-48; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-101-110-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Vehicle License 

Sec. 110-126. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the city limits unless there has been obtained by the owner of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle a vehicle license issued by the chief of police. 
(Code 1971, § 28-54; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-127. - Application. 
    Any applicant, except those provided in subsections 110-56(1) and (2), for a taxicab, limousine or shuttle vehicle license shall make proper application therefore on blanks to be furnished by the chief of police. 
(Code 1971, § 28-55; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-128. - Inspections. 
    Before any taxicab, limousine or shuttle vehicle license is issued by the city, such taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be inspected by the chief of police to determine that it: 
(1)  Displays a current state vehicle inspection sticker, and 
(2)  Is clean, and 
(3)  That all equipment workings and the like required by this article, the franchise or the operator of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle, and state or federal law is present and in operating condition. 
(Code 1971, § 28-56; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-129. - Inspection fees. 
    An inspection fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection of each vehicle. The payment shall be due at the time of the vehicle inspection. 
(Code 1971, § 28-57; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-130. - Revocation or suspension. 
    Upon complaint filed by any person with the chief of police, or upon his own motion, the chief of police, after five days' notice of the grounds of such complaint to the owner or operator of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle against whom a complaint is made, may hear evidence with reference to such complaint and after such hearing, the chief of police may revoke or suspend the vehicle license of such owner or operator of any particular taxicab, limousine or shuttle service for good cause shown. 
(Code 1971, § 28-58; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-131. - Appeals from revocation or suspension. 
    After the chief of police has heard the complaint for the revocation or suspension of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle vehicle license of any owner or operator of such vehicle, he shall make his findings and declare the same and either the owner or operator of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle or the complainant shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten days and such appeal shall be perfected by a letter delivered to the city manager, stating that an appeal from the ruling of the chief of police is desired to the city council as a whole. If an appeal from the decision of the chief of police is perfected as above provided, the decision shall be suspended until passed upon by the city council. Upon receiving such appeal, the city council, as soon as practicable thereafter, shall hear such appeal and shall either sustain, modify or reverse the decision of the chief of police. If no appeal is taken from the ruling of the chief of police in the time as provided above, the ruling of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Code 1971, § 28-59; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-132-110-155. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Regulations 

Sec. 110-156. - Chief of police to recommend regulations to council. 
    The chief of police shall recommend to the city council reasonable rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to facilitate the service to be rendered to the public under a franchise, which when approved by the city council by appropriate measures, shall become binding upon the grantee of a franchise. 
(Code 1971, § 28-7; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-157. - Delinquent ad valorem taxes. 
    No operator of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles shall engage in the transportation of persons by taxicab, limousine or shuttle at any time when the ad valorem taxes assessed against such taxi stand, taxicab, limousine, shuttle or such equipment shall be delinquent. 
(Code 1971, § 28-21; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-158. - Persons authorized to operate taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxicab, limousine or shuttle to be driven or operated within the city by a person except the owner of such taxicab, limousine or shuttle, or the authorized agent or employee of the owner. 
(Code 1971, § 28-2; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-159. - Operators to comply with traffic laws. 
    All automobiles or vehicles used in connection with a taxicab, limousine or shuttle service shall be operated in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas, this Code and other ordinances of the city, and such future amendments thereof, relating to or regulating the operation of motor vehicles upon streets or highways. 
(Code 1971, § 28-3; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-160. - Owner, operator responsible for negligence of driver. 
    The owner or operator is responsible for the acts of negligence of any driver of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle who shall drive such taxicab, limousine or shuttle with the knowledge or with the consent of such owner or operator. 
(Code 1971, § 28-4; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-161. - City officers, employees not to accept favors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to accept directly or indirectly any gifts, discounts or gratuities from any holder of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle permit or driver of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle or from any person engaged in the repair of taxicabs, limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-5; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-162. - Taxi stands. 
(a)  Taxi franchise owners with five or fewer taxicabs operating in the city limits are not required to maintain an off-street taxi stand or terminal. If operated as a home occupation, the franchise shall not be operated in such a way as to violate the terms of a home occupation, as defined in section 118-1 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Taxi franchise owners with more than five taxicabs operating inside the city limits shall maintain within the city limits an off-street taxi stand or terminal of sufficient size to accommodate all of the franchise owner's taxicabs. The franchise owner shall have such taxi stand open to the general public from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and shall be available via telephone 24 hours per day. 
(c)  The location and type of building must be in compliance with zoning regulations. The form and type of taxi stand shall be of such a nature as best meets public convenience and necessity and affords a safe, sanitary and lawful operation of transportation by taxicabs. The site, location and type of proposed buildings and the sanitary conditions of the taxi stand shall be reflected in an application to the chief of police. The equipment, site and place of a taxi stand must be found by the chief of police to best meet public convenience and necessity prior to an authorization to a franchise holder to operate such taxi stand. 
(Code 1971, § 28-8; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 110-163. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1725-12-16 , § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2017, repealed § 110-163 in its entirety. Former § 110-163 pertained to subtaxistands and derived from the Code of 1971, § 28-9; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, adopted Sept. 4, 2004. 
Sec. 110-164. - Receipt and discharge of passengers. 
    No driver of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street, but shall drive to the right-hand sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers; provided however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit such vehicles from so discharging or receiving passengers on the left-hand side of the street or sidewalk where left-hand parking is permitted within the city. 
(Code 1971, § 28-10; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-165. - Transporting undesirables; procuring. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle to knowingly transport any passenger to the abode of a commercialized prostitute or to knowingly transport any known criminal, narcotic peddler, prostitute or bootlegger in the commission of a crime or the infraction of the law in any manner or to act as a contact man for unlawful establishments of any character. 
(Code 1971, § 28-11; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-166. - Disposition of property left in vehicle. 
    It shall be the duty of every taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver to immediately return to the owner, if known, any luggage, merchandise or other property left in his taxicab, limousine or vehicle. If the owner is not know, said driver shall, immediately upon return to his terminal, turn over to the operator of the terminal any property left in his vehicle with a complete report of when it was left in his vehicle. Such articles shall be tagged and if not called for within 72 hours shall be turned over to the chief of police with all available information as to the probable owner. If such articles remain unclaimed, the chief of police shall dispose of such property in accordance with applicable city ordinances and state law. 
(Code 1971, § 28-12; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-167. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful to transport alcoholic beverages, not owned and in the exclusive possession and control of a fare paying passenger, in the taxicab, limousine or shuttle or for any taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver to have on his person any alcoholic beverage while driving and operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle. 
(Code 1971, § 28-13; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-168. - Smoking prohibited in taxicabs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver or passenger of any taxicab to smoke tobacco products of any kind while the taxicab is occupied. The owner of every taxicab will post in a prominent location in the taxicab, visible to every occupant, a "No Smoking" sign composed of letters of no less than one inch in height. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-14; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-169. - Maximum seating. 
    It shall be unlawful to carry more passengers than any vehicle is equipped to transport. The number of passengers permitted in a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be determined by the vehicle make and design. 
(Code 1971, § 28-15; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-170. - Taxicab required to have lighted dome sign on top of same. 
    All taxicabs in the city shall have a lighted dome sign on top thereof just above the windshield, which sign shall have the word "TAXI" thereon. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-16; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-171. - Rates. 
(a)  The rate of fare for one passenger shall be $2.00 for the first .10 mile and $0.175) for each .10 mile or fraction thereof traveled thereafter. The rate for additional passengers shall be $1.00 per passenger, not to exceed the vehicle's maximum seating capacity, with a minimum trip fare of $4.50. 
(b)  For each one minute of waiting time consumed by the taxicab at the instance of the passenger, the rate shall be $0.25. 
(c)  Whenever a taxicab is engaged on an hourly basis, whether for one or more passengers, the rate of fare shall be $25.00 for each hour. For each quarter hour in excess of each completed hour, the rate shall be $6.25 for each quarter hour the taxicab is so engaged. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-17; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-172. - Display of rates. 
    A card showing the rates charged by a taxicab shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the inside of each taxicab and on the back of the front seat at all times. 
    This section will not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-18; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-173. - Receipt for fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab upon receiving full payment of a fare to refuse to give a receipt therefore upon request of any passenger making said payment. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-19; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-174. - Refusal to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the same or to hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-20; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-175. - Complaints. 
    All taxicabs, limousines or shuttle franchises operated in the City of Nacogdoches will post in a prominent location in the vehicle, visible to every occupant, a sign composed of letters of no less than one inch in height stating "All complaints regarding the operation of this vehicle shall be directed to the Nacogdoches Police Department." 
(Ord. No. 1371-9-04, § 28-15.1, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-176. - Maximum year model and mileage limit for vehicles. 
    No inspection permit shall be issued for any vehicle older than eight years or with mileage exceeding 300,000 miles. 
(Ord. No. 1371-9-04, § 28-17.1, 9-7-2004) 
Secs. 110-177-110-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 110-201. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Every person operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle business or service in the city shall employ as a driver only persons who are physically and mentally fit and able to operate a motor vehicle for hire, and it shall be the duty of the owner of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle service or business, as well as the driver, to furnish to the chief of police a physician's certificate stating that the driver, who seeks a chauffeur's license to operate a taxicab, limousine or shuttle is physically and mentally fit to operate such taxicab, limousine or shuttle. 
(b)  Every person who driver a taxicab, limousine or shuttle shall be covered either personally or through the franchise owner or operator with automobile liability insurance meeting the minimum requirements of Texas law. 
(c)  It shall be the full responsibility of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator to select and employ drivers who are qualified for taxicab, limousine or shuttle service, who can read and write the English language, and who are familiar with the streets and addresses in the city. 
(d)  Every operator of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle business or service is charged with a knowledge of the police and court records of all drivers in his employ and no such operator shall employ or retain in his employ any person, as a taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver, who frequently violates laws governing motor vehicle operations or violates law which directly relate to the occupation of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver. 
(Code 1971, § 28-73; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-202. - State license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the city unless he is duly licensed by the State of Texas for the transportation of passengers, having on his person at all times while operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle, an appropriate and valid Texas driver's license. 
(Code 1971, § 28-74; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-203. - Maximum hours in day driver may operate. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any taxicab, limousine or shuttle licensed under this article to permit any driver to operate such taxicab, limousine or shuttle for more than 12 hours within a 24-hour period. 
(Code 1971, § 28-75; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-204. - Driver's daily manifest. 
(a)  Each person or company operating a taxicab, limousine or shuttle business shall provide its drivers with forms for maintaining a daily manifest. The form must include appropriate spaces for recording: 
(1)  Taxi number, driver's name, date, hours of operation, meter number, total miles, paid miles, units, trips and extras; 
(2)  Time, place, origin and destination of each trip; 
(3)  Number of passengers and amount of fare and other charges; and, 
(4)  Other information required by the city council to facilitate the implementation of this article. 
(b)  Each driver shall complete a manifest on a separate form for each tour of duty. The driver shall provide the information required by the form and shall record the information with regard to trips at the end of each trip. The driver shall return completed manifest forms to the owner of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle business upon completion of each tour of duty. 
(c)  The owner or operator of every taxicab, limousine or shuttle business will keep such daily manifest forms in a permanent and orderly fashion and make such records available to the city council or designated city officials at their request, and keep such forms for five years. 
(d)  Limousine and shuttle drivers shall be exempt from having to meeting requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1971, § 28-76; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-205-110-230. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Chauffeur's License 

Sec. 110-231. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the city limits without having first obtained from the chief of police a "City of Nacogdoches chauffeur's license". 
(Code 1971, § 28-77; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-232. - Application. 
    To obtain a chauffeur's license, each person shall make a written application therefore to the chief of police, upon the form provided therefore by the city, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name, age and specific address of the applicant. 
(2)  The full name of the person or owner for whom the applicant proposes to be employed. 
(3)  The length of local residence of the applicant in the city, county, state and the United States and whether or not he/she is a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  Proof of liability insurance either through he applicant or the taxicab, limousine or shuttle operator shall be attached to the application. 
(5)  The experience that applicant has had in rendering such service. 
(6)  Whether applicant has been convicted of a felony, and full information concerning same; likewise, if applicant has a police record with any conviction of a misdemeanor and full information concerning the same. 
(7)  Whether applicant has been convicted of a violation of the law in the operation of motor vehicles, and if so, full information concerning the same. 
(8)  A true photocopy of the front and back of the state driver's license issued to the applicant. 
(9)  Two color passport size photos shall be attached to the application. 
(Code 1971, § 28-78; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-233. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall make or cause to make such investigations of the character, criminal history (only to the extent allowed by law), experience and qualifications of the applicant for a chauffeur's license as may be deemed consistent, judicious and allowed by law. 
(Code 1971, § 28-79; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-234. - Determination of applicant's fitness, appeals. 
(a)  Based on the application and his investigation, and within 30 days of receipt of the complete application and all driver's license and criminal history information required by the chief of police, the chief of police shall determine whether or not any applicant for a chauffeur's license is fit and proper to drive and operate a taxicab, limousine or shuttle within the corporate limits of the city in a manner consistent with the welfare of the citizenry. Falsification, material omission or material misrepresentation of or on the application shall be nonexclusive grounds for denial of such application. 
(b)  If the chief of police has made his decision as to whether or not the applicant for a chauffeur's license is fit and proper to drive a taxicab, limousine or shuttle, and declared same, either the applicant for such license or any citizen of the city, shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten days, which appeal shall be perfected by delivering in writing five copies of same to the city council, stating that an appeal from the decision of the chief of police is desired. The city council shall, within a period of not more than 15 days after receiving such notice of appeal, grant a hearing thereon, and after the hearing of such appeal shall, within a period of five days, sustain or reverse the decision of the chief of police. If no appeal is taken from the findings made by the chief of police within the time provided above, the decision of the chief of police shall be final; otherwise the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Code 1971, § 28-80; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-235. - Fee. 
    A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for each chauffeur's license issued by the city. No chauffeur's license shall be issued until said fee is paid. 
(Code 1971, § 28-81; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-236. - Issuance. 
    After the applicant for a chauffeur's license has complied with all requirements of the relevant provisions of this article and the approval of the chief of police, a chauffeur's license shall be issued to him. 
(Code 1971, § 28-82; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-237. - Expiration. 
    Any chauffeur's license issued by the city shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1971, § 28-83; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-238. - Renewal. 
    A license under the provisions of this division may be renewed annually without filing a new application by payment of a $5.00 license fee. Renewal may be refused for any reason the original application could have been rejected. 
(Code 1971, § 28-84; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-239. - Nontransferable. 
    Any chauffeur's license that is issued by the city shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1971, § 28-85; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-240. - Identification card. 
(a)  Issuance. Each applicant for a chauffeur's license shall, at the time of the actual issuance of said license, be issued an identification card. 
(b)  Contents. The identification card shall be postcard size, and shall contain the full description, residence address and fingerprints of the applicant. 
(c)  Possession. The identification card shall be carried on the person of the applicant and presented for identification purposes on demand of any passenger or police officer. 
(Code 1971, § 28-86; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-241. - Suspension, appeals. 
    The chief of police, upon making any of the findings justifying a revocation of a chauffeur's license, may temporarily suspend such chauffeur's license. Upon such suspension, the holder of such chauffeur's license shall have the right to appeal to the city council as provided in section 110-131. 
(Code 1971, § 28-87; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-242. - Revocation. 
    Any chauffeur's license may be revoked by the chief of police after a hearing is first held by the chief of police resulting in finding that the driver of the taxicab, limousine or shuttle was guilty of any of the following: 
(1)  Making any false statement or material omission or material misrepresentation in his application for a chauffeur's license. 
(2)  Knowingly engaging in the sale of intoxicating liquors, directly or indirectly. 
(3)  Knowingly engaging in the transportation of any known criminal, narcotic peddler, prostitute, or bootlegger, in the commission of a crime, or in the infraction of the law in any manner. 
(4)  Acting in any manner as a contact man for bootlegging or a contact man for any unlawful establishments of any character. 
(5)  Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of a taxicab, limousine or shuttle driver as determined under the guidelines adopted by the city for such analysis. 
(Code 1971, § 28-88; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-243. - Appeal of revocation. 
    Upon revocation of any chauffeur's license by the chief of police, the holder of such chauffeur's license shall have the right to appeal such revocation to the city council as provided for in section 110-131. 
(Code 1971, § 28-89; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-244-110-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAXIMETERS 

Sec. 110-271. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be operated or advertised for public hire in the city unless it is equipped with a taximeter, which taximeter shall be used as provided in this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, driving or in charge of any taxicab for hire in the city to drive or operate such taxicab, or to use or advertise in connection therewith the word taxi, taxicab or cab, or in soliciting trade from the public, to represent or exhibit such vehicle as a taxi, taxicab or cab, unless each vehicle be equipped with a taximeter. 
(c)  The taximeter requirements stated herein shall not be applicable to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-23; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-272. - Use in determining fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, driving or in charge of a taxicab to operate or drive such taxicab unless a taximeter is used in determining the fare to be charged, and no other or different fare shall be charged than the fare recorded on the reading face of such taximeter for such trip and no other rates or methods of measuring the distance or time charges shall be allowed except as expressly permitted by this division. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-24; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-273. - Size, design, specifications. 
    Every taxicab shall use a taximeter which shall conform to the following specifications. 
(1)  The taximeter shall be a mechanical/electric instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically/electronically calculated for the distance traveled, for waiting time, if any, and extra passengers, if any, and upon which such charge or charges shall be indicated by means of clearly legible figures which are electrically lighted each time the taximeter flag is thrown from nonearning to earning position. 
(2)  Every taximeter must register upon visual counters the following items: 
a.  Total miles (unless shown by accurate registration on the speedometer tested in good working order on the taxicab). 
b.  Paid miles. 
c.  Number of trips. 
(3)  Each taximeter must be driven from the taxicab transmission to the taximeter head. 
(4)  No taximeter shall be in such condition as to be more than five percent incorrect to the prejudice of any passenger. 
This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-25; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-274. - Case to be sealed; cover and gear intact. 
    No person shall use or permit to be used or driven for hire a taxicab equipped with a taximeter the case of which is unsealed and not having its cover and gear in tact. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-26; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-275. - Tests and inspections generally. 
    All taximeters used in the city shall be kept in good repair and functioning accurately. The city may require each taximeter tested for accuracy by the appropriate responsible state agency and/or by any private company capable of performing such test. Proof of accuracy from such test shall be submitted to the chief of police. The actual cost of the test shall be borne by the owner or operator of the taxicab. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-27; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-276. - Changing flag to vacant position. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver to call to the attention of passengers to the amount registered on the taximeter, and the taximeter flag shall not be changed to vacant position until after the fare is paid. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-28; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-277. - Unauthorized display of signal. 
    No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter, while carrying a passenger or passengers, or while under employment, shall display the signal affixed to such taximeter in such position as to denote the vehicle is not employed, or in such position as to denote that the taxicab is employed at a rate of or different from that which the use of the taxicab legally justified under the provisions of this division. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-29; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 110-278. - Multiple passengers. 
    The first passenger employing a taxicab shall be entitled to its exclusive use until delivered to his destination by the most practical direct route and no other passenger may be carried unless the passenger or passengers first engaged the taxicab shall consent to additional passengers not with him or her party. 
    This section shall not apply to limousines or shuttles. 
(Code 1971, § 28-30; Ord. No. 1371-9-04, 9-7-2004) 
Secs. 110-279-110-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-306. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Carriage means a wheeled passenger vehicle pulled by a horse. 
    Carriage horse means any horse or any animal in the horse family which is used by its owner in exchange for a fee. A horse rented or leased by its owner to another for any of the purposes set forth in this article shall be deemed to be a carriage horse for the purpose of this article. 
    Chief of police means the administrative head of the police department or his designee. 
    Code enforcement officer means the representative of the city whose primary duty is to enforce various codes related to property appearance and various nuisances. 
    Franchise or license to operate means an authority issued by the city council after a finding that the public convenience and necessity so require it, which may be issued to an owner of a horse-drawn carriage service. The term "franchise" shall apply to an owner or operator of a horse-drawn carriage service, which authorizes the owner or operator to engage in the business of transportation by horse-drawn carriage. 
    Holder means a person who is granted a permit under this article. 
    Horse-drawn carriage driver means any individual duly licensed as a driver by the state as required by this article and who operates or has been duly employed to operate a horse-drawn carriage by the holder of a horse-drawn carriage permit. 
    Horse-drawn carriage service means a service offered to a passenger as transportation under this article. 
    Operating authority means a permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
    Passenger means an individual, other than the driver, being transported by horse-drawn carriage. 
    Permit means permission granted by the city to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire within the city for a period of 12 months and renewable under the provisions of this article; provided, however, that the permission granted is neither expired nor revoked. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, company, association, or a joint stock association owning, driving, controlling, or operating any horse-drawn carriage as defined and regulated by this article. 
    Public convenience and necessity means a public convenience, which is fitting and suited to public need, and a public necessity, which embraces a great and urgent public convenience. This term as applied to a proposed service by an applicant shall mean that the applicant is fit, able, and willing to perform transportation by horse-drawn carriage in accordance with the requirements of this article and that public convenience and necessity require the service proposed by such applicant. 
    Street means and includes any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive, public way, or highway commonly used for the purpose of public travel within the corporated limits of the city. 
    Work, as applied to a horse and carriage means the horse is out of its stable and presented to the public as being available for pulling a carriage. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-90, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-307. - Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly do or perform any act prohibited in this article and it shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly fail to do or perform any act required in this article. Upon conviction of any violation of this article a person shall be subject to punishment as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-91, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-308. - Correction notices. 
(a)  Any officer of the city with power to enforce this article may, when in his judgment and for health and safety reasons, it becomes necessary to protect the passengers, the general public or the horse: 
(1)  Remove a horse from a public street until such time as the horse is reexamined by a veterinarian of this state and the permit holder obtains a certificate from that veterinarian stating the horse has been personally examined by him and such horse is fit to return to work in the horse-drawn carriage business. 
(2)  Remove a carriage from the street when it is not in compliance with the provisions of this article. The carriage shall not be allowed to operate on public streets until a reinspection is performed and the chief of police or his designee certifies it to be in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When a horse or carriage is removed from service, an officer with the power to enforce this article shall issue a correction notice to the driver or permit holder. Such notice shall state the specific reason for action taken and that the carriage or horse shall not be allowed to operate until a reinspection is conducted and the carriage or horse is certified to be in compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-158, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-309. - Citations; penalties. 
(a)  All police officers and/or code enforcement officers of the city have the authority and are charged with the responsibility enforcing the provisions of this article. Any police officer of the city may issue a citation for the violation of any provision of this article. 
(b)  The violation of a provision, rule, or regulation under the provisions of this article shall be a class C misdemeanor. Each offense is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 but not less than $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-159, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-310. - Declaration of public convenience and necessity prerequisite for issuance. 
    No business license to operate a horse-drawn carriage and/or franchise shall be issued by the city council, until the city council shall first, after a hearing, declare by certificate that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed service for which application for a license or franchise is made. Such declaration of public convenience and necessity shall not be necessary in the following instances: 
(1)  For the annual renewal of the same number of licenses in force. 
(2)  For the renewal of licenses to the applicant for the number of horse-drawn carriages for which the city council shall have, at any time prior to the application for such renewal, made a declaration of public conveniences and necessity; provided, however, that the horse-drawn carriages shall have been duly licensed and operated by such applicant during the year previous to the year for which such renewal is sought. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-95, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-311. - Criteria for determination of public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of horse-drawn carriage services for which application may be made, the city council shall take into consideration: 
(1)  Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require such proposed or such additional horse-drawn carriage service within the city. 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  The number, kind, and type of equipment to be used by the applicant. 
(4)  The increased traffic congestion on the streets of the city which may result from the licensing of additional horse-drawn carriages. 
(5)  Whether the safe use of the streets of the city by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be unduly endangered by the granting of such additional license. 
(6)  Whether the applicant is fit, able, and willing to perform transportation by horse-drawn carriage. 
(7)  Other relevant facts as the city council may deem advisable or necessary which may throw light on public necessity and convenience. 
(b)  No application will be granted and no finding shall be made of public convenience and necessity unless and until there is a finding that such applicant is fit, able, and willing to perform transportation by horse-drawn carriage as provided by this article and that there is public demand and need for the type of service proposed. 
(c)  A refusal on the part of the holders of franchises to meet public convenience and necessity shall constitute just cause for a finding of additional need of public convenience and necessity and thereby authorize the city council to issue additional franchises and additional certificates of public convenience and necessity, over and above those granted pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-96, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-312. - Notice to holders of certificates. 
    When an application is filed purporting to reflect the applicant's fitness, willingness, and ability, as well as a need for transportation service by horse-drawn carriage in the city, the person making such application must make additional copies thereof and serve such copies upon the holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity, being the franchised horse-drawn carriage operators in the city, giving and granting to the franchised operators of such services an opportunity to reply on the question of convenience and necessity, both prior to and at the hearing to be held by the city council, as provided for in section 110-314. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-97, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-313. - Notice of application, hearing. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a horse-drawn carriage franchise, the city secretary shall cause a notice to be published in the daily newspaper of the city, and the cost of publishing shall be advanced in full by the applicant. The notice shall set out the facts that an application has been filed for a horse-drawn carriage service, the name of the applicant, the kind of equipment, and all other pertinent data from such application which the city secretary may deem necessary. Such publication shall constitute a notice to all holders of existing horse-drawn carriage licenses and to the public that a public hearing will be held by the city council at a public place in the city, and at a designated time given in such notice, which designated time shall not be less than five days nor more than 15 days after the date of the publication of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-98, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-314. - Hearing on application. 
    All holders of existing horse-drawn carriage franchises or any other citizens shall be entitled to file any complaints or protests that such party may have to the issuance of any horse-drawn carriage franchise. At the time of the holding of the investigation and hearing, with reference to whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such additional vehicles covered in the application for a horse-drawn carriage franchise, the city council shall consider all of the complaints and protests and in conducting the hearing shall have the right to call such witnesses as they shall see fit. In all such hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear, cogent, and convincing evidence that the public convenience and necessity require such operation of the horse-drawn carriages for which such application has been made and that the applicant is fit, able, and willing to perform such transportation of persons and property by horse-drawn carriage as proposed in such application. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-99, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-315. - Notice to applicants. 
(a)  If the city council finds from the investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the horse-drawn carriages for which a horse-drawn carriage license is desired, they shall notify the applicant thereof of their findings. Within five days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the city manager any and all relevant information which may be required. 
(b)  If the city council finds from such investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the operation of the vehicles for which a horse-drawn carriage license is desired, the city council shall forthwith notify the applicant of its finding. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-100, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-316. - Issuance of certificate. 
    If the city council finds that there is a need of transportation by horse-drawn carriage that is not being furnished by the franchised operators of such services and the insurance policy required by this article has been filed and deposited with the city manager and that such equipment and animals comply with and the applicant has complied with all relevant provisions of this Code and relevant ordinances of the city and all of the rules and regulations established by the city manager to more effectively carry out the purpose and intent of this article and such ordinances, they shall issue a written certificate to the city secretary, not more than ten days after their findings have been declared, certifying that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of such horse-drawn carriages or any less number thereof which the applicant desires and proposes to operate, and that the applicant is entitled to have such equipment licensed as horse-drawn carriage services and franchises to operate horse-drawn carriages upon complying with all other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-101, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-317. - Sale, transfer of certificate. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity for a horse-drawn carriage franchise may be sold and transferred without the written approval of the city expressed by a resolution. No resolution shall be drafted approving the sale and transfer of a certificate of public convenience and necessity for a horse-drawn carriage franchise without a hearing first held before the city council, followed by a finding of the city council that the person proposing to purchase such franchise is fit, able, and willing to carry on the transportation of persons by horse-drawn carriage in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. If the person seeking to purchase a franchise is a person holding a franchise and a certificate of public convenience and necessity, and being a then-licensed operator of horse-drawn carriages in the city, then the applicant asking authority to purchase shall be deemed to have introduced a prima facie case of fitness, willingness, and ability. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-102, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-318-110-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE 

Sec. 110-336. - Required. 
    No person shall be permitted to engage in the transportation of persons for hire in the operation of horse-drawn carriages in the city unless a franchise to permit such operation of horse-drawn carriages is first obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-103, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-337. - Application. 
    It shall be the duty of the city secretary to receive all applications for franchises to operate horse-drawn carriages. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-104, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-338. - Liability and casualty insurance. 
(a)  No franchise shall be issued under this article, nor shall such franchise be valid after issuance, nor shall any transportation service be operated unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance meeting the requirements of state law for automobile liability insurance, providing for payment of damages to property and injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the operator and/or vehicle driver would be liable on account of liability imposed by law, regardless of whether the vehicle was being driven by the operator or driver. 
(b)  The maximum amount of recovery in a policy of insurance required by this article shall not be less than the state minimum. 
(c)  Every insurance policy or contract of insurance required under this section shall contain a provision that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured, and every such policy shall contain a provision making the city an additional insured under such policy or contract of insurance. 
(d)  Every insurance policy or contract of insurance required under this section shall contain a provision for the insurer to give not less than 30 days written notice to the city and to the named insured before any cancellation or termination of any such policy or contract of insurance. Cancellation or termination of any such policy or contract of insurance shall automatically revoke and terminate the permit unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(e)  A certificate of insurance showing compliance with insurance required under this section shall be filed with the chief of police, and no permit granted under this article shall be valid unless and until such certificate shall have been so tendered. Such certificate shall be replaced when it expires. 
(f)  Any operator shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against all liability arising out of the operator's permitted activities under this article. 
(g)  All policies or contracts of insurance shall be approved by the city and shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-105, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-339. - Street rental charge. 
    An annual street rental charge is levied upon the owner and operator of horse-drawn carriages operating within the city limits in the sum on file in the city secretary's office per horse-drawn carriage for which the franchise is granted or held. The holder of a franchise or the operator of a horse-drawn carriage shall be required to pay to the city at the office of the city secretary, in lawful money of the United States, such amount, which remittance shall be made annually on or before each February 1 for the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-106, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-340. - Duration. 
    Any franchise granted to operators of horse-drawn carriages shall continue for a period of five years, unless sooner revoked by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-107, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-341. - Organization of business. 
    In the performance of his duties and privilege under this article, the grantee of a franchise may provide for the conduct of such business by operating the same through divisions, or units, under trade names or trademarks, or through operating companies, provided each such operation shall first be approved by the city council by resolution duly adopted, and provided no such operation shall diminish the obligation of the revenue accruing to the city under this grant. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-108, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 110-342. - Assignment, subletting. 
    No person granted a franchise under this division shall assign or sublet his franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-109, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-343. - Payment of taxes, levies, etc. 
    Any grantee of a franchise under this division shall promptly pay all lawful ad valorem taxes, and such other levies and assessments, if any, that may be lawfully imposed upon the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-110, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-344. - Amendments. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to modify, amend, alter, change, or eliminate any of the provisions of the franchise granted pursuant to this division, during the life of the same, for the following purposes: 
(1)  To eliminate or delete from the same such conditions as then prove obsolete or impractical. 
(2)  To impose such additional conditions upon the grantee as may be just and reasonable, such conditions to be those as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of ensuring adequate service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-111, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-345. - Suspension or termination of franchise and business license. 
(a)  The franchise and business license granted under this article shall be subject to suspension and/or termination for neglect, failure, or refusal of such owner or horse-drawn carriage operator to comply with the terms of such franchise or this article. 
(b)  In the event of complaint or upon its own motion the city council may set a public hearing, giving the owner or carriage operator at least seven days' notice of the hearing and the given nature of the complaint or concern. 
(c)  If the owner or carriage operator should be found at such hearing to have violated the term of this article or its franchise or business license, the city council may, by written notice to the owner or carriage operator, suspend for a period of time or revoke the rights of the owner or carriage operator under such franchise or business license or admonish such owner or carriage operator. 
(d)  Notice shall be effective when sent certified mail, return receipt required, properly addressed and postage paid to the recipient. Notice of the decision of the city council upon the hearing shall be sent within five business days of such hearing. Appeal of such suspension, revocation, or admonition shall be to the state district court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-112, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-346-110-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 110-371. - Authority to operate required. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a horse-drawn carriage service within the city without first securing operating authority granted under this article. 
(b)  A person shall not transport a passenger for hire inside the city limits by carriage unless the driver holds a valid state driver's license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire on city streets for any purpose except as provided under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-116, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-372. - Grant or denial; scope. 
    The authority to grant or deny a permit under this division and to renew or deny renewal of a permit, shall be vested exclusively with the city manager. Upon arrival of an application for a permit, the permit holder is authorized to operate horse-drawn carriages carrying passengers for hire on an approved route within the city for a period of 12 months beginning on the date stated on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-117, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-373. - Application. 
    To obtain a permit pursuant to this division, a person shall make application to the city manager in a manner prescribed by this section. The applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the horse-drawn carriage service. The applicant shall file with the city a written, sworn application containing the following: 
(1)  The nature of the service to be performed. 
(2)  Name, address, and verified signature of the applicant. 
(3)  The proposed hours of operation. 
(4)  The name, address, and driver's license number of all horse-drawn carriage drivers. 
(5)  Number and description of the horses and carriages the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the horse-drawn carriage service. 
(6)  An outline and description of the proposed route to be traveled by the horse-drawn carriage, to include proposed area of loading and unloading passengers. Note: All proposed routes are subject to rejection or modification by the chief of police. 
(7)  Proof of liability insurance covering the period of proposed operation of the horse-drawn carriage will be required before a permit to operate is issued. 
(8)  If application is by other than owner of carriages and/or horses, the applicant shall provide the name and address of the actual owner, and the applicant shall provide proof of ownership of the carriages and/or horses. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-118, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-374. - Fees. 
(a)  An applicant under this division shall pay the city a permit fee per year for each carriage authorized by the permit. Such fee is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)  Payment of the permit fee shall be made prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(c)  A permit holder shall operate not more than the approved number of carriages authorized by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-119, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-375. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The city manager, the chief of police, or assistant chief of police may temporarily suspend the operation privileges of a permit holder under this division when he finds that the permit holder is in violation of the franchise or regulations as set out in this article and such violation constitutes an imminent danger to the health or safety of the public. 
(b)  Notice will be given to the driver or permit holder to immediately suspend operations, stating the reason for the temporary suspension. The permit holder shall not operate a horse-drawn carriage until the cause for suspension has been corrected and same has been reinspected by the code enforcement officer and the suspension lifted by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-120, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-376. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The city manager may revoke a horse-drawn carriage permit where he finds that it is in direct violation of the franchise or regulations set out in this article, and/or where a permit holder or driver has had two or more suspensions pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager shall give written notice to the horse-drawn carriage permit holder of such revocation of privilege to operate. The decision of the city manager to revoke a holder's permit shall be appealable to the city council upon written notice of appeal within seven days of such revocation. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council within 30 days of receipt of the city council of such notice of appeal. The appeal shall use the same criteria as set out in this section. That person may not reapply for a new permit for 90 days. 
(c)  The chief of police, code enforcement officer, or any police officer may petition the city manager to revoke a holder's permit to operate a horse-drawn carriage for the following causes: 
(1)  The holder will permit or has permitted a driver to operate a horse-drawn carriage who does not have a valid state driver's license. 
(2)  Two or more health or safety violations of this article or traffic law convictions during the term of the permit. 
(3)  The consumption of alcoholic beverage or the use of drugs by a carriage driver while on duty. 
(4)  For any material violation of this article or rules and regulations governing horse-drawn carriages or violations of the laws of this state where it is determined revocation of a holder's permit is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-121, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 110-377-110-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATING AND SERVICE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 110-396. - Compliance by holders. 
    In the operation of a horse-drawn carriage service a holder shall comply with the terms and conditions of the holder's operating authority and shall comply with this article, regulations established under this article, and other law applicable to the operation of a horse-drawn carriage service. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-126, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-397. - Compliance by drivers. 
    While on duty, a driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall comply with this article, regulations established under this article, other law applicable to the operation of a motor vehicle in the state, and orders issued by the holder employing or contracting with the driver in connection with the holder's discharging of its duty under its operating authority and this article. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-127, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-398. - Holder's duty to enforce compliance by drivers. 
(a)  A holder pursuant to this article shall establish policy and take action to discourage, prevent, or correct violations of this article by drivers who are employed or contracted by the holder. 
(b)  A holder shall not permit a driver under his employ to operate a carriage if the holder knows or has reasonable cause to suspect that the driver has failed to comply with this article, the rules and regulations established by the city manager, the chief of police or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-128, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-399. - Holder's responsibility for fitness of driver. 
    Every holder pursuant to this article shall ensure that only persons who are physically and mentally fit and able to operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire will drive a horse-drawn carriage under the holder's authority to operate. It shall be the full responsibility of the holder to select and employ drivers who are qualified to operate horse-drawn carriages, and who are familiar with the streets within the city where horse-drawn carriages are allowed to operate. The holder shall submit to the city manager and the chief of police a roster of all drivers prior to operating horse-drawn carriages. The holder shall not permit any person not on that roster to drive a horse-drawn carriage under his control. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-129, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-400. - Conduct of drivers. 
    While on duty, a driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall: 
(1)  Conduct himself/herself in a reasonable, prudent, and courteous manner; 
(2)  Maintain a sanitary and well-groomed appearance; 
(3)  Not consume, nor report to duty within 12 hours after consuming, alcoholic beverages or drugs; 
(4)  Not solicit passengers in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by any manner annoying any person or obstruct the movement of any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage; 
(5)  Not permit any unauthorized person to operate carriages under his control; 
(6)  Not permit persons to ride or sit on horses under his control; 
(7)  Not leave a horse unattended at any time; 
(8)  Not permit a horse to drop excrement from its diaper; 
(9)  Empty diapers of all excrement when half full and at the beginning of each trip; 
(10)  Keep all routes and carriage staging areas clean and free of animal excrement; 
(11)  Walk a horse at a pace not faster than slow trot when transporting passengers; 
(12)  Not allow passengers to stand, hang over the side, or ride on the back of the carriage; 
(13)  Not allow passengers to engage in horseplay while in the carriage; 
(14)  Not permit anyone on the carriage who is intoxicated; 
(15)  Not allow alcoholic beverages to be brought on or consumed on the carriage; 
(16)  Have in his possession his state driver's license when operating a horse-drawn carriage; 
(17)  Comply with state motor vehicle laws governing the operation of a motor vehicle while operating a horse-drawn carriage on a public roadway within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-130, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-401. - Public liability and property damage insurance required. 
(a)  The permit holder pursuant to this article shall provide proof of and maintain, at his own expense, the following type and amount of insurance for the term of the permit: 
(1)  Type. Comprehensive general (public) liability to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Premises/operation; 
b.  Independent contractors; 
c.  Personal injury; 
d.  Product/completed operations; 
e.  Contractual liability; 
f.  Operation of horse-drawn carriages. 
(2)  Amount. Combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage, $500,000.00. 
(b)  The permittee further agrees that with respect to the required insurance, the city shall be: 
(1)  Named as additional insured; 
(2)  Provided with a waiver of subrogation; 
(3)  Notified immediately, in writing, of cancellation of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-131, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-402. - Payment of taxes. 
    The permit holder pursuant to this article shall pay all city taxes, fees, or assessments levied on the business or property used in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-132, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-403. - Hours of operation. 
    A person may operate a horse-drawn carriage only during the hours specified on the holder's permit, which shall be determined by the city manager with due regard to the health and safety of the customers and public at large as well as traffic safety and circulation. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-133, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-404. - Routes. 
(a)  A permit holder pursuant to this article shall operate carriage tours only within the areas approved by the chief of police. 
(b)  The carriage driver shall alter his route at the direction of a police officer in an emergency situation. 
(c)  Subject to city manager approval, additional restrictions may be imposed to promote the public safety. Additionally, the police department may impose temporary restrictions during period of heavy traffic congestion resulting from construction, traffic accidents, holiday activities, or other special events. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-134, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-405. - Maintenance of routes and staging areas. 
(a)  A permit holder pursuant to this article shall at his own expense keep routes and staging areas clean and free of all animal excrement and other debris created in the course of operating a horse-drawn carriage. A trash receptacle shall be maintained by the licensee at the loading/unloading site. 
(b)  Disposal of manure shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and must be transported to an approved disposal area. 
(c)  Where excrement has been removed from the route (street) or the staging area, water will be used to thoroughly rinse down those areas. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-135, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-406. - Fares. 
    The permit holder pursuant to this article shall file a schedule of fares with the city manager, subject to his approval. Fares may be adjusted only after filing a request through the city manager and approval granted. Minimum and maximum fares must be visibly posted at all embarkment points. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-136, 9-19-2000) 
Secs. 110-407-110-425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR HORSES AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 110-426. - Identification, health certificate required for horses. 
(a)  No person shall use or offer the use of a horse not described in the application for the permit to operate a horse-drawn carriage service. For the purpose of this article, the use of a horse-drawn carriage service means that a horse is used or offered for use to the public for a fee for the purpose of operating a horse-drawn vehicle for hire. 
(b)  The application shall contain the name and address of the owner of each horse to be used by the holder or his employee for the purpose of pulling a horse-drawn vehicle. The age, sex, color, markings, and any other identifying marks such as brands or tattoos shall be listed in the application. Should there be a need for a horse previously identified on the application to be replaced or should the franchisee or licensee wish to permit additional horses, the city manager shall be provided all necessary information for the health certificate and the animal inspected by the code enforcement officer prior to being put in service. 
(c)  The applicant for a horse-drawn carriage permit shall at the time of application present to the city manager a health certificate for each horse to be used. The holder or applicant shall, at his own expense, have each horse examined by a licensed veterinarian before it is put in service. The health certificate will be valid for a period of 90 days from the date of issuance by the veterinarian. The certificate of health from the veterinarian shall contain a statement certifying the horse is physically sound, is free of disease, and is capable of being used to pull a horse-drawn carriage. The health certificate shall also contain the following information: 
(1)  The examination record of the horse in use; 
(2)  A picture of the horse; 
(3)  Weight of the horse (minimum weight 1,000 pounds); 
(4)  Description and location of any identifying characteristics, marks, brands, and/or tattoos; 
(5)  Description of any mechanical lameness which would not cause pain or suffering to the horse during use; and 
(6)  A record of annual immunization for rabies, Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis, eastern and western equine encephalomyelitis, tetanus, influenza, and annual negative Coggins test. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-141, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-427. - Health and safety requirements for horses. 
(a)  A permit holder pursuant to this article shall ensure that appropriate and sufficient food and drinking water are available for each horse and that, while working, each horse is permitted to eat at reasonable intervals and permitted to have access to drinking water as may be necessary. 
(b)  Permit holders shall not allow a horse to be worked during adverse weather or other dangerous conditions which are a threat to the health or safety of the horse, passengers, or general public. 
(c)  Permit holders and drivers shall ensure that carriage horses are not worked for more than eight hours in a continuous 24-hour period. 
(d)  A carriage horse required to be registered pursuant to this article which is lame or suffers from a physical condition or illness making it unsuitable for work may be ordered to be removed from work by a police officer, the code enforcement officer, or the city manager. A horse for which such order has been issued shall not be returned to work until it has recovered from the condition for which the order was issued. Before returning to work, the permit holder shall submit a statement from a veterinarian certifying that the condition no longer exists and the horse is fit to return to service. 
(e)  The permit holder shall, in the operation of a horse-drawn carriage, use only horses which are geldings or mares, at a minimum of three years old, which weigh at least 1,000 pounds. The horse shall be in such physical condition to perform the task without undue stress and effort. The permit holder shall ensure the horse has the stamina and physical ability to perform the work and duties required. 
(f)  The permit holder will ensure that the horse has been treated for internal parasites within the past four months under the direction of a veterinarian. The permit holder shall treat the horse for external parasites whenever found to be present. 
(g)  The permit holder shall ensure the hooves of the carriage horses are trimmed and their shoes are reset before placing them in service, using caulks or borium to prevent slippage. 
(h)  Permit holders and drivers shall ensure that carriage horses are kept clean at all times, especially those areas in contact with harnesses or other tack. 
(i)  Permit holders and drivers shall ensure that pads and other pieces of padded tack are kept clean and in safe and serviceable condition. 
(j)  The following shall deem a horse unfit for service and be cause for removal from service: 
(1)  Lameness of any kind, except that of a mechanical nature listed on the health certificate. 
(2)  Open sores or wounds caused or likely to be irritated by the bearing surfaces of harness, bridle, girth, or other tack. 
(3)  Obvious signs of emaciation, dehydration, or exhaustion. 
(4)  Loose shoes or unsafe or unserviceable tack. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-142, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-428. - Barns, stables, or other housing required; location. 
    The permit holder pursuant to this article shall be responsible for providing adequate housing for horses and carriages when not in service. Barns, stables, or other housing for horses and carriages shall be situated in areas properly zoned for such use. Horses and carriages shall at no time be stabled in a business or residential area of the city, unless so zoned for such use. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-143, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-429. - Seating capacity of carriages; occupation by minors. 
(a)  Each carriage operated under this article will have the seating capacity listed on the application for each carriage to be operated. The seating capacity of each carriage will be subject to approval of the chief of police. Under no circumstances will the number of passengers exceed the approved capacity. A baby in-arms shall not be deemed to occupy a seat. 
(b)  A parent, guardian, or other adult responsible for that child must accompany children under 12 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-144, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-430. - Safety and sanitation of carriages. 
(a)  Horse-drawn carriages will be kept clean and free of refuse. Carriages shall be kept in safe operating condition. Carriages and wheels shall not have any visible cracks, broken or, missing parts, or visible damage. All required safety equipment shall be in good and operable condition. Wheels shall be firmly attached to the hub and shall not wobble excessively. Carriages using rubber tires shall meet those standards set forth in the state motor vehicle law for a motor vehicle. All springs, axles, and supporting structures shall be intact without any visible breaks or deflection greater than incurred by a normal load. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided for in this article, while working, each horse shall wear a properly fitted diaper that prevents excrement from being deposited on the streets. If the city manager determines that such equipment, i.e., diaper, is not readily manufactured and/or available for the horse utilized by the permittee, the city manager may waive such equipment requirement. Such waiver must be in writing signed by the city manager and/or his designee; however, such waiver shall not modify and/or reduce the other obligations imposed upon the permittee by this article. 
(c)  The holder will provide proper cleaning equipment for the removal of excrement from streets and loading areas (shovels, brooms, and adequate water supply). 
(d)  The holder will provide a closed container for the disposal of excrement; containers will be emptied periodically and will not be allowed to cause an offensive odor. Containers will be removed from staging areas at the end of each working day. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-145, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-431. - Inspection and identification of carriages and equipment. 
    The code enforcement officer will inspect horse-drawn carriages and equipment before they are put in service and at his discretion there after. The permit holder is required to identify each carriage listed in the permit by a visible number painted or placed on an attached placard on each carriage. Each carriage in service will have a copy of the permit to operate as a horse-drawn carriage on board. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-146, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-432. - Lighting requirements generally. 
(a)  Lighting requirements for horse-drawn carriages operating in the city limits are established to make carriages as safe as possible for passengers and to enable vehicular traffic to see and avoid collisions with these carriages. A strong consideration for lighting requirements is the fact that carriages have no generators and must rely on battery power for their lights. Because of this, the use of commonly available bulb and lighting fixtures and reflectors are required. 
(b)  To avoid maintenance problems with batteries, it is suggested that operators utilize deep cycle batteries, such as those used in marine or RV applications. These batteries are only a suggestion and are not mandatory, although they will perform more efficiently than a standard automobile battery under the conditions for which they are used. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-147, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-433. - Carriage rear lighting. 
(a)  Two red lights and two red reflectors shall be mounted on and visible from the rear of the horse-drawn carriage. The reflectors shall be at least three inches in diameter or seven square inches in area. The red lamps shall be at least four inches in diameter and shall be mounted as far to either side of the carriage rear as possible. 
(b)  The lamps shall be mounted above the reflectors and no higher than five feet from the ground. The reflectors shall be mounted as far as practical below the lamps on the rear of the carriage, but no lower than two feet from the ground. 
(c)  Bulbs of at least 32 candlepower designated by the trade lamp number 1156 shall be used in the lamp. It is rated at 12 volts and draws two amps when lit. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-148, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-434. - Carriage front lighting. 
(a)  One lamp displaying a white light shall be mounted on and visible from the front of the horse-drawn carriage. This lamp shall be at least four inches in diameter and use a 32-candlepower number 1156 bulb. It shall be placed as far to the left (looking forward) as possible and shall not be obscured from view by the person driving the carriage, passengers, or the animals pulling the carriage. It shall be mounted no less than two feet nor more than five feet from the ground as measured from the center of the lens. 
(b)  All lamps on the horse-drawn carriage shall be in operation during the nighttime hours, from a half-hour after sunset to a half-hour before sunrise, or at any time when weather conditions cause visibility to be reduced from normal daytime visibility. The wiring for all lamps shall be so mounted and maintained so that it is not damaged by persons entering or exiting the carriage, nor create a danger to any passenger. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-149, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-435. - Side reflectors. 
(a)  Each horse-drawn carriage will have six additional reflectors. Two reflectors will be mounted on each side of the carriage as far apart to the front and rear. 
(b)  Also, one reflector will be mounted on each side of the animal pulling the carriage, either attached to the harness of the animal or on the draw bars of the carriage and as far as possible toward the front of the horse. Where more than one horse is used to pull the carriage, each horse will have one reflector mounted on each side. 
(c)  All the reflectors mentioned in this section shall be white, yellow, or amber in color, and shall be at least three inches in diameter or seven square inches in size. 
(d)  White reflectors mounted on the side of a horse or carriage shall not face the rear of the carriage. Reflectors will be visible for a distance of 600 feet when illuminated by the lawful low beams of headlamps. All reflectors will be mounted no less than two feet nor more than five feet off the ground as measured from the center of the lens. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-150, 9-19-2000) 
Sec. 110-436. - Slow-moving vehicles emblem required. 
(a)  Every horse-drawn carriage shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem on the rear and center of the carriage. The emblem shall be a 133/4-inch fluorescent orange triangle with a one and five-eighths-inch red reflective border, giving a total width of 16 inches by 14 in height. This emblem will meet the current standards adopted by the American Society of Agriculture Engineers and will be visible in daylight or at night when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps for a distance of not less than 500 feet. It will be mounted base down in the rear center of the carriage, not less than three feet, nor more than five feet from the ground as measured from the base of the emblem. No decoration, trim, or any part of the carriage shall cover or obscure any part of the emblem at any time. 
(b)  All lamps and reflectors and the emblem shall be maintained in a clean, visible condition at all times. The electrical supply to such lamps will be maintained to provide sufficient power so the lamps are visible at night for a distance of at least 1,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1217-9-00, § 28-151, 9-19-2000) 
Chapter 114 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; parks and recreation, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 118. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 114-1-114-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAKE NACOGDOCHES RULES AND REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-26. - Assumption of risk. 
    The city shall not be liable to any person on account of the loss or damage of any property that may be placed in or upon Lake Nacogdoches, nor shall the city be liable to any person whomsoever on account of personal injuries or loss of life that may be sustained by any person in or upon Lake Nacogdoches. Any person entering in or upon the lake shall do so at his sole risk and shall not be privileged to enter or remain in or upon such reservoir, save and except under the terms of this article that have been or may be adopted by the city council, nor shall the city be responsible or liable in such instances as set out in this section. 
(Code 1971, § 7-19; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 114-27. - Waiver. 
    The city council may, upon application and after hearing, waive for a specified length of time such of the terms, provisions, and conditions of this article that may be deemed appropriate for the accommodation of water carnivals, shows, boat races, educational purposes, exhibitions and other special events as may be permitted from time to time, and subject to such safety measures as the city council may require. 
(Code 1971, § 7-20; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 114-28. - Use of area between elevation 286 and water level. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the lake shall be defined as including not only the body of water known as Lake Nacogdoches but also all of that area between the water level, as such may advance or recede, and the elevation of 286 feet above mean sea level (MSL). 
(b)  Owners of record of land contiguous to elevation 286 MSL shall have the joint right with the city to the use of the land between elevation 286 and the water level subject to the city's right, power and duty to make regulations, ordinances, and other requirements deemed necessary by it in the construction, maintenance, and operation of Lake Nacogdoches as a water source. 
(Code 1971, § 7-21) 
Sec. 114-29. - Domesticated animals prohibited. 
    All domesticated animals are prohibited from Lake Nacogdoches, its parks and beaches, except that dogs may be used by persons engaged in the lawful exercise of waterfowl hunting only for the purpose of retrieving dead or wounded waterfowl in Lake Nacogdoches and for the purpose of training dogs for such. Such training and/or retrieval shall take place only north of the electric transmission lines crossing Lake Nacogdoches and from 30 days prior to the beginning of each waterfowl season as set by the state or the United States or their agencies until the end of each waterfowl season. Such dogs shall be kept on a leash and confined within a boat or other motor vehicle while on Lake Nacogdoches south of the electric transmission line, any boatramp, parking area, roadway or other area of lake property and must be transported forthwith and by the most direct route to the area north of the electric transmission line. 
(Code 1971, § 7-22) 
Sec. 114-30. - Glass beverage containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any glass beverage container into the Lake Nacogdoches eastside and westside parks, their beaches and/or parking areas. 
(Code 1971, § 7-23) 
Sec. 114-31. - Swimming area hours. 
    All swimming areas at Lake Nacogdoches shall be closed at sundown, with all other park areas and facilities being closed at 10:00 p.m. with the exception of the boatramps, parking lots, and restrooms. 
(Code 1971, § 7-24) 
Sec. 114-32. - Livestock. 
    No animal pens, corrals, or barns shall be constructed within 500 feet measured horizontally from the 286-foot elevation or at any point from which drainage may run in to Lake Nacogdoches or into any stream which lies within the Lake Nacogdoches watershed. 
(Code 1971, § 7-87) 
Sec. 114-33. - Wells. 
    All wells at Lake Nacogdoches must be driven or bored and properly cased and shall be installed and maintained in such a matter as to meet the requirements of the state health department. 
(Code 1971, § 7-88) 
Sec. 114-34. - Garbage and trash. 
    No garbage, trash, refuse, dead animals, fish, vegetables, food, ashes, offal, fecal matter, cans, bottles, glass, rubbish, or filth of any kind shall be placed or be permitted to be placed in the water of Lake Nacogdoches or situated in such a manner that it will drain toward or reach the water of Lake Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 7-89) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 82. 
Sec. 114-35. - Placing of artificial shelters or bait. 
    No artificial shelter, such as willow tops, etc., or any bait of any kind shall be placed in the waters of Lake Nacogdoches without first obtaining permission from the city or lake officer. 
(Code 1971, § 7-90) 
Secs. 114-36-114-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 114-61. - Office of lake officer. 
(a)  There is created the office of lake officer, which shall be filled by the chief of police. The lake officer shall be a licensed peace officer employed by the city police department. In a like manner and subject to the same terms, the lake officer shall have such number of assistants, if any, as the chief of police may see proper to appoint from time to time. Such officer and his assistants shall exercise all of the rights and powers of peace officers as provided by this Code or city ordinances and state statutes and regulations. 
(b)  The lake officer may inspect all boats and other watercraft before the boats and watercraft are permitted to be placed on Lake Nacogdoches under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code title 4, Water Safety, and any other applicable statute and ordinances. If the officer concludes the watercraft or boat is unsafe or dangerous to life, such watercraft may be removed from the lake. 
(c)  It shall further be the duty of the lake officer to patrol Lake Nacogdoches and the adjoining lands for the purpose of enforcing strict compliance on the part of all persons with the terms, provisions, and conditions of this article and all other state laws, ordinances, rules and regulations relating to such lake and to make arrests upon the violation of any of the sections of this article. 
(Code 1971, §§ 7-16, 7-17) 
Sec. 114-62. - Right to exclude persons from the lake. 
    The lake officer, any police officer or any other authorized city representative shall have the right and authority to exclude from Lake Nacogdoches any person in violation of the sections of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 7-18) 
Secs. 114-63-114-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOATS AND BOATING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Texas water safety act, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.001 et seq. 

Sec. 114-91. - Boats for rent or hire and commercial concession permits. 
(a)  No person shall rent or let for hire boats on Lake Nacogdoches without first having obtained a commercial permit and paid the license fee as may be set by the city council. 
(b)  No person shall conduct a concession business in areas of city authority without first having obtained a commercial permit and paid the license fee as may be set by the city council. 
(Code 1971, § 7-56; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 114-92. - Inspection of boats. 
    All boats on Lake Nacogdoches shall be subject to inspection as to structural soundness and proper state registration. 
(Code 1971, § 7-28) 
Sec. 114-93. - Launching at authorized points. 
    No person shall launch a boat or other watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches except at points designated and authorized by the city council. However, this section shall not apply to privately owned boatramps being used by the owner or his guests. Any privately owned launching ramp or device shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of division 5 of this article relating to docks and other structures. 
(Code 1971, § 7-29; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 114-94. - Traffic rules. 
(a)  The following traffic rules shall be observed by boats and other watercraft operating on Lake Nacogdoches: 
(1)  Passing. When two boats or other watercraft are approaching each other head on or nearly so, so as to involve risk of collision, it shall be the duty of each boat to bear to the right and pass the other boat on its left side. 
(2)  Right-of-way. When boats approach each other obliquely or at right angles, the boat approaching on the right side has the right-of-way. 
(3)  Overtaking. One boat may overtake another on either side but must grant the right-of-way to the overtaken boat. 
(4)  Sailboats. Sailboats have the right-of-way over all other boats. 
(b)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this article, the water safety act, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.001 et seq., applicable to the operation of small boats is made a part of this article. 
(Code 1971, § 7-31) 
Sec. 114-95. - Reckless driving and speeding. 
(a)  Every operator of a boat or other watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches shall at all times navigate the boat or watercraft in a careful and prudent manner and at such rate of speed as not to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person. 
(b)  Reckless navigation of any boat or watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches shall include operating the boat or watercraft in a manner which unnecessarily interferes with the free and proper use of the water of the lake or unnecessarily endangers other boats and watercraft on the lake or the life and limb of any person. 
(c)  No person shall operate any boat or other watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches at a rate of speed greater than will permit, by the exercise of reasonable care, such boat to be brought to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(d)  Boat operators in areas adjacent to public ramp launching facilities, whether designated by marker buoys or not, shall limit their motor boats to a no-wake speed (five mph). 
(Code 1971, § 7-32) 
State Law reference- Excessive speed, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.095. 
Sec. 114-96. - Reckless or negligent operation. 
    No person shall operate any motorboat or vessel or manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device in a willfully or wantonly reckless or negligent manner that endangers the life, limb, or property of any person on Lake Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 7-33) 
State Law reference- Reckless operation, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.096. 
Sec. 114-97. - Obstruction of boat launching facilities. 
    No person shall anchor a boat or other watercraft for fishing or other purposes on Lake Nacogdoches in such a position as to obstruct the entrances or exits to the public or private boat launching facilities. 
(Code 1971, § 7-34) 
State Law reference- Obstructing passage, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.101. 
Sec. 114-98. - Mooring and buoys. 
    No person shall at any time moor any boat or other watercraft to any buoy, beacon, or sign placed on Lake Nacogdoches, nor shall any person in any manner hang on with a boat to such buoy, beacon, or sign. 
(Code 1971, § 7-35) 
Sec. 114-99. - Anchoring. 
    No person shall leave a boat or any other watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches without having the boat or watercraft dependably fastened to an anchorage either in the water or upon the land, or any such boat or other watercraft must be removed from the water a sufficient distance to ensure that the boat or watercraft will not be caused to float away from its placement because of rising waters. No boat or other watercraft shall be permitted to remain anchored upon land, but can be within a boathouse or dock or entirely removed from the lake. 
(Code 1971, § 7-36) 
Sec. 114-100. - Accidents. 
    If the operator of any boat or watercraft involved in an accident on Lake Nacogdoches resulting in injury or death to any person or in damage to property, he shall, so far as he can do so without danger to his own vessel, crew, and passengers, if any, render to other persons affected by the collision such assistance as may be practicable and give his name, address, full identification of his boat and the name and address of the owner of the boat struck or the operator or occupants of the boats collided with and shall report such accident immediately to the lake officer, the police department, or the state parks and wildlife department. 
(Code 1971, § 7-37) 
State Law reference- Accidents, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.104. 
Sec. 114-101. - Water sports. 
    Skiing, surf boarding, and other comparable water sports shall be governed as follows: 
(1)  The term "skiing," as used in section 2:12 or anywhere else in the rules and regulations of Lake Nacogdoches, shall be defined as the use of any equipment of any kind or character whose purpose is to pull or propel a human body through, on or over the surface of Lake Nacogdoches. It is further specified that sailboats are exempted from this definition. 
(2)  Boats towing people engaged in such activities shall go no nearer than 200 feet of shore, docks, persons swimming, or other boats, except when leaving and returning to the dock. 
(3)  Such activity shall not be engaged in between sunset and sunrise nor shall any person operate a boat for the purpose of towing persons engaged in such activities between sunset and sunrise. 
(4)  No other boat or watercraft shall follow closer than 200 feet behind persons engaged in such activity. 
(5)  Scuba diving is allowed in the lake only in areas within 140 feet of a shoreline, except for emergency rescue or salvage operations or for special events for which exceptions may be granted by the lake officer. Scuba diving in other areas is prohibited. 
(6)  Each diver must be accompanied by at least one other diver. 
(7)  A warning flag reading "diver below" shall be displayed on the water's surface on a buoy or boat in the area where scuba diving is in progress. The sign must be readable from 100 feet and must be removed when the divers return to the boat. 
(8)  Scuba diving will not be carried on where it will interfere with normal boat traffic. 
(9)  A tow boat pulling water skiers must be equipped with a rearview mirror as specified by the state water safety act. 
(10)  Skiing in the northern end of Lake Nacogdoches shall be prohibited in areas marked by buoys. 
(11)  Skiing shall be prohibited on Lake Nacogdoches in all areas north of the existing overhead electrical transmission lines. This area shall be marked with "no-skiing" buoys or signs at such locations as deemed appropriate by the lake officer. 
(12)  Swimming only areas will be designated by marker buoys. 
(Code 1971, § 7-38) 
State Law reference- Personal watercraft, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.106. 
Sec. 114-102. - Lights. 
    No boat shall be operated on Lake Nacogdoches between sunset and sunrise unless the lights required by the state water safety act, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.064, shall be operating and lighted. In addition, all motorboats less than 16 feet in length, regardless of the motor's horsepower, shall have lights as required by the state water safety act for class 1 boats. 
(Code 1971, § 7-39) 
State Law reference- Lights, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.064. 
Sec. 114-103. - Capacity of watercraft. 
    No person owning or operating a boat or other watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches shall permit the boat or watercraft to be occupied by more than the rated capacity of such boat or other watercraft, nor shall any person owning or operating a watercraft on the lake permit the watercraft to be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond its safe capacity, taking into consideration weather and other operating conditions. 
(Code 1971, § 7-40) 
Sec. 114-104. - Life preservers. 
    Every boat or watercraft operating on Lake Nacogdoches must be equipped with one life preserver per person. Life preservers shall be of an approved type, adequate to sustain afloat any occupant of the boat. Children under the age of 13 must wear a life preserver at all times while the boat is in motion on the lake. 
(Code 1971, § 7-41) 
State Law reference- Life preservers, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.066. 
Sec. 114-105. - Flotation devices. 
    No boat or other watercraft shall be operated on Lake Nacogdoches unless it is self-sustained either by patent methods, compartmentation or composition. Inboard power boats shall be exempted from this section. The lake officer may grant, for a period not to exceed 30 days, permission to use a raft or barge on Lake Nacogdoches for constructing, dredging, or other purposes, and nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city and its authorized representatives from using rafts and barges in the operation and maintenance of Lake Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 7-42) 
Sec. 114-106. - Muffling devices. 
    It is unlawful to use a boat propelled by gas, gasoline, or naphtha on Lake Nacogdoches unless the boat is provided with a stock factory muffler, underwater exhaust or water exhaust manifold capable of adequately muffling the sound of the engine. The term "adequate muffling" shall mean that the motor's exhaust at all times be so muffled or suppressed as not to create excessive or unusual noise. However, the city council, in its sole discretion, may permit the operation of competition-type motorboats without muffling devices and subject to such restrictions and regulations as the lake officer may direct. 
(Code 1971, § 7-43; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 114-107. - Fire extinguishers. 
    Fire extinguishers are required in all boats as prescribed by the state water safety act, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.067. 
(Code 1971, § 7-44) 
State Law reference- Fire extinguishers, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.067. 
Sec. 114-108. - Carburetors. 
    Carburetors on all engines of motorboats used on Lake Nacogdoches, other than outboard motors, shall be fitted with a U.S. Coast Guard approved device for arresting backfire. 
(Code 1971, § 7-45) 
State Law reference- Flame arrestors, backfire traps, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.068. 
Sec. 114-109. - Ventilators. 
    On Lake Nacogdoches, all inboard motorboats using fuel having a flashpoint of 110 degrees Fahrenheit or less shall have at least two ventilators fitted with cowls or their equivalent for the purpose of properly and efficiently ventilating the bilge of every engine and fuel compartment in order to remove any inflammable or explosive gases. Some motorboats so constructed as to have the greater portion of the bilge under the engine and fuel tanks opened and exposed to the natural atmosphere at all times need not be required to be fitted with such ventilators. 
(Code 1971, § 7-46) 
State Law reference- Ventilators, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.069. 
Sec. 114-110. - Toilet facilities. 
    No boat or other watercraft shall be placed, operated, or kept on Lake Nacogdoches if equipped with toilet facilities. 
(Code 1971, § 7-47) 
Sec. 114-111. - Sirens. 
    No person other than a duly authorized police officer or other person authorized by the city shall equip, own or operate a boat or other watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches which is equipped with a siren. 
(Code 1971, § 7-48) 
State Law reference- Whistles and bells, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.065. 
Sec. 114-112. - Searchlights. 
    No person other than a duly authorized police officer or other person authorized by the city shall flash searchlights on the bridge of a boat or other watercraft being operated on Lake Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 7-49) 
Sec. 114-113. - Intoxication. 
    Any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drugs or barbiturates or any person who is a habitual user of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drugs or barbiturates shall not operate or occupy or be in physical control of any boat or other watercraft on Lake Nacogdoches, nor shall the owner of any boat or other watercraft or any person in charge or in control authorize or knowingly permit the boat or watercraft to be operated by any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drugs or barbiturates or by any person who is a habitual user of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drugs or barbiturates. 
(Code 1971, § 7-50) 
State Law reference- Operation of a vessel while intoxicated, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 49.06. 
Sec. 114-114. - Houseboats prohibited. 
    No person shall place, operate, or keep any houseboat on Lake Nacogdoches. For the purposes of this section, cabin cruisers or cruiserettes shall not be deemed to be houseboats, but any other watercraft capable of being occupied as living or camping quarters is prohibited. 
(Code 1971, § 7-51) 
Sec. 114-115. - Severe weather warning. 
    When, in the opinion of the lake officer, severe weather is forecast or when weather conditions on Lake Nacogdoches are such as to render boating, fishing, or other activities hazardous, the lake officer shall have the authority to order all persons, boats, and other watercraft to shore, under such terms and conditions that are deemed necessary for the protection of life, limb, and property. 
(Code 1971, § 7-53) 
Sec. 114-116. - Removal of boats. 
(a)  The lake officer may require the removal of any boat or other watercraft from Lake Nacogdoches if such boat or other watercraft is in an unsafe operating condition or if the boat or watercraft or its operator is in violation of any of the applicable sections of this article. 
(b)  Any person refusing to so remove any boat or watercraft under this section shall be deemed guilty in violation. 
(Code 1971, § 7-54) 
Sec. 114-117. - Abandoned boats. 
    Any boat or watercraft found abandoned or adrift on Lake Nacogdoches or any unlicensed boat or other watercraft thereon or any boat or watercraft not in use, found not anchored or grounded in compliance with this division shall be deemed to be derelict and shall be taken up by the lake officer, which shall be done at the owner's risk and without any liability whatsoever on the part of the city, and the city shall have a lien on the boat or watercraft for all unpaid fees. 
(Code 1971, § 7-55) 
Sec. 114-118. - Westside boatramp area. 
    The following shall govern the westside boatramp and that portion of Lake Nacogdoches adjacent to the westside boatramp: 
(1)  There is created a no swimming/no wake zone that extends outward to a 150-foot radius of the boat launching area with a maximum boat or other watercraft speed of five miles per hour. 
(2)  Fishing, boating, skiing, surf boarding, swimming or any other activity shall not be permitted within the no swimming/no wake zone. This shall not apply to boats and personal watercraft having ingress and egress by the most direct route, from the westside loading ramps. 
(3)  The no swimming/no wake zone as designated by this section shall be clearly marked with appropriate buoys. 
(Code 1971, § 7-99) 
Secs. 114-119-114-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FISHING 

Sec. 114-146. - Applicability of state law. 
    General laws of the state, as enacted or as they may be amended or enacted, save and except as specifically provided through proper regulations passed by the city, will control the taking of fish from Lake Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 7-63) 
Sec. 114-147. - Fishing methods. 
    The state water safety act and state statues shall govern fishing methods on Lake Nacogdoches. For safety purposes, trotlines will be restricted to that area north of the electric power line on the upper portion of the lake. 
(Code 1971, § 7-64) 
Sec. 114-148. - Fishing tournaments. 
(a)  Fishing tournaments may be held on Lake Nacogdoches upon issuance of a city fishing tournament permit. 
(b)  A city fishing tournament permit may be obtained from and is granted by the city parks and recreation department upon acceptance of an application and payment of a permit fee as may be set from time to time by the parks and recreation department. 
(c)  A permit must be obtained for all tournaments. 
(d)  Activities in noncompliance of the conditions as set out in the application and/or permit will result in automatic revocation of the permit. 
(e)  Revocation of a city fishing tournament permit or any violation of the sections of this article or such rules, regulations, and policies as from time to time may be adopted by the parks and recreation department to monitor or administer fishing tournaments shall be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a distinct and separate violation offense. 
(f)  Any criminal violation of this section, upon conviction, shall punished by a fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1971, § 7-65) 
Secs. 114-149-114-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DOCKS AND OTHER STRUCTURES 

Sec. 114-176. - Classification of docks. 
(a)  Private docks. A private dock shall be any boat dock or structure, fixed or floating, placed upon the waters of Lake Nacogdoches for pleasure purposes only and producing no revenue, either direct or indirect to the owner. 
(b)  Commercial docks. A commercial dock shall be any boat, dock, or structure, fixed or floating, place upon the waters of Lake Nacogdoches and used by any person for the purposes of deriving revenue, direct or indirect, from the dock or structure. 
(c)  Public piers. Public piers shall be any structure, fixed or floating, placed on public property, extending into the waters of Lake Nacogdoches, which is available to the general public, for recreational purposes only, and producing no revenue, either direct or indirect, to the owner. 
(Code 1971, § 7-71) 
Sec. 114-177. - Permit required. 
    No dock, wharf, boathouse, or other structure shall be erected on Lake Nacogdoches without a written permit from the building inspection department. 
(Code 1971, § 7-72) 
Sec. 114-178. - Safety devices. 
    All piers, docks, wharves, or other similar fixed structures erected from the shores and into the body of Lake Nacogdoches shall be marked by placement of red reflectors along the side of the structure directly opposite from the shore and the placement of amber reflectors along the flank side of the structure. These reflectors shall be at least three inches in diameter placed at intervals of not more than ten feet between reflectors on all sides of any such pier, dock, wharf, or any similar fixed structure facing the waters of Lake Nacogdoches. 
(Code 1971, § 7-73) 
Sec. 114-179. - Anchoring. 
    Any piers, docks, and wharves not of permanent nature but floating may be anchored by the use of anchor lines running out into Lake Nacogdoches, provided such anchor lines do not extend over onto adjoining boundary lines of lots as protracted into the lake and provided such anchor lines are so located as not to block any canal or slough to less than the 30-foot clearance required in this division. Any floating-type dock, wharf, or pier must be located close enough to the adjoining property as to be connected to it by a walkway. 
(Code 1971, § 7-74) 
Sec. 114-180. - Construction standards. 
(a)  The minimum width of docks, piers, boathouses, and other structures on Lake Nacogdoches shall be four feet, and such shall be constructed in a safe manner. Wooden materials used shall be treated with a wood preservative. Boathouses are structures, as that term is used in the city building code, and persons desiring to construct them shall comply in all respects with such code. 
(b)  No permanent dock shall be constructed to exceed a height of two feet above the elevation of 279 feet above mean sea level. 
(c)  The walk or platform of such docks shall not exceed two feet in height above elevation 279 feet, nor shall any such dock extend more than 50 feet into the lake from the 279-foot level. Further, no dock shall be so constructed, regardless of length, as to block any channel or slough, it being necessary to leave a minimum of 30 feet of clearance and passageway for boats in the channel or slough. All docks must be a minimum of five feet from the side boundary lines of any private lot, as such boundary lines would be located if extended or protracted into the lake. No dock shall be constructed and projected out into Lake Nacogdoches by any persons not the owner of the land area from which such dock projects. 
(Code 1971, §§ 7-72, 7-75) 
Sec. 114-181. - Public piers. 
(a)  Public piers at Lake Nacogdoches shall be constructed in accordance to the city building code and electrical code, as amended. In addition no public pier shall extend horizontally more than 100 feet into the lake, from 279 feet above mean sea level. 
(b)  Public piers shall be adequately lighted so that they are visible from all directions of Lake Nacogdoches from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet. 
(c)  Public piers shall have their boundaries clearly marked with buoys and signage, visible not less than 150 feet in all directions projecting out at right angles from all sides of a public pier. Buoys shall not be spaced farther apart than 20 feet, signs shall be placed not farther apart than 50 feet on centers, and no less than one sign per pier face will be allowed for any public pier over 50 feet in length beyond elevation 279. No boats shall be allowed within 150 feet of any public pier. No swimming shall be allowed within 150 feet from any public pier. 
(d)  Maximum occupancy limits shall be established and posted for all public piers by the building official. 
(e)  Proper rules shall be posted on all public piers stating: "No alcoholic beverages, no swimming, no loud music, no parties, no fires, no fireworks and no cooking." 
(Code 1971, § 7-75a) 
Sec. 114-182. - Ski jumps and similar structures. 
    No ski jumps or structures of such nature shall be constructed or placed upon Lake Nacogdoches without prior written consent of the city council upon application, and such shall not be constructed except at a point designated by the lake officer in such written permit. 
(Code 1971, § 7-76; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 114-183. - Buoys, signs and beacons. 
    No buoys for anchoring boats or other purposes or floating signs, markers, or beacons shall be placed in Lake Nacogdoches without prior written consent as to the location by the lake officer. 
(Code 1971, § 7-77) 
Sec. 114-184. - Electric or other permanent lines. 
    No electric transmission line or other permanent line or rope shall lead to any dock, wharf, boathouse or other floating object above water level at Lake Nacogdoches unless it shall be high enough its entire length over water to give at least 20 feet of clearance between it and the high water level, elevation of 286 feet. 
(Code 1971, § 7-78) 
Sec. 114-185. - Use of boathouses restricted. 
    Boathouses shall be used for the housing of boats and equipment only, and human habitation shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1971, § 7-79) 
Secs. 114-186-114-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESTRICTED AREAS 

Sec. 114-211. - Dam area. 
    The following shall govern the dam and that portion of Lake Nacogdoches adjacent to the dam: 
(1)  No person shall be permitted upon any dam for any purpose. 
(2)  There is created a no wake zone that extends 300 feet outward from the dam with a maximum boat speed of five miles per hour. 
(3)  Fishing, boating, skiing, surf boarding or any other activity shall not be permitted within the no wake zone from the east end of the dam to a point 200 feet west of the water intake structure. This shall not apply to boats having ingress and egress, by the most direct route, from the loading ramps adjacent to the eastside park. 
(4)  Fishing and/or boating activities shall be allowed within the no wake zone from a point 200 feet west of the intake structures to the west end of the dam. No activities shall be permitted within 25 feet of the dam. 
(Code 1971, § 7-96) 
Sec. 114-212. - Other restricted areas. 
    No person shall engage in any activity on Lake Nacogdoches or around the lake in an area which has been designated by the city as a restricted area and which has been plainly marked with signs that such is a restricted area. 
(Code 1971, § 7-97) 
Secs. 114-213-114-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - HUNTING AND FIREARMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Weapons, explosives and fireworks, § 70-26 et seq. 

Sec. 114-241. - Restrictions. 
    Except as may be authorized by the city from time to time, the possession and/or discharge of rifles or pistols, which shall be firearms capable of discharging solid projectiles, on Lake Nacogdoches is prohibited. The possession and discharge of shotguns is permitted only under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Hunting with shotguns in the reservoir area will be permitted in accordance with federal and state laws regulating the hunting of game and wildlife. 
(2)  Hunting will be permitted only in areas specifically designated by the lake officer. 
(3)  No duck blinds will be permitted on the lake or city property. 
(Code 1971, § 7-100) 
Chapter 118 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Airport zoning, § 10-86 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fences, § 14-386 et seq.; alcoholic beverages in businesses, § 18-26 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; floods, ch. 42; historic preservation, ch. 50; manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66; signs, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86; subdivisions, ch. 90; telecommunications, ch. 98; waterways, ch. 114. 
State Law reference- Land use regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 118-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Word interpretations. Interpretations of certain words used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  All words used in the present tense shall include the future. 
(2)  All words in the singular number include the plural number, and all words in the plural number include the singular number. 
(3)  The term "structure" includes the word "building," and the term "dwelling" includes the terms "residence" and "place of habitation." 
(4)  The term "person" includes corporation, copartnership, association, and individual. 
(5)  The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(b)  Undefined terms. Terms not defined in this section shall have the meanings assigned to them in the city building codes. Terms not defined in this section or in the building codes shall have the customary meaning assigned to them. 
(c)  Words and terms defined. The definitions in this subsection supplement, restrict, and define the meaning and intent of the use regulations as set forth in this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory apartment means an accessory dwelling for the use and occupancy by any person employed on the premises on a full-time basis for domestic or medical help or family members to the second degree of consanguinity and affinity. Such dwelling shall not have separate utility services or meters. This may also include an accessory dwelling located in a commercial or industrial district for the use of any person employed by the business or property owner to provide management, maintenance or security for the property. 
    Accessory use means a structure or use that: 
(1)  Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal building or use. 
(2)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use; is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served. 
(3)  Is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served. 
    Accessory use (residential) means a subordinate use which is detached from the main building and used for purposes customarily incidental to the residential occupancy of the main building and not involving the conduct of a business or the sale of a service. Accessory buildings include but are not limited to an automobile storage garage, laundry room, garden shelter, hobby room and mechanical room. 
    Airport or landing field means a landing facility for fixed wing aircraft containing a minimum of 60 acres. 
    All-weather surface means a hard smooth paved surface of either hot-mixed asphaltic concrete (HMAC) or Portland cement concrete (PCC) and the appropriate base material, meeting the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  Hot-mixed asphaltic concrete: 
a.  Surface: 1.5 inches of type D or type C material. 
b.  Base: six inches of compacted iron ore gravel or the equivalent flexible base, or four inches of compacted hot sand asphaltic base. 
(2)  Portland cement concrete: 
a.  Surface: five inches of class A, 3,000 psi concrete, reinforced with WWF 6 × 6, W 2.9 - 2.9. 
b.  Base: four inches of compacted granular material. 
Material shall conform to city and state department of transportation specifications. Other possible types of paved surfaces will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city's planning and engineering departments. 
    Amusement, commercial (indoor) means an amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building, including but not limited to a bowling alley, bingo parlor or amusement arcade, but not including a billiard parlor or pool hall. 
    Amusement, commercial (outdoor) means any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open, including but not limited to a golf driving range, archery range, and miniature golf course. 
    Animal hospital or clinic means a facility for the treatment or care of domestic animals, which includes a veterinarian's office, and may include overnight stays, but does not include outside pens. 
    Animal pound. See Animal hospital or clinic with outside pens. 
    Antique shop means an establishment offering for sale articles such as glass, china, furniture or similar furnishing and decorations which have value and significance as result of age, design or sentiment; and when all such items displayed or offered for sale are housed within a building and there is no exterior display except the usual sign or advertising. 
    Apartment means a dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling or apartment house arranged, designed or occupied as a place of residence by a single family. See Multifamily; (apartments). 
    Area of lot means the square-foot area of a lot within the bounding property lines and exclusive of dedicated streets or alleys. 
    Artificial lot means an area within a platted lot, for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of this chapter, that is delineated on the building site plan and the landscape plan and approved by the city planner. 
    Arts school or studio means a school for instruction and practice of the performing, visual or martial arts. 
    Banks and financial institutions means activities and institutions for the extension of credit and the custody, loan or exchange of money. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means a private single-family residence in which lodging for one or more nights and breakfast is provided by the resident owner for compensation. 
    Billiard parlor or pool hall means a facility for the playing of billiards and pool. Food service may be allowed as an ancillary use. 
    Block means an area enclosed by streets, or if such word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between two intersecting streets, or if the street is of a dead-end type, a block shall be considered to be measured between the nearest street and the end of such dead-end street. 
    Board means the board of adjustment as provided for in division 3 of article II of this chapter. 
    Boardinghouse or roominghouse means a building, other than a hotel or multiple-family dwelling, where lodging is provided for five or more persons for compensation, where meals may or may not be served and where facilities for food preparation are not provided in the individual rooms. Where meals are served, they shall be served only to the residents of the boardinghouse. 
    Building means any structure designed, built or intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind or for an accessory use. When separated by an absolute fire separation, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building. This definition includes structures wholly or partly enclosed with an exterior wall. 
    Building line means a line established, in general, parallel to the front property line, over which no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Building and landscape materials and lumber sales (outside sales) means a facility for the sale of home, lawn and garden supplies and construction materials such as brick, lumber and other similar materials. The facility may include outside sales. 
    Cabinet and woodwork shop (custom) means a shop for the repair or creation of individual items of furniture and wooden home furnishings on a custom basis, not a factory, planing mill or similar woodworking plant. 
    Carnival or circus (temporary) means a temporary traveling show or exhibition usually housed in tents, and which has no permanent structure or installation. 
    Carwash means a facility or area for the cleaning or steam cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of passenger vehicles by machine or hand-operated facilities. A carwash may be a single unit, multiple single washing units, or a tunnel type which can wash several vehicles in tandem. 
    Cemetery means a land use intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
    Chemical and allied products includes the manufacturing of industrial inorganic and organic chemicals, plastics materials, and synthetic resins, synthetic rubber, synthetic and other manmade fibers; drugs; soap, detergents, cleaning preparations, perfumes, and other toilet preparations; paints, varnishes, lacquers, enamels, and allied products; gum and wood products; agricultural chemicals; and other chemical and allied products. 
    Church or place of worship means a facility or area for people to gather together for public worship, religious training, or other religious activities including a temple, mosque, synagogue or other structure, together with its customary accessory structures and uses, including a parsonage or rectory. This does not include home meetings or other religious activities conducted in a privately occupied residence. 
    City council means the official governing body of the City of Nacogdoches. 
    Club, private means a clubroom or suite of rooms or a building available to restricted membership for meetings, dining and entertainment. Such facilities may include a private tennis court, swimming pool or similar recreation facilities, none of which are available to the general public. 
    College or university means an institution of higher learning beyond the level of a secondary school. 
    Community center (private) means: 
(1)  A building or group of rooms designed and used as an integral part of a residential or apartment project by the tenants of such a project for a place of meeting, recreation or social activity and under the management and unified control of the operators of the project. 
(2)  A private nonprofit community center operated as a boys' or girls' club or similar use. A private community center shall not be operated as a place of public meetings, or as a business. 
    Community center (public) means a building and grounds owned and operated by a governmental body for the social, recreational, health or welfare of the surrounding community. 
    Convenience store means any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with such and having a gross floor area of less than 7,500 square feet. 
    Convent or monastery means the living quarters or dwelling units for a religious order or for the congregation of persons under religious vows. 
    Contractor or maintenance yard means an open storage yard for supplies and operational equipment, including buildings, but not constituting a junkyard, wrecking yard or salvage yard. 
    Country club (private membership) means an area of 20 acres or more containing a golf course and a clubhouse and available only to a private specific membership. Such a club may contain as adjunct facilities a private club and dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreation facilities. 
    Coverage means the percent of a lot area which is covered by a roof, floor or other structure and is not open to the sky. Roof eaves to the extent of two feet, and ordinary projections from the building not exceeding 12 inches, shall not be counted in computing coverage. 
    Custom sewing and millinery means custom making of items of apparel and millinery, by a seamstress, but not involving a factory. 
    Day care means a facility or area used regularly to provide daytime care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision to more than four children, adults or elderly in other than a family setting for less than 24 hours a day, whether for compensation or not. This definition includes preschools, private kindergartens, nurseries and other similar uses not listed elsewhere in this chapter. 
    Density means as follows: 
(1)  Residential density means the relationship of dwelling units or rooms to the area of the lot or tract upon which a residential structure is located or erected, and is expressed in "units per acre." 
(2)  Nonresidential density means the ratio of the area of the building to the area of the site. See Floor area ratio (FAR). 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as a single living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
    Eating place with drive-in or curb service means an establishment offering food for sale to customers in automobiles and wherein the food for sale is to customers in automobiles and wherein the food service is to the automobile. 
    Eating place without drive-in or curb service means any eating establishment, cafeteria, restaurant or inn where food service is offered to the customers not in automobiles. 
    Emergency ambulance service means a facility for the operation and dispatch of emergency medical vehicles. Typically this operation is ancillary to a hospital or a fire station, but it may also be a primary use on a property. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for fee, tip or other consideration. 
    Fabricated metal products includes the manufacturing of ordnance and accessories; machinery, equipment and supplies; transportation equipment; and other fabricated metal products. 
    Fairground means a specific facility that hosts special indoor and outdoor events including exhibits or competitions of agricultural products, livestock, machinery, etc.; a large exhibition or show of products from various countries; an exhibition or sale of fancywork or other items for the benefit of some cause; or a gathering of buyers or sellers of some product or service. 
    Family means any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than two individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. 
    Family home and family group home means a community-based residential home licensed by the state department of mental health and mental retardation providing food and shelter, personal guidance, care, rehabilitation services, or supervision. Family homes shall have a maximum of six clients plus two staff members residing in a house. Family group homes shall have a minimum of seven and a maximum of 15 clients plus staff residing in a house. 
    Farm, ranch, garden or orchard means an area of three acres or more which is used for growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees and grain for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle and sheep, including a private stable and also including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by city ordinance or law. 
    Farmers' market means the retail sale of farm products by individual vendors either within a building or outside. Items sold may include fruits, vegetables, herbs, spices, edible seeds, nuts, live plants, flowers and honey. The sale of new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, artwork, small household appliances and similar merchandise are not included. 
    Feed store, retail (livestock, no mill) means an establishment for the sale of grain, prepared feed and forage for pets, livestock and fowl, but not involving the grinding, mixing or commercial compounding of such items. 
    Flea market means a building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are set aside and rented, or otherwise provided, and which are intended for the sale of articles that are either homemade, homegrown, hand-crafted, old, obsolete, or antique and may include the retail selling of goods by businesses or individuals who are generally engaged in retail trade. This does not include garage sales. 
    Floor area means the total square-foot area of all floors in the building measured to the outside faces of exterior walls or to the line of an omitted wall, whichever includes the largest area. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio between the total square feet of floor area in the building to the total square feet of land in the lot or tract; e.g., "2:1" means that the building contains twice the amount of area as there is in the lot. 
    Foster home means a facility or area providing full-time parental care for six or more unrelated minor children for which compensation or fee is received in return for such services. This must comply with statutory licensing requirements. 
    Fraternity/sorority house means any building occupied and maintained by a social association of college students, or where organization-sponsored functions are regularly held. 
    Garage or estate sale: means a sale for the purpose of offering clothing, household furniture or appliances belonging to the residents may be conducted as home occupation provided that no such sale may be held on any lot or premise more often than twice in each calendar year, and not to exceed three days during each sale. 
    Garden shop and plant sales (display or greenhouse) means an enclosed or open area for the retail sale of plants and gardening products, including fertilizers, soil and gardening implements. 
    Golf course (public or private) means a golf course owned or controlled publicly or privately. This includes such uses as a clubhouse, food service, retail, and other customary accessory uses. 
    Golf driving range means a facility for the organized practice of golf techniques. It may include a practice green for putting, a clubhouse and other minor ancillary uses. 
    Government facility means a facility for public purposes, owned or operated by the city, county, state or federal government. These typically include city hall, courthouse, police and fire stations, public library or museum. 
    Grain mill products includes the manufacturing of flour and other grain mill products, feeds for animals and fowl, cereal preparations, rice milling, blending and preparing flour, and wet corn milling. 
    Guesthouse (detached) means a secondary structure on a lot or tract containing dwelling accommodations but excluding kitchen facilities and separate utility services or meters and intended for the temporary occupancy by guests and not rented or used for permanent occupancy. 
    Halfway house (criminal) means a facility for the housing, rehabilitation, and training of persons on probation or parole from correctional institutions, or other persons found guilty of criminal offenses. 
    Health club or studio means a wholly enclosed facility for fitness training and practice. 
    Height means the vertical distance from the average grade of the finish ground level at the center of all walls to the highest finished roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio and television towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height. 
    Home occupation means an occupation carried on in the home by a member of the occupant's family, being incidental to the primary occupancy of the home as a dwelling; without the display or advertising of any commodity or service for sale on the premises; without the employment of any persons other than members of the immediate family; without the use of any sign, lighting or display; without the use of other than domestic or household equipment or appliances; and the conduct of which does not generate noise, odor, fumes, vibration, additional vehicle traffic or any other condition visible, obnoxious or detrimental to abutting or adjacent properties. 
    Hospice means a facility for the terminally ill, where patients are under the supervision of a doctor, but undergo limited curative treatment, and which is licensed by the state. 
    Hospital (chronic care) means an institution where those persons suffering from generally permanent types of illnesses, injury, deformity, deficiency or age are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis and which is licensed by the state. 
    Hospital (general acute care) means an institution where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life, and which is licensed by the state. 
    Hotel or motel means a building or group of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals. To be classified as a hotel or motel, an establishment shall contain a minimum of 20 individual guestrooms or units and shall furnish the customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, telephone, use and upkeep of furniture, and the accommodations shall not be designed as permanent dwelling units. 
    Household appliance and equipment repair means a shop for the repair of household and home equipment, such as electrical appliances, lawn mowers, tools, and similar items, where all such items are stored within a building or a storage area surrounded by a solid fence, wall or screen. 
    Ice or roller skating rink means a facility for the practice of ice or roller skating. Accessory uses may include food service and other indoor amusements, contained entirely within the primary structure. 
    Industrialized housing means a residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of one or more families, that is constructed according to the rules of the state department of labor and standards in one or more modules, or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent residential site, and that is designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the modules or modular components are transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Laundry or dry cleaning, self-service, means an establishment providing facilities for washing or dry cleaning garments and similar items and where the customer may personally supervise and handle the cleaning operation. 
    Legal height means the maximum height of a building imposed by the Federal Aviation Administration for the airport, this chapter, the building code, or any other legal ordinance or code. 
    Library, art gallery or museum (public) means any institution for the loan or display of books, objects of art or science which is sponsored by a public or responsible quasipublic agency and which institution is open and available to the general public. 
    Livestock auction pens or sheds means a facility or area for the auction of livestock. Accessory uses may include but are not limited to feed pens, stalls, and outside pens or runs. 
    Lot means a platted parcel of land intended to be separately owned, developed, and otherwise used as a unit. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of two dedicated streets and having frontage along both streets extending from the intersection. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot having frontage on two or more dedicated streets other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the property or lease lines bounding a lot or tract. 
    Lot line, interior, means a lot line delineating the division between two contiguous lots on the interior of a block and not adjacent to a street. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision plat which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk or a tract of land described by metes and bounds, the description of which is recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
    Lot width means the width of a lot at the required front yard line or at the building line if such is established at a greater distance from the street than the required front yard line. 
    Lumber and wood products manufacturing includes logging camps and contractors; sawmills and planing mills; and the manufacturing of millwork, veneer, plywood, prefabricated structural wood products, wood furniture; and other lumber and wood products. 
    Main building means the building on a lot which is occupied by the primary use. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Manufactured home park means a unified development of manufactured home sites, plots, or stands as arranged on a large tract under single ownership, meeting the area and setback requirements of this chapter, and designed to accommodate manufactured homes for permanent duration. 
    Meat products processing or manufacturing includes meat, poultry, and small game packing and the manufacturing of sausages and other prepared meat products, but not including the slaughtering of animals or poultry. 
    Microbrewery means a business which: 
(1)  Operates under a manufacturer's license, as described in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, ch. 62, issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission ("T.A.B.C."); 
(2)  May operate, but is not required to operate under a brewer's permit as described in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, ch. 12, issued by T.A.B.C.; 
(3)  Has a total maximum production per year of beer, malt liquor and ale of not more than 15,000 barrels (or 465,000 standard gallons); and 
(4)  Does not produce or generate any generally obnoxious odors. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, or one constructed after this date that does not meet the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. 
    Mobile home park means a unified development of mobile home sites, plots or stands as arranged on a large tract under single ownership, meeting the area and setback requirements of this chapter, and designed to accommodate mobile homes for a permanent duration. 
    Multifamily (apartments) means any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or residence of three or more families. 
    Nightclub or dancehall means an establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by any of the following as a principal use of the establishment: 
(1)  Live, recorded or televised entertainment, including but not limited to performances by magicians, musicians or comedians; 
(2)  Dancing; or 
(3)  Any combination of subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
This does not include theaters, auditoriums and stadiums with fixed row seating; private clubs; bars; teen clubs; or any establishment defined elsewhere in this chapter as an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Nursing and convalescent homes means an establishment which furnishes, in single or multiple facilities, food and shelter to five or more persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or proprietor of the establishment and, in addition, provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician, or services which meet some need beyond the basic provision of food, shelter and laundry. 
    Office (general and professional) means a facility for the regular transaction of business, wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations not specifically listed elsewhere in this chapter. 
    Open space means an area on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices and eaves, and is exclusive of driveways or parking areas. 
    Open storage (no enclosure) means storage in the open of vehicles, machinery or any equipment or commodity where permitted as a primary use of land and accessory storage in the open of commercial and industrial products where such storage is not enclosed by a fence, wall or building. 
    Open storage with visual screen means the permitted storage of any equipment or commodity in a open area which is enclosed by a fence or wall, as defined in this chapter, or surrounded by a building so as to create an effective visual screening of the storage from the adjacent property. 
    Orphanage means an institution for the care of orphans or other abandoned children. 
    Paper and allied products manufacturing includes the manufacture of pulp, paper, paperboard, converted paper and paperboard products, paperboard containers and boxes, building paper and building board. 
    Pawnshop means a building or premises, other than a bank, savings and loan or mortgage banking company, used for the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or for the business of the purchase of tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a certain price within a certain period of time, and licensed by the state to conduct such a business. 
    Pet shop means a place for the display and sale of small animals and birds as pets, such as dogs, cats, parakeets or canaries, but not involving the boarding or treating of dogs or similar pets. 
    Petroleum refining and related industries includes the refining of petroleum and the manufacturing of paving and roofing materials; lubricating oils and greases and other petroleum and coal products. 
    Piercing studio means any establishment that performs any type of body piercing. 
    Pool house (detached) means a secondary structure on a lot with a swimming pool, excluding separate utility services or meters, and intended for temporary recreation use and not used as a permanent occupancy. 
    Poultry hatchery means a commercial facility for the hatching and raising of domestic fowl, including a research facility for such activity. 
    Primary metal products manufacturing includes blast furnaces, steel works and the rolling and finishing of ferrous metals; iron and steel foundries; primary smelting and refining of nonferrous metals and alloys, rolling, drawing and extruding of nonferrous metals; and nonferrous foundries. 
    Professional, scientific and controlling instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks manufacturing includes the manufacturing of engineering, laboratory and scientific and research instruments and associated equipment; instruments for measuring, controlling, and indicating physical characteristics; optical instruments and lenses; surgical, medical, and dental instruments and supplies; ophthalmic goods; photographic equipment and supplies; and watches, clocks, clockwork-operated devices and parts. 
    Psychiatric hospital or institution means a facility or area for providing health services primarily for inpatient medical care for alcoholic, narcotic, or psychopathic patients, and which may include related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of the facilities. This includes a substance abuse and rehabilitation facility. 
    Racetrack means an indoor or outdoor facility for the recreational or competitive racing of horses, canines, or motor vehicles, including the necessary accessory uses such as retail sales, automobile maintenance, veterinarian supplies and shops, exercise areas and stables. 
    Radio or television transmission station (commercial) means a facility used for the production and transmission of programming by radio or television to the general public. Included are commercial, religious, educational and other stations. 
    Radio, television, microwave or cellular communication tower (commercial) means structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antennae installations for home use of radio or television. 
    Radio tower (noncommercial) means a radio tower located on a residential property which is for home use, only, and which is not taller than 15 feet above the maximum building height allowed in the district. 
    Recreation club or area (private) means a building, park or recreation area, the use of which is restricted to private membership such as by a church, neighborhood association, fraternal or social organization, and which may contain the normal active and passive facilities as provided in a park or playground, or public recreation facility. 
    Recreation facility (public) means a facility or area sponsored by a public entity and devoted to sports, entertainment, games of skill or recreations to the general public. This may include swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, community clubhouses, park facilities and other similar uses. 
    Retirement home means a residential facility principally designed for persons 55 years of age or older. Dwelling units may include full kitchen facilities, and recreational, social, nursing or other services may be available. This does not include a nursing or convalescent home. 
    Rubber and miscellaneous plastics manufacturing includes the reclaiming of rubber and the manufacture of tires and innertubes; rubber footwear; plastic products; and other fabricated rubber products. 
    Satellite dish means the dish and its structural elements that is commonly used in the reception of television signals from orbiting satellites. 
    School, K-12, public or private, means a school and customary accessory uses under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency having a curriculum generally equivalent to public, elementary or secondary schools, but not including private, trade or commercial schools. 
    School, vocational means a business operating for profit and offering instruction and training in a service or art, such as a secretarial school, barber college, commercial art school; or offering instruction and training in a trade such as welding, bricklaying, machinery operation and other similar manual trades. This does not include truck or heavy equipment driving schools. 
    Service station means any facility where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold and/or light maintenance activities such as engine tuneups, lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor cleaning are conducted. Service stations shall not include facilities where heavy automobile maintenance activities such as engine overhauls, automobile painting, and body or fender work are conducted. 
    Single-family dwelling (attached) means a dwelling unit on a separately owned lot which is joined to another dwelling unit on one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate walls and occupied by not more than one family. 
    Single-family dwelling (detached) means a detached building having a single dwelling unit and occupied by not more than one family. 
    Single-family dwelling (zero lot line) means a dwelling unit on a separately owned lot on which one wall of the principal dwelling is located within one foot of the side property line of an adjacent residential lot, and the other side yard meets or exceeds the minimum required side yard for the district. 
    Stable, commercial, means a facility housing horses or mules which are boarded or rented to the public or any stable other than a private stable; but not including a sales barn, auction, or similar trading activity. 
    Stable, private, means a facility or area for keeping horses, mules or other domestic animals for the private use of the property owner. 
    Stone, clay, glass and concrete products manufacturing includes the manufacturing of glass; flat glass and glassware; cement; structural clay products; pottery and related products; concrete, gypsum and plaster products; cut stone and stone products; and abrasive, asbestos and other nonmetallic mineral products. 
    Studio (art, drama, speech, or dance) means a building or rooms in a building used for the instructing, coaching or counseling in drama, speech, dance or similar personal skills or arts. 
    Tattoo salon means an establishment or facility in which tattooing is performed. 
    Teen club means a nightclub that caters to teenage patrons. 
    Tennis court (lighted) means an outside tennis court with elevated lighting for nighttime play. 
    Tennis court (no lights) means an outside tennis court without elevated lighting for nighttime play. 
    Textile mill products manufacturing includes the manufacturing of woven fabrics, knit goods, rugs, carpets, yarns, and threads, and other textile goods; and the dyeing and finishing of textiles. 
    Theater, movie or live (enclosed) means a facility with fixed seats for the viewing of movies or live presentations of musicians or other performing artists. 
    Tobacco products manufacturing includes the manufacturing of cigarettes, cigars, chewing and smoking tobacco, snuff; tobacco stemming and redrying. 
    Travel trailer/RV park means any lot upon which two or more travel trailer or other recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. The area is intended for use on a shortterm basis by campers, vacationers, and travelers. 
    Truck or heavy equipment driving school means a type of vocational school where education is provided behind the wheel of trucks or heavy equipment. 
    Two-family dwelling means a detached building having two dwelling units and occupied by not more than two families. 
    Use, nonresidential, means any use other than a one- or two-family residence, or a roominghouse or boardinghouse, and their bona fide accessory uses. 
    Use, residential, means a one- or two-family residence, or a roominghouse or boardinghouse, together with bona fide accessory uses. 
    Utility facilities (major) includes such uses as electrical substations, wastewater treatment plants, elevated water storage and water treatment plants. 
    Utility lines and transmission includes local utilities such as electric power, telephone, gas, water, sewer, and air monitoring stations. It also includes inline facilities such as gas regulating stations and water wells or pumping stations; sewage pumping stations; telephone exchange, switching and transmitting equipment; and electrical transmission lines operated by a municipality or a franchised utility company. It does not include major utility facilities. 
    Veterinary office (no hospital or clinic) means a facility for the diagnosis and treatment of animals, without an overnight stay. 
    Warehouse/storage (inside) means a building or group of buildings providing enclosed shelter and protection for commodities stored therein. No open or unenclosed storage shall be classified as a warehouse. 
    Wrecking yard, junkyard, salvage yard or reclamation yard means a yard or building where automobiles, machinery, appliances or other used commodities and equipment are stored, dismantled, and/or offered for sale as whole units or as salvaged parts. 
    Yard means an open space on the lot on which a building is situated and which is open and unobstructed to the sky. 
    Yard, front, required, means a yard facing and abutting a street and extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and having a minimum horizontal depth measured from the street equal to the depth of the minimum front yard specified for the district in which the lot is located. The required front yard line represents the line in front of which no building or structure may be erected. 
    Yard, rear, required, means a yard extending across the rear of the lot between side lot lines and having a minimum depth measured from the rear lot line as specified for the district in which the lot is located. 
    Yard, side, required, means a yard located on a lot and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard and having a minimum width measured from the side lot line as specified for the district in which the lot is located. Any lot line which is not a rear or front line shall be deemed a side lot line. 
    Zoning district map means the official, certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are shown and which are an integral part of this chapter and, together with the zoning text in this chapter, make up the zoning ordinance for the city. 
    Zoo, zoological park, animal park, or aviary means an institution which owns and maintains captive wild animals and under the direction of a professional staff, provides its collection with appropriate care and exhibits them in an aesthetic manner to the public on a regularly scheduled basis for the purposes of education, conservation, scientific study and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1185-12-99, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 1350-2-04, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1351-2-04, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1439-10-06, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 1516-5-09, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1626-5-13, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-2. - Purposes. 
    The zoning regulations and districts established in this chapter have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan, for the purpose of promoting health, safety, and the general welfare of the city. They have been designed, among other things, to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration of, among other things, the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses contained therein and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the community. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. I, § 2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-3. - Effective date and applicability. 
(a)  The sections of this chapter shall be effective ten days following its adoption by the city council and its publishing in the newspaper of general circulation. 
(b)  The sections of this chapter supersede all other development regulations governing the development of land within the city. These regulations shall apply to all land, property and development in the city, except as expressly and specifically provided otherwise in this chapter. No development shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. I, § 3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-4. - Relationship to comprehensive plan and thoroughfare plan. 
    This chapter is intended to implement the policies and objectives contained in the comprehensive plan for the city and to affect the city's plan for provision of public facilities and services within city limits and within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. If a zoning or rezoning request differs from what the comprehensive plan recommends for that area, the city planner will advise the applicant of this and will request the applicant to submit a written letter stating the reasons the comprehensive plan should be changed, if he wishes to proceed with the zoning request. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. I, § 4, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-5. - Fees. 
    Every application under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee made payable to the "City of Nacogdoches" and shall be collected and deposited with the planning department. Current fees and charges are on file in the city's planning department. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. I, § 5, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1388-9-05, 10-1-2005; Ord. No. 1679-8-14, § 2, 8-19-2014) 
Sec. 118-6. - Diagrams and drawings. 
    This chapter contains diagrams and drawings. When diagrams and drawings appear in this chapter, they are presented for explanation purposes only, unless specifically referred to in the text of this chapter. The text governs over any diagram or drawing when any discrepancy exists. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. I, § 6, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 118-7-118-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-36. - City planner. 
    The city planner shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Make recommendations and provide assistance to the city council and planning and zoning commission concerning exercise of their responsibilities under this chapter. 
(2)  Develop and recommend to the planning and zoning commission and the city council a comprehensive plan, thoroughfare plan, and open space plan for the city and to propose actions to implement the plans. 
(3)  Coordinate all planning relating to the city's comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Render such administrative decisions as are required of the city planner by this chapter. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or directed by the city council, the planning and zoning commission or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IX, § 4, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 118-37-118-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-201 et seq. 
State Law reference- Planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 

Sec. 118-66. - Organization. 
    There is created a planning and zoning commission for the city consisting of five members, each to be appointed by the city council for a term of two years and removable for cause. Each member shall continue to serve until the member's successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IX, § 1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-67. - Public hearing postponement, recess and continuations. 
(a)  Postponement. A public hearing before the planning and zoning commission for which notice has been given may be postponed by announcing the postponement at or after the time and place the hearing is scheduled to begin. 
(b)  Recess. A public hearing may be recessed and continued any time after the hearing has commenced. 
(c)  Time limit; notice of delay. If a postponement or continuance of a public hearing is to a specific date and time no later than 60 days from the first or most recent hearing, the announcement of the postponement or continuance at the public hearing in which the application has been postponed or continued shall be sufficient notice, and no additional notice is required. 
(d)  Location of delayed public hearing. Postponed or continued public hearing shall be presumed to be held in the same location, unless a different location for the hearing is announced at the time of the postponement or continuance. 
(e)  Applicant-delayed hearings. If any request or amendment is being considered, whether or not a public hearing is involved, and it is continued at the request of the applicant more than one time, an additional fee shall be required as may be established by the ordinance setting fees. 
(f)  Continuation. The body conducting the hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, for good cause, continue the hearing to a fixed date, time and place. No notice shall be required if a hearing is continued. An applicant shall have the right to request and be granted one continuance; however, all subsequent continuances shall be granted at the discretion of the body conducting the hearing only upon good cause shown. All adjourned public hearings shall commence only upon the giving of all notices which would have been required or at the initial call of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IX, § 2.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-68. - Conduct of public hearing. 
    Subject to the presiding officer's inherent authority to conduct meetings of the planning and zoning commission, the public hearing shall generally be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Report by the city representative. 
(2)  Presentation by the applicant. 
(3)  Testimony by parties supporting the application. 
(4)  Testimony by parties in opposition to the application. 
(5)  Rebuttal by the applicant. 
(6)  Closure of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IX, § 2.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-69. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Advise the city council and make recommendations concerning adoption of or amendments to the city's comprehensive plan and thoroughfare plan, and implementation thereof. 
(2)  Serve as an advisory body to the city council concerning adoption of, or amendments to, the zoning regulations and zoning map and to make recommendations thereon. 
(3)  To call a public hearing to determine proper zoning for a tract of land or for an area. 
(4)  Undertake such actions as are necessary to exercise its delegated powers, as indicated by adopted ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IX, § 3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 118-70-118-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-201 et seq. 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008-211.011. 

Sec. 118-96. - Organization. 
    The board of adjustment shall be composed of five members and four alternate members. Appointments to the board of adjustment shall be for staggered terms of two years. Alternate members shall serve in the absence of one or more regular board members when required to do so by the mayor or city manager. The city council may remove a member or alternate member of the board for cause, as found by the city council on a written charge, after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member, or alternate member, whose term becomes vacant for any cause. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. X, § 1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-97. - Officers and compensation. 
    The board of adjustment shall meet and organize as soon as practicable, shall elect one of its members as chair, and shall have a secretary. The members of the board and the secretary shall receive such compensation as may be determined and fixed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. X, § 2.1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-98. - Procedures. 
(a)  Adopting procedural rules. The board of adjustment, by majority vote, shall adopt such procedural rules as are necessary to execute its duties. 
(b)  Quorum. All cases before the board of adjustment must be heard by at least four members. 
(c)  Calling meetings. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair, and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chair, or in the chair absence the acting chair, shall administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. 
(d)  Meetings open to the public. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(e)  Keeping of minutes. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. X, § 2.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-99. - Powers. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Decide appeals of city planner's decisions. The board of adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the city planner in the enforcement of this chapter and city rules and regulations. 
(2)  Variances to chapter. 
a.  Findings. The board of adjustment, pursuant to the powers conferred upon it by state law, the city ordinances, and this article, may grant variances and exceptions to the sections of this chapter upon finding that: 
1.  Such variance is in harmony with the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and this chapter; 
2.  Such variance will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent property in the same district; 
3.  Such variance will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
4.  Such variance will not authorize the operation of a use other than those uses specifically authorized for the district in which the property for which the variance is sought is located; 
5.  The plight of the owner of the property for which the variance is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, including but not limited to the area, shape or slope; and that the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property, and are not merely financial, and are not due to or the result of general conditions in the district in which the property is located; and 
6.  The variance is not a self-created hardship. 
b.  Variances. The board of adjustment may permit in any district such modification of the requirements of the district regulations as the board may deem necessary to secure an appropriate development of a lot where adjoining such lot on two or more sides there are lots occupied by buildings which do not conform to this chapter. 
c.  Decision. The concurring vote of at least four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to authorize a variance. 
d.  Application for variance. Variances to be considered by the board of adjustment may be initiated by the owner of the affected property or the owner's authorized representative or any aggrieved party who files the required application and pays the appropriate fee, or by any person aggrieved by a decision of an administrative officer with authority over any matter appealable to the city council, or by an officer or appropriate board of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. X, § 3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-100. - Appeal of decisions made by city officers. 
(a)  Appeal of city planner's decision. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department or board of the city affected by any decision of the city planner. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, by filing with the city planner and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal, which shall specify the grounds thereof. The city planner shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
(b)  Appeal stays city planner and building official action. An appeal from the action of the city planner shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of such action unless the city planner certifies to the board that a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. If the city planner shall make and file such certificate, that action shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order which may be granted by the board, or by a court of record, upon application of the party aggrieved by the action of the city planner, and after notice to the city planner. 
(c)  Hearing. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and may authorize city staff to do such. The board of adjustment shall decide such appeal within a reasonable time. Upon hearing of such appeal, any interested party may appear in person or by an agent or attorney. 
(d)  Powers. In exercising the powers set out in this section, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of state law, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the city planner from whose action the appeal is taken. 
(e)  Decision. Decisions of the board of adjustment shall be as follows: 
(1)  Required vote. A reversal by the board of any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city planner against the applicant, and a finding in favor of the applicant by the board, shall require the concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment. 
(2)  Lapse of order. Any reversal by the board of adjustment shall lapse after the expiration of 90 days where action by the appellant is not taken pursuant thereto within such period. This subsection shall not apply when the applicant has presented to the board of adjustment a development plan which requires a length of time greater than 90 days, in which event the board of adjustment may grant a greater length of time. In no event, however, shall such time granted exceed two years. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. X, § 4, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-101. - Appeal to courts. 
    Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, any taxpayer or any city officer, department or board may present any such matter to a court of record for review, after the final action of the board thereon, and in the manner and upon the terms provided by state law in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.0011. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. X, § 5, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 118-102-118-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AMENDMENT PROCEDURE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 118-131. - Applicability. 
    This division applies to all changes to zoning. For historic designations and certificates of appropriateness, see article II of chapter 50 pertaining to historic preservation. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-132. - Notice of public hearings. 
(a)  Notice for planning and zoning commission public hearing. Before the tenth day before the date of the planning and zoning commission hearing, written notice of each public hearing before the planning and zoning commission on a proposed change in a zoning classification shall be sent to each owner indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax role, of real property within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. The notice may be served by its deposit in the United States mail. 
(b)  Publication of notice for city council public hearing. Before the 15th day before the date of the city council hearing, notice of the time and place of the hearing must be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 2.1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-133. - Joint public hearings. 
    The planning and zoning commission and the city council may, from time to time, hold joint public hearings to consider a zoning or planning-related matter. However, the city council shall not take action until it has received the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The notice for such hearings shall meet the minimum requirements for a public hearing established in section 118-132. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 2.2, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-134. - Computation of time. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done pursuant to this chapter shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday as observed by the city, that day shall be excluded. Whenever a person has the right or is required to perform some act within the prescribed period, after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the notice or paper is served by mail, three calendar days shall be added to the prescribed time, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 2.3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-135. - Zoning upon annexation. 
(a)  Newly annexed territory. The planning and zoning commission shall, as soon as practicable, either during or after annexation of any territory, recommend to the city council a plan for zoning the newly annexed area. The procedure to be followed for adoption shall be the same as is established in this division for a change in zoning. 
(b)  Issuance of permits in newly annexed areas. No permits for the construction of a building or a use of land other than types of buildings or land use allowed in an AG agriculture district under this chapter shall be issued by the building official until such land has been zoned to a district which permits such a use. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-136. - Review of specific use permit applications. 
(a)  Planning and zoning commission action. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing and make a recommendation to the city council on any application for a specific use permit. 
(b)  City council action. The city council shall conduct a public hearing and make a determination on the application for a specific use permit. 
(c)  City council approval or denial. Following the closure of the public hearing, the city council may take the following actions on any specific use permit applications: 
(1)  Approval. The city council may approve the request as presented, or make it subject to such appropriate conditions as are allowed by law. Such approval of any request for a specific use permit shall be granted only if the city council determines that the request is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the purposes of this chapter. 
(2)  Approval with conditions. In authorizing a specific use permit, the city council may impose additional reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public interest and welfare of the community. 
(3)  Denial. The city council may deny the request. If a request is denied, a new application may be submitted for the same lot or tract of land, or any portion thereof, within one year only if the new request is for a more restrictive or less intense use or development. Unless the new proposal is more restrictive or less intense than the previously denied proposal, no other application pertaining to a specific use permit may be submitted on the same lot or tract of land or any portion thereof for a period of one year from the date of its denial by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 4, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-137. - Initiation of administrative procedures. 
(a)  Application required. All zoning and site plan requests to be considered by the planning and zoning commission and/or the city council, shall be initiated by filing an application with the city. The applications required by this section shall be on forms supplied by the city, and shall be available in the offices of the city. 
(b)  Submittal and acceptance. No application shall be processed until such application is complete and the fee established by the city council for processing the application has been paid. 
(c)  Authority to initiate request. The following shall have authority to initiate a request: 
(1)  Zoning map amendments. All zoning-map amendment applications may be initiated by the owner of the affected property or his/her authorized representative who files the required application and pays the appropriate fee for the request, or by action of the city council, planning and zoning commission or the city planner. 
(2)  Zoning ordinance text amendments. Amendments to the text of this chapter shall be initiated only by action of the city council, the planning and zoning commission or the city planner. 
(d)  Application withdrawal. Procedures for withdrawal of an application are as follow: 
(1)  Submittal of application for withdrawal. Any request for withdrawal of an application must be submitted in writing to the city planner. 
(2)  Timing for application for withdrawal. Once an application for a zoning-related item to be considered by the planning and zoning commission and/or city council or a variance, special exception or appeal going before the city council has been published in a newspaper or notifications of public hearing, if any, have been mailed, such request for withdrawal must be placed on the public hearing agenda and acted upon by the applicable body. 
(3)  Refund of fees. Application fees are not refundable except when the city planner determines that an application was accepted in error, or the fee paid exceeded the amount due under city council policy or city ordinance, in which case the amount of the overpayment may be refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 5, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1408-3-06, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-138. - Review of zoning-related items. 
(a)  Planning and zoning commission actions. Actions of the planning and zoning commission on zoning-related items are as follow: 
(1)  Recommendations. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing and make recommendations to the city council on the following matters: 
a.  Text amendments to this chapter. 
b.  Zoning changes and map amendments, including reclassification of the zoning designations on land, planned developments (PD), and overlay districts. 
c.  Amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
d.  Amendments to the thoroughfare plan. 
e.  Specific use permit applications. 
(2)  Final determinations. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing and make final determinations on detailed site plans for planned development districts. 
(b)  City council actions. The city council shall conduct a public hearing and make determinations on the following matters: 
(1)  Text amendments to this chapter. 
(2)  Zoning changes and map amendments, including reclassification of the zoning designations on land, and planned developments (PD). 
(3)  Amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Amendments to the thoroughfare plan. 
(5)  Specific use permit applications. 
(c)  City council approval or denial. Following the closure of the public hearing, the city council may take the following actions on any zoning-related applications: 
(1)  Approval. The city council may approve the request or amendment either as requested, or in the form of a more restrictive district, and subject to such appropriate conditions as are allowed by law in order to implement the policies of the city's comprehensive plan and in order to safeguard the public safety and welfare of the citizens and to protect properties from adverse impact and incompatibilities. Approval of any request for a text amendment to this chapter or a zoning change and map amendment shall be granted only if the city council determines that the request or amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the purposes of this chapter. If the request or amendment concerns a text amendment to this chapter or a zoning change and map amendment, the city council shall enact an ordinance amending this chapter or amending the official zoning map, whichever is applicable. 
(2)  Approval with conditions. In approving a planned development district, the city council may impose additional reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public interest and welfare of the community. 
(3)  Denial with prejudice. The city council may deny the request or amendment with prejudice. If a request or amendment is denied with prejudice, a new application may be submitted for the same lot or tract of land, or any portion thereof, within one year only if the new request is for a more restrictive or less intense use or development. Unless the new proposal is more restrictive or less intense than the previously denied proposal, no other application pertaining to a change of zoning and map amendment may be submitted on the same lot or tract of land or any portion thereof for a period of one year from the date of its denial by the city council. If a request or amendment is denied by the city council without an indication of "with" or "without" prejudice, the action shall be considered to be "denied with prejudice." 
(4)  Denial without prejudice. The city council may deny the request or amendment without prejudice, in which case an application for a change in zoning and map amendment other than that which was requested on the original application may be filed at the applicant's discretion. 
(5)  Submission of subsequent rezoning request. A proposal to rezone a tract or parcel of land which has been previously rejected by the city council may be resubmitted within one year only if there is an actual change in conditions relating to zoning principles of the tract or parcel of land or the property surrounding it. In that event, the applicant must submit to the city planner, in writing, a description of such changed conditions. The city planner shall investigate the property or cause such an investigation to be made and shall report to the planning and zoning commission whether or not such changed conditions exist. Upon hearing such report, the planning and zoning commission shall either grant or deny the request to refile the proposal for rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 6, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1373-8-05, 8-2-2005; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-139. - Conditions for approval. 
    The following conditions shall be considered when reviewing an application for zoning change. 
(1)  Compatibility. The specific use will be compatible with and not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity, nor significantly diminish or impair property values within the immediate vicinity; 
(2)  Orderly growth and development. The establishment of the specific use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property; 
(3)  Supporting facilities. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities have been or will be provided; 
(4)  Drives and parking. The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provides for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments; 
(5)  Nuisances. Adequate nuisance-prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration; 
(6)  Lighting. Any lighting to be provided will be directional so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring properties; 
(7)  Landscaping. Sufficient landscaping and screening to ensure harmony and compatibility with adjacent property exists or will be provided; and 
(8)  Comprehensive plan. The proposed use is in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 7, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1432-8-06, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 118-140. - New matters of evidence in zoning-related hearings. 
(a)  New matters of evidence not presented to the planning and zoning commission in zoning-related hearings may or may not, in the discretion of the city council, be heard or considered by the city council in its public hearings related to amendments to this chapter and maps to the city. 
(b)  If new evidence develops between the date of the hearing by the planning and zoning commission and the hearing of the city council on any zoning change, or if for any other valid reason a person wishes to present evidence to the city council which had not been presented to the planning and zoning commission, the city council may hear and consider the evidence or refer the case back to the planning and zoning commission for further hearings to consider the new evidence. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit anyone from speaking in the public hearing related to changes in zoning. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 8, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1481-2-08, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-141. - Protest of proposed change in zoning. 
(a)  Property owners adjacent to and within a distance of 200 feet of a property for which a change in zoning is being considered have the right to file a written protest against the request. The land area of this 200-foot distance includes streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Whenever such written protest is signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots or land included in such zoning change or of the lots or land immediately adjoining such and within the 200-foot distance, such change in zoning shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the commission. 
(c)  For purposes of determining representation on such written protest, the written protest of any one owner of land owned by two or more persons shall be presumed to be the protest of all owners. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 9, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-142. - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
    No building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued for a property unless it is legally zoned for that use and structure or it is a legally nonconforming use or structure as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VII, § 10, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 118-143-118-170. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Application for Rezoning or Special Use Permit 

Sec. 118-171. - Preapplication conference. 
(a)  It is recommended that the applicant for a zoning-related change have a preapplication conference with the city planner prior to incurring substantial expense in preparing plans, surveys and other data. 
(b)  An applicant for a zoning change is encouraged to request a preapplication conference with the city planner prior to formal application. 
(c)  At the preapplication conference, the applicant should present a draft concept with as much detail as possible. 
(d)  Based on the information presented, the city planner will provide initial comments concerning the merits of the proposed development and inform the applicant of any additional requirements for preparation of the formal planned development application. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 1.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-172. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1408-3-06, adopted Mar. 21, 2006, deleted § 118-172, which pertained to applicant and derived from Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 1.2, adopted Nov. 3, 1998. 
Sec. 118-173. - Conditions for approval. 
    A zoning change or specific use permit may be approved if all of the following conditions have been found: 
(1)  Compatibility. The specific use will be compatible with and not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity, nor significantly diminish or impair property values within the immediate vicinity; 
(2)  Orderly growth and development. The establishment of the specific use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property; 
(3)  Supporting facilities. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities have been or will be provided; 
(4)  Drives and parking. The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provides for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments; 
(5)  Nuisances. Adequate nuisance-prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration; 
(6)  Lighting. Any lighting to be provided will be directional so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring properties; 
(7)  Landscaping. Sufficient landscaping and screening to ensure harmony and compatibility with adjacent property exists or will be provided; and 
(8)  Comprehensive plan. The proposed use is in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 1.3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-174. - Specific use permit (SUP). 
(a)  Application procedures. An application for a specific use permit shall follow the procedure for general zoning applications except as set out in this section. 
(b)  Specific use permit site plan. The completed application shall be accompanied by a site plan which, along with the application, will become a part of the specific use permit, if approved. The accompanying site plan shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Data describing all the processes and activities involved with the proposed use; 
(2)  Boundaries of the area covered by the site plan; 
(3)  The location of each existing and proposed building and structure in the area covered by the site plan; and 
(4)  The location and dimensions of all curb cuts, public and private streets, and parking and loading areas. 
(c)  Notice of public hearings. Notice of public hearings shall be given as follows: 
(1)  Notice for planning and zoning commission public hearing. Before the tenth day before the date of the hearing, written notice of each public hearing before the planning and zoning commission on a specific use permit application shall be sent to each owner indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax role, of real property within 200 feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. The notice may be served by its deposit in the United States mail. 
(2)  Publication of notice for city council public hearing. Before the 15th day before the date of the city council hearing, notice of the time and place of the hearing must be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(d)  Joint public hearings. The planning and zoning commission and the city council may, from time to time, hold joint public hearings to consider a specific use permit application. However, the city council shall not take action until it has received the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The notice for such hearings shall meet the minimum requirements for a public hearing established in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Computation of time. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday as observed by the city, that day shall be excluded. Whenever a person has the right or is required to perform some act within the prescribed period, after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the notice or paper is served by mail, three calendar days shall be added to the prescribed time, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(f)  Time limit. A specific use permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period of 180 days from the date of issuance and shall become null and void unless construction or use is substantially underway during such 180-day period, or unless an extension of time is approved by the city council. A specific use permit issued by the city council shall become null and void if the land use for which it was issued has been closed, vacated, abandoned, or changed to a different use for a period of 180 or more days. 
(g)  Revocation. A specific use permit may be revoked or modified by the city council, after notice to the property owner and a hearing, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The existence of any material error or misrepresentation in the application required in this section; 
(2)  The specific use permit was obtained or extended through misrepresentation or deception; or 
(3)  One or more of the conditions imposed by the permit has not been met or has been violated. 
(h)  Amendments. No building, premises, or land use under a specific use permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise significantly changed unless an amendment to the original specific use permit has been obtained. The procedure for amendment of a specific use permit shall be the same as for a new application. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 2, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1431-8-06, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Secs. 118-175-118-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 118-201. - Applicability. 
(a)  Nonconformity. If the city or other governmental agency takes an act or action which transforms a previously conforming structure or lot of record in terms of the city's previous ordinance, or the minimum requirements in this division or in division 1 of article VI of this chapter, such structure or lot shall be deemed to be in conformance with this division and article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  Creation of nonconformity. No lot or structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be reduced below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter, except as otherwise provided. 
(c)  Change in district boundaries. Whenever a nonconformity is created by changing the boundaries of a zoning district and transferring an area from one district to another district, or when the boundaries of districts are changed as the result of annexation of new territory, or changes in the regulations or restrictions of this chapter, this division shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IV, § 2.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-202. - Continuing nonconforming use. 
    The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives may be continued, even though such use does not conform to the sections of this chapter; provided, however, the right to continue such nonconforming use shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Nonconforming buildings. A nonconforming building or structure may be occupied as follows: 
a.  Repairs and alterations. Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, provided that no structural alterations shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, or those necessary for installing or enclosing required sanitary facilities, such as toilets and bathrooms. 
b.  Enlargement. Unless otherwise provided, a nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions and enlargements are made to conform to all of the requirements of the district in which such building structure is located. 
c.  Relocating a nonconforming structure. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all regulations of the district in which it is to be located. 
d.  Reconstruction of damaged building. If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed to an extent less than 60 percent of its fair market value by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, restoration or new construction shall be permitted. If destruction is greater than 60 percent of its fair market value, such building or structure and its use, if repaired or replaced, shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located, and it shall be treated as a new building. 
e.  Unoccupied nonconforming structures. A nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed may be occupied by a use for which the building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a period 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. The use of a nonconforming building or structure lawfully constructed, which becomes unoccupied after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, may also be occupied by the use for which the building or structure was designed or intended, if so occupied within a period of 180 days after the building or structure becomes vacant. 
f.  Manufactured home. A manufactured home on an existing lot lawfully in place at the time of the adoption of this section may remain in use, provided that it does not remain vacant for more than 180 days. Once a manufactured home is removed from a lot, another manufactured home may be placed on the lot, if placed no more than 180 days from the date of the removal of the original manufactured home, provided it meets the applicable requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
(2)  Nonconforming use of building. The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be continued as follows: 
a.  Changing use of nonconforming structure. The nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to a use of the same or more restrictive classification. Where the nonconforming use of a building or structure is changed to a use of a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a use of less restrictive classification. 
b.  Changing or expanding nonconforming use. A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be extended or expanded into any other portion of such conforming building or structure, nor changed except to a conforming use. If such nonconforming use or portion thereof is voluntarily discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(3)  Nonconforming use of lands. The nonconforming use of land existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives may continue as follows: 
a.  Expansion of nonconforming use of land. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended. 
b.  Discontinuance of nonconforming use of land. If a nonconforming use of land, or any portion thereof, is voluntarily discontinued for a period of 180 days, any future use of such land or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such land or portion thereof is located. 
(4)  Single-family residential. Any legal nonconforming single-family residential structure damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, or is the subject of a city-approved housing rehabilitation or reconstruction program may be reconstructed or repaired, with the following conditions: 
a.  A building permit is issued for the reconstruction or repair within 180 days of the occurrence of the damage or destruction. 
b.  The repairs or replacement structure shall not increase the extent of the nonconformity or the nature of the nonconforming activity. 
c.  The replacement structure shall meet the minimum required building setbacks of the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IV, § 2.2, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1350-2-04, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1547-7-10, 7-20-2010) 
Sec. 118-203. - Abandonment of nonconforming use. 
    A nonconforming use of a building, structure or land which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when: 
(1)  The intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; 
(2)  The characteristic equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment within 180 days; 
(3)  A nonconforming building, structure, or land, or portion thereof which is or becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a period of 180 days; or 
(4)  A nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. IV, § 2.3, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 118-204-118-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 118-231. - Compliance required. 
(a)  No person shall use, occupy, or develop any land, building or other structures or authorize or permit such use, occupancy or development, except in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of any building, structure, or land or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or any other person employed in connection therewith who violates or assists in or contributes to the commission of a violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of such violation and shall become liable for the penalties established in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-232. - Notice of intent to suspend or revoke. 
    Before suspension or revocation of any construction permit or authorization pursuant to this division, the building official may give notice of the intent to suspend or revoke the permit or authorization, which notice may specify a reasonable time for compliance with this chapter. If notice of intent is given, suspension or revocation may not occur before the time for compliance has expired. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-233. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  When the city determines that a construction permit has been issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information or material misrepresentation or that there has been noncompliance with the sections of this chapter, the building official may suspend the permit or license pending compliance with this chapter. The building official may revoke a permit if compliance is not achieved within a reasonable period of time. 
(b)  Notice of suspension or revocation of a construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be sent to the permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  A construction permit or certificate of occupancy may be immediately revoked by the building official when and if additional noncompliance with this chapter occurs after the permit has been suspended. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-234. - Suspension or revocation of permits conditioned by variance. 
(a)  When it is determined that there is a failure to comply with any term, condition or requirement of a variance to this chapter, the building official or designee may suspend or revoke any permits pending compliance with the terms, conditions or requirements under which the variance was approved. 
(b)  Notice of suspension or revocation of a permit shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing no later than 45 days after notification of the suspension or revocation. If the board of adjustment determines that there is a failure to comply with any term, condition or requirement of the variance, it may revoke the variance or take such action as it considers necessary to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 4, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-235. - Suspension, revocation or lapse of site plan or specific use permit by city council. 
    A site plan or specific use permit may be revoked by the city council upon public hearing if violations of conditions are determined to exist, or if the time limit for permit or plan approval has lapsed without significant action on behalf of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 5, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-236. - Stop work order. 
(a)  When the city determines that there has been noncompliance with any material term, condition or requirement of this chapter, the city may order any person having a proprietary interest in the property or any person engaged in the development or construction on the property to cease and desist from engaging in any further development or construction activities on the site. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be posted on the site. The order shall specifically state the nature of the noncompliance and the acts prohibited. 
(b)  The city may bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain and enjoin any person attempting or allowing development or construction without a permit or other authorization or who fails to cease and desist from further development or construction after notice of a stop work order has been posted in accordance with this division. 
(c)  When the city determines that there has been noncompliance with this chapter which constitutes a health or safety hazard, a stop work order shall be issued and shall remain in effect until there has been compliance with this chapter. This division shall not override the county health director or designee's ability to suspend or reinstate food or child care permits in conformance with state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 6, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-237. - Appeal of stop work order, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Appeal of a stop work order, suspension or revocation by an administrative official such as the building official or city planner may be made to the board of adjustment by any aggrieved person or party. The aggrieved person or party shall give written notice no later than three days after the stop work order is posted, or notice of the suspension or revocation is received. The notice shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the person making the appeal; 
(2)  The facts surrounding the particular appeal; 
(3)  The nature of the stop work order, suspension or revocation; and 
(4)  The reasons why the ruling should be set aside. 
(b)  The board of adjustment or appropriate board shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal, provided that the appeal is received at least three working days prior to that meeting. The board of adjustment or appropriate board shall either affirm or reverse the decision appealed, no later than seven days after the close of the hearing. 
(c)  An appeal brought under this section shall not stay the stop work order, suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 7, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-238. - Criminal enforcement. 
(a)  The violation of any of the sections of this chapter shall be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a distinct and separate violation offense. 
(b)  Any criminal violation of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 per offense. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall limit in any manner the authority of the city to seek any injunctive or other civil relief available under state laws. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 8, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-239. - Civil remedies. 
(a)  If any building, structure, or land is used, constructed, maintained, repaired or altered, or any development is undertaken in violation of this chapter, the city may institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation authorized by the state, including but not limited to imposition of a civil penalty, not to exceed $2,000.00 a day, for the kinds of violations enumerated in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.012. 
(b)  The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the city from instituting any other appropriate action to require compliance with this chapter and with administrative orders and determinations made pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. XII, § 9, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 118-240-118-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 118-266. - Organization of zoning district standards. 
    Generally, sections 118-267 through 118-272 defines the zoning districts and their intent for the city. Section 118-273 and article IV of this chapter pertaining to permissible uses establishes the allowable uses in each district as well as establishing special requirements for certain uses. Article VI of this chapter pertaining to development standards establishes such things as density, height and setback of each zoning district, among other things. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. II, § 1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-267. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The city is divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition, there are overlays to these zoning districts which may or may not conform to the same boundaries. These overlays and the city's floodplain management ordinance in article II of chapter 42 may impose additional standards or requirements. 
(c)  The zoning map may include, for reference only, the general boundaries of floodplain and floodway areas. For regulations beyond those established in section 118-273 and article IV of this chapter pertaining to permissible uses and article VI of this chapter pertaining to development standards and for the location of boundaries, reference should be made to article II of chapter 42, pertaining to floodplain management, in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. II, § 2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-268. - List of districts. 
(a)  Base zoning districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into 12 zoning districts which shall be known and cited as follows: 
FIGURE 1 ZONING DISTRICTS 
Abbreviated 
Designation Zoning District Name A Agricultural district R-1 Single-family district R-2 Single-family district R-3 Two-family district R-4 Multifamily district B-1 Local business district B-2 General business district B-3 Central business district I-1 Light industrial district I-2 Heavy industrial district MD Medical use district PD Planned development (PD) district  
(b)  Zoning overlay districts. In addition to the base zoning districts, the following zoning overlay districts may be applied to properties within the city: 
FIGURE 2 ZONING OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
Abbreviated 
Designation Zoning Overlay 
District Name H Historic overlay district UC Urban Core  
(Ord. No. 1130, art. II, § 3.1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1350-2-04, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 118-269. - Purpose of zoning districts. 
(a)  Zoning districts comprise the base standards by which any property may be developed. They establish such standards as allowable land uses, maximum density or development and minimum building setbacks, among other things. Each zoning district established in this chapter is provided for a specific purpose in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the location of various types of uses throughout the city as follows: 
(1)  A agriculture district. The agriculture district is intended for the following: 
a.  Land which is presently used for agricultural purposes; 
b.  Land which has been newly annexed into the city; 
c.  Land which is used for open space purposes; and 
d.  Land which is not yet ready for development due to unavailability of urban services or a lack of a market for development. 
These lands should appropriately continue to be used for agriculture purposes until such time as they are needed for urban purposes in conformity with the comprehensive plan and orderly growth of the city. The uses permitted in this district are intended to accommodate normal agricultural activities. 
(2)  R-1 single-family dwelling district. The R-1 district is intended as an area for low density single-family use. Lots in this area must be 8,250 square feet and larger. 
(3)  R-2 single-family dwelling district. The R-2 district is intended to provide for slightly higher density residential areas. Lots in this area must be 6,000 square feet or larger. 
(4)  R-3 duplex dwelling district. This classification creates a residential district which is appropriate for single-family housing and two-family housing. 
(5)  R-4 multiple-family dwelling district. This district is intended for higher density residential areas which may contain a mixture of single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings. District regulations are designed to protect residential characteristics of the area and to prevent the overcrowding of land. For the purposes of this chapter, R-4 is considered a commercial zoning district in locating and mapping this district, and in determining residential adjacency. 
(6)  B-1 local business district. This district is intended to accommodate those business activities supplying the day-to-day commercial needs of nearby residents. The types and intensity of uses allowed in this district are limited so as to not adversely affect neighboring residential areas. 
(7)  B-2 general business district. This district is intended to accommodate those business activities that are oriented toward the automobile, or whose operations may require limited truck access. Generally this district is located along major traffic arteries where strip business development exists. 
(8)  B-3 central business district. This district is intended to accommodate and enhance commercial activities in the central area of the city, and to promote the downtown as a pedestrian-oriented destination for residents and visitors. This district is intended to build on the area's historic heritage and character. 
(9)  I-1 light industrial district. This district is intended to accommodate light industrial and heavy commercial uses which may be characterized as having regular truck traffic, large amounts of storage, higher levels of noise, or some other impact on surrounding properties and the roadway system. In addition, the district also includes certain support services for industrial development such as office, commercial, personal and professional services, and retail. 
(10)  I-2 heavy industrial district. This district provides for a wide range of industrial activities, some of which may generate objectionable or hazardous conditions and therefore are not compatible with nonindustrial land uses. Allowed uses include manufacturing, processing, slaughtering, warehousing, outside storage, and distribution. 
(11)  MD medical use district. This district is intended to accommodate those business activities associated with, or related to, the medical profession. 
(12)  PD planned development district. The purpose of the planned development (PD) district is to: 
a.  Provide greater flexibility in land use, density, and other regulations, and more closely reflect special conditions of development sites in a manner which is consistent with the comprehensive plan and community objectives; 
b.  Preserve the natural amenities and environmental assets of the land, and character of the community; 
c.  Provide an appropriate balance between intensity of development and the ability to provide adequate supporting facilities and services; and 
d.  Facilitate a more effective arrangement of buildings, land uses and utilities, and protect contiguous land uses. 
Any use or combination of uses listed in the land use schedule may be permitted within a planned development (PD) district. The uses to be permitted in any specific planned development (PD) district shall be enumerated in the ordinance which creates such a district. 
Each planned development (PD) district shall constitute an amendment to this chapter. Certain maximum and minimum standards will be specified for various use categories, and certain provisions such as yards, coverage, and building spacing are to be determined by the particular design. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. II, § 3.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-270. - Purpose and designation/location of zoning overlay districts. 
(a)  Generally. Zoning overlay districts serve to modify the base underlying zoning district with special development standards which are appropriate to the particular area so designated. Where the overlay district contains standards which are more restrictive than the underlying district, the overlay district governs. Otherwise, the base underlying zoning controls development. 
(b)  H historic overlay district. This overlay district denotes a special designation by the city council that the area has particular historic or cultural merit to the community. There are usually specifically tailored development standards in such overlay districts which govern building and construction. 
    The suffix "H" shall indicate the zoning designation of those sites, districts, areas, buildings, and lands which the city council has designated historic landmarks. The historic designation is an overlay restriction. Use classifications as to all property which may be included in an historic overlay district shall continue to be governed by the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city and the procedures therein established. 
(c)  Urban core. This overlay district denotes an area of mixed institutional, retail, offices, multi-family residential, lodging, dining, and entertainment. This area is generally more densely developed than other areas zoned B-2, general business, but are not under this overlay. This area is generally less densely developed than areas zoned B-3, central business district. This area is oriented to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation. 
    Any lot, parcel, or tract of land adjacent and contiguous with the right-of-way of: North Street (BR59) between NE Stallings Drive (LP 224) and Main Street (SH 21), South Street (BR 59) between Main Street (SH 21) and SW Stallings Drive (US 59/LP 224) or SE Stallings Drive (LP 224), and North University Drive (FM 1275) between Main Street (SH 21) and NE Stallings Drive (LP 224) is designated as the Urban Core Overlay District. The Urban Core Overlay District is depicted on the City of Nacogdoches official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. II, § 3.3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1350-2-04, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 1738-7-17 , § 2, 8-8-2017) 
Sec. 118-271. - Zoning district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Thoroughfares. Boundaries indicated as following streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerline of such thoroughfares. 
(2)  Railroad lines. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(3)  Platted lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following lot lines. 
(4)  Unsubdivided property. Boundaries located on unsubdivided property shall be determined by the scale of the official zoning map. 
(5)  Line dividing platted lot. If a district boundary line divides a platted lot into two parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the district boundary line as shown. 
(6)  City limit lines. Boundaries indicated as following the city limit lines shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(7)  Floodplain areas. The boundaries of designated floodplain areas shall be defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps adopted by the city in the Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Extensions of features. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(9)  Streets or alleys on the ground. Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on the zoning district map, the streets or alleys on the ground shall control. 
(10)  Board of adjustment. If none of subsections (1) through (9) of this section apply, the board of adjustment shall determine the location of the district boundary. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. II, § 4, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-272. - Compliance. 
    Except as specifically provided: 
(1)  No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit established for the district in which such building is located. 
(4)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(5)  No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided in this chapter except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulation in which such building is located. 
(6)  The minimum yards, parking spaces and open spaces, including lot area per dwelling unit, required by this chapter for each and every building existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or for any building erected after such effective date shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for the district in which such lot is located. 
(7)  Every building erected or structurally altered after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be located on a lot as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. II, § 5, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-273. - Land use schedule. 
(a)  Use of land and buildings. Buildings, structures and land shall be used only in accordance with the uses permitted in the following land use schedule, subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter. The following symbols are used in the land use schedule: 
(1)  The symbol "P" shall mean that the use is permitted as a principal use in that zoning district by right. 
(2)  The symbol "S" shall mean that the principal use is permitted in that zoning district only after first obtaining a specific use permit. 
(3)  The symbol "A" shall mean that this use is specifically permitted as an accessory use to a principal use in the district. This does not exclude other land uses which are generally considered ancillary to the primary use. 
(4)  An asterisk (*) indicates that the use has special standards or requirements listed in this section, which it must meet in order to be allowed. 
(5)  A blank square shall mean that the use is not allowed in that zoning district. 
(6)  Italicized words are defined in article IV of this chapter or under section 118-1 containing definitions. 
(b)  Organization of land use schedule; category grouping. Uses are grouped into general categories such as "agriculture" and "residential," and then further organized into subcategories. This organization of land uses is for ease of reference only. 
LAND USE SCHEDULE(*) Signifies Uses with Special Guildelines 
( Italic ) Signifies a Defined Term Residential Permitted Use 
P=Permitted, A=Accessory Use, S=SUP Commercial Industrial AG R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 MD I-1 I-2 AGRICULTURAL USES P P P P P Farm, Ranch, Garden or Orchard S P P P P P P P Farm or Ranch for live stock and Animal Specialties S P P P Feed Store and Tack for live Stock - No Mill P P P S Livestock Auction Pens or Sheds P S Poultry Hatchery P S Stables (Commercial) P RESIDENTIAL USES Household Units P P P P P Home Occupation P P P P P Multifamily - Apartments S P P P P P Single Family Attached P P P P P Single Family Detached P P Single Family Zero Lot Line P P Two Family Dwelling A A A P P Pool House (Detached)* P P P P Special Unit Types P P P P P Industrialized Housing* Manufactured Home S Manufactured Home Park S Mobile Home (House Trailer, Camp) S Mobile Home Park S S Travel Trailer/ RV Park S S S Lodging/Group Quarters S S S S P Bed and Breakfast* - 4 or Less Patrons P P P P P Bed and Breakfast* - 5-8 Patrons S P P P P Boarding or Rooming House S P P S S S S S P Accessory Apartment* P P P P S S S S P Convent or Monastery S P P S S P Family Group Home S P P P P P P P P Family Home P P P P P P P P P Foster Home P P P P P A A P P Guest House (Detached) P P P P S S S Half-way House - Criminal S P P S Hotel or Motel S P P P P S P Orphanage S P P S P Retirement Home P P P P AMUSEMENT /RECREATION USES General Recreation Amusement, Commercial - Indoors* P P P Amusement, Commercial - Outdoors S S Billiard Parlor or Pool Hall* P P P S Carnival or Circus (Temporary) S S S S S S S S S Country Club (Private Membership) S P P P S S Fairground* P P P P S S S S Golf Course (Public or Private) P P P P P S S S P Golf Driving Range P P P P A Health Club or Studio P P P P P A Ice or Roller Skating Rink* S P P P P Night Club or Dance Hall* P P P S Race Track S P S S S S A Recreation Club or Area (Private)* P P P S S S S A Recreation Facility (Public) P P P P P Teen Club* S P P A Tennis Court (Lighted) S P P P A A A A P Tennis Court (No Lights) P P P P Theater - Movie or Live (Enclosed) S P P P S Zoo, Zoological Park, Animal Park, or Aviary S Adult Recreation Adult Arcade* P Adult Book Store or Video Store* P Adult Cabaret* P Adult Motel* P Adult Motion Picture Theater* P Adult Theater* P Escort Agency* P Nude Model Studio* P Sexual Encounter Center* P INTITUTIONAL, UTILITY and 
GOVERNMENTAL USES Government / Utility P P P P P Government Facility P P P P P P P P Library, Art Gallery or Museum (Public) P P P P P Post Office S P P P P Postal Distribution Facility P P P S Radio or TV Trans. Station (Commercial) S P P P P P S S S S S Radio Tower (Non-Commercial)* P P P P P P S S S S S Radio, TV, Microwave, or Cellular Transmission Tower (Comm.)* P P P P P P A A A A A Satellite Dish* P P P P P P P S S S S Utility Facilities (Major) S P P P P P P P P P P Utility Lines and Transmission P P P P P P Schools / Organizations P S S S S College or University S P P P S S P P P P P Daycare - 3 or less Attendees P P P P P S S S P P Daycare - 4-6 Attendees P P P P P S S S Daycare Center - 7 or more Attendees S P P P P S School - Vocational S P P P P P P P P School, K-12 (Public or Private) P P P P S P P P P P Church or Place of Worship P P P P P S Club, Private P P P P P S S S S P Community Center - Private P P P P P P S S P P Community Center - Public P P P P P S Fraternity / Sorority House S S Lodge or Fraternal Organization S P P S P P OFFICE AND PROFESSIONAL Office - General Advertising Agency P P P Architectural / Engineering Services P P P P P Banks and Financial Institutions P P P P P Banks with Drive In Facilities S P P P P Legal Services P P P P Offices - General or Professional P P P P P P Medical/Healthcare S Animal Hospital or Clinic P P P P S Animal Hospital or Clinic w/Outside Pens S P Animal Pound (Public or Private) S P Emergency Ambulance Service P P P P S Hospice P P P P S Hospital - Acute Care S P P P P Hospital - Chronic Care S P P P Medical or Dental Office or Clinic P P P P P P Nursing/Convalescent Home S P P P Psychiatric Hospital or Institution S P S Veterinary Office (No Hosp. or Clinic) P P P P P P Business or Personal Services S Auction - Goods & Equipment (Indoors) P P P P Beauty Parlor/Barbershop P P P P P Cabinet and Woodwork Shop (Custom) S P P P P P Caretaker/Security Quarters P P P P A A S S S S S Cemetery or Mausoleum P P P P P P Communications/Electronics Equipment - Installation and Repair S P P P Conventions, Trade Shows or Exhibits S P P S S Exterminator Service S P P P Exterminator Service Storage P P Household Appliance and Equipment Repair S P P P P Information Processing P P P P Laundry/Dry Cleaning - <3,000 s.f. w/ Customer Service P P P P Laundry/Dry Cleaning - >3,000 s.f. A P P Laundry/Dry Cleaning - Drop Off/Pick Up P P P P P A Laundry/Dry Cleaning -Self Service P P P P P Locksmith P P P P P Mailing Service (Private) P P P P P Mortuary or Funeral Home P P P P P Photocopying or Duplicating Services S P P P P P Photographic Studio P P P P Sewing and Millinary (Custom) P P P P Shoe Repair P P P P Studio - Art, Drama, Dance, Music - Performing Arts P P P P Tailor Shop P P P S P Tattoo Salon/Piercing Studio S S S S P Taxidermist S S P P P P P P P Temporary Field or Construction Office P P P P P P Temporary Retail Use S S S S S Travel Agency P P P P Upholstery Shop or Furniture Repair (non-Auto) P P P P Food and Beverage Services Club (Private)* S P P S S P Catering Service S P P P P P Eating Place w/ Drive-thru S P S P P Eating Place w/o Drive-thru P P P P P P Food Preparation or Food Service P P P P P P Liquor By the Drink* S P P S S P Retail Alcohol Sales - Off Premise Consumption P P P P P Antique Shop P P P P Art Dealer P P P Art Gallery P P P Bait or Tackle Shop S P P P Bakery Shop P P P P P Bicycle Sales or Repair P P P P Book or Stationery Shop P P P P Building Material Sales (Outside Storage) P P P Camera or Photographic Supply Shop P P P P P Cloth or Fabric Store S P P Clothing Store P P P P Confectionery Shop P P P P Consignment Shop P P P P Convenience Store P P P Department Store P P Drapery Shop S P P Drug Store or Pharmacy P P P P Farmers Market - Outdoor S P P P P Flea Market - Outdoor S P P P P Florist Shop P P P P Furniture Sales - New (Indoor Only) S P P P P Garden Shop & Plant Sales - Display or Greenhouse S P P P P Grocery P P P Hardware Store S P P P Hobby, Handicraft or Art Supplies P P P P Lawnmower Sales or Repair S P P P Major Appliance Sales (Indoor) S P P P Mobile/Manufactured Home Dealer (Sales Only) S P P Monument Sales Yard P P P P Optical Shop P P P P Paint and Wallpaper Store P P P S P Pawn Shop* P P Pet Shop S P P P Plumbing Shop (Retail & Wholesale) P P P P Retail or Convenience Store with Gasoline P P P P P P Sporting Goods P P Swimming Pool Sales & Supply P P P P Used Merchandise - Furniture, Rummage, Second Hand Store (Inside) S P P P TRANSPORTATION, AUTOMOBILE 
and MARINE USES & SERVICES Automobile Related Auto Brake, Muffler, Glass, Seat Covers or Tire Sales & Service P P P Auto Dealer - Primarily New/Used Autos P P Auto Dealer - Primarily Used Autos P P Auto Interior Shop P P Auto Paint/Body Repair S P P Auto Rental P P P Auto Repair - General P P P Auto Storage or Auction P P Auto Supply - Used Parts Store with no On-Site Salvage P S P P Auto Supply Store for New and Rebuilt Parts P P P Auto Wrecker Service A A P Auto/Truck Parts and Accessories P P P Car Wash P P P Drag Strip or Commercial Racing P Parking - Accessory to Another Use A A A A A Parking - Commercial Lot or Garage P P P P Lube/Oil Change P P P Service Station S P P P P State Vehicle Inspection P P P Bus or Truck Related Bus or Truck Parking or Storage S S P P Bus Station and Terminal S S S Truck Stop, Including Gas Sales P P P Truck/Heavy Equipment Driving School S P P Truck/Recreational Vehicle Sales S P P Truck/Trailer Rental P P P Trucking Company S P P Railroad or Airport Related Airport or Landing Field S S S Railroad Freight Depot S P P Railroad Passenger Station P P Railroad Yard & Shops P P Vehicle - General Boat Dealer - Sales Only P P Boat Repair or Storage P P Go Cart Track S P Motorcycle Sales or Service P P Transfer/Storage Terminal S P P Vehicle Maintenance - Private A A P P Vehicle Wash - Private A A P P WHOLESALE TRADE 
and STORAGE USES Wholesale Trade Apparel, Piece Goods, Notions - Wholesale P P P Groceries/Related Products - Wholesale P P P Heavy Machinery Sales P P Lumber Sales - Wholesale P P Paper or Paper Products - Wholesale P P P P Petroleum Products Storage & Wholesale P P Tool or Equipment Rental - Indoor P P P P Tool or Equipment Rental - Outdoor P S P P Storage Contractor or Maintenance Yard P P P Hazardous Gases/Chemicals Storage S P Mini Warehouse S S P P Open Storage (No Enclosure) P P Open Storage (Screened) P S P P Warehouse/Storage (Inside) P P P P P Wrecking, Junk, Salvage or Reclamation Yard S S MANUFACTURING 
and MINING USES Food-Related Products Animal or Poultry Slaughtering P Bakery Products; Manufacturing P P Beverage Manufacturing P Bottling or Canning of Soft Drinks & Carbonated Water P P Bottling Works P P Canned, Frozen, and Preserved Fruits, Vegetables and Other Foods P Dairy Products - Processing or Manufacturing P P Fats and Oils Manufacturing or Processing S P Grain Mill Products; Processing and Manufacturing P Ice Manufacturing P P Meat Products; Processing or Manufacturing - Not Including Slaughtering P P Microbrewery S S P P Sugar and Confectionery Products, Manufacturing P P Sugar Manufacturing P Articles and Equipment Apparel Manufacturing P P Broom & Brush Manufacturing P P Cabinet & Woodworking Manufacturing P P P Chemical and Allied Products Manuf. P S Concrete or Asphalt Batch Plant - Temp. S S S P Costume Jewelry, Novelties, Buttons & Misc. Notions Mfg. P P Fabricated Metal Products Manufacturing S P Fur Dressing & Dying P Jewelry, Silverware & Plateware Mfg. P P Laboratory - Medical or Dental P P P P P Laboratory - Scientific Testing P P P P P S Land Fill (Private or Municipal) S Light Manufacturing/Assembly S S P P Linoleum, Asphalt - Felt Base & Other Hard Surfaced Floor Covering Mfg. P Machine Shop P P Match Manufacturing P Musical Instruments & Parts Mfg. P P Paper and Allied Products Manufacturing P Pens, Pencils & Other Office & Artists' Materials Mfg. P P Printing Publishing and Allied Industries P P P P Professional, Scientific & Controlling Instruments; Photographic & Optical Goods; Watches & Clocks Mfg. P P Rubber and Misc. Plastics Manufacturing P Salvage and Reclamation (Enclosed) P P Sign & Advertising Display Manufacturing P P Textile Mill Product Manufacturing P Tobacco Products Mfg. P Toys, Amusement, Sporting & Athletic Goods Mfg. P Welding Shop P P Natural Resources Lumber and Wood Products Manufacturing P S S S S S Oil & Gas Extraction S S S S P S S S S S Oil & Gas Field Services S S S S P Petroleum Refining and Related Industries P Primary Metal Products Manufacturing P Stone, Clay, Glass & Concrete Products Manufacturing P S S S S S Stone, Sand, Gravel & Mineral Extraction S S S S S Stone, Sand, Gravel or Earth Sales and Storage S P  
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1184-12-99, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 1185-12-99, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 1204-5-00, 5-16-2000; Ord. No. 1329-9-03, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 1350-2-04, 2-3-2004; Ord. No. 1431-8-06, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 1439-10-06, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 1516-5-09, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 1560-10-10, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 1626-5-13, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 1676-7-14, 7-15-2014; Ord. No. 1721-10-16 , § 2, 10-18-2016) 
Secs. 118-274-118-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-301. - Accessory uses and structures. 
    An accessory use or structure which is customarily incidental to the principal use or structure, and is located on the same lot or tract of land, shall be permitted as an accessory use without being separately listed as a permitted use. However, an accessory use is not permitted until such time as a principal use is established. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-302. - Specific use permits. 
(a)  Certain uses because of their nature and locations are not always appropriate for categorizing into specific zoning districts. To provide for the proper handling and location of such specific uses, provision is made in this chapter for the granting of a permit for a specific use in a specific location. 
(b)  The city council shall approve, deny, or conditionally approve those uses for which specific use permits are required. These uses generally have unusual nuisance characteristics or are of a public or semipublic character which are often essential or desirable for the general convenience and welfare of the community. Due to the nature of the use, the importance of the use's relationship to the comprehensive plan, or possible adverse impact on neighboring properties of the use, review, evaluation, and exercise of planning judgment relative to the location and site plan of the proposed use are required. A specific use permit shall not be requested, approved or conditionally approved as a substitute for rezoning when rezoning the property in question would be appropriate under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-303. - Temporary structures. 
(a)  Applicability. A temporary structure is one which is used for a limited period of time. It may be manufactured on site or off site, but is temporary in nature, and only used until a permanent structure can be constructed or refurbished, or until the shortterm need is fulfilled. All temporary structures shall be required to comply with this section. 
(b)  Permits. No temporary structure may be constructed on site, or brought on site, until a building permit for its construction and siting has been issued. 
(c)  Time limit. The time limit for all temporary structures shall be 90 days, except for on-site construction offices and batching plants which shall be limited to the time required for the actual on-site construction of the structure or facility, or one year, whichever is less. Any further extension shall require city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 4, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-304. - Overlay districts. 
(a)  Historic overlay district permitted uses. The historic overlay district allows any use which is provided for in the underlying district, provided it will not result in the diminution of the designated historic structure as provided for in article II of chapter 50 pertaining to historic preservation. Regardless of the underlying district, a detached single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling under the historic overlay district may always be used for the dwelling's original intended use or purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 5, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1350-2-04, 2-3-2004) 
Sec. 118-305. - Floodplain areas. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within that portion of a district which is designated as being within a floodplain by the floodplain administrator, provided they are allowed in the underlying zoning, and that they meet any additional requirements established in this chapter and in the city's floodplain regulations in article II of chapter 42: 
(1)  Agriculture. Agricultural activities including the ordinary cultivation of land or legal forms of animal husbandry. 
(2)  Parking. Off-street parking incidental to any adjacent main use. 
(3)  Utilities. Electrical substation and all types of local utilities 
(4)  Parks and recreation. Public or private parks, community centers, playgrounds, public golf courses. 
(5)  Private recreation. Private commercial open area amusements such as golf courses, driving ranges, archery courses and similar uses when approved by a specific use permit. 
(6)  Private open space. Private open spaces as part of a planned development (PD) district. 
(b)  Dumping, excavating or filling floodplain. Any dump, excavation, storage or filling operation within that portion of a district having a floodplain designation shall be approved in writing by the city engineer before such operation is begun, except that such approval shall not be required for the improvement or repair of levees or drainage facilities related thereto when such are located within a legally constituted district charged with such responsibility. 
(c)  Local flooding may occur in other areas. The fact that land or property is or is not within a district having a floodplain designation shall not constitute assurance that such land or property is not subject to local flooding, and the designation of floodplain in this chapter shall not be so interpreted. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 6, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Floods, ch. 42. 
Sec. 118-306. - Use of residentially zoned land. 
    Use of land zoned residential shall be limited to residential activities as determined by sections 118-273 and 118-301 through 118-305. Residential land shall not be used for land use activities associated with adjacent commercial and/or industrial zoned land. Such associated activities include but are not limited to parking, storage (outdoor), secondary street access and driveways, or vehicle maneuvering area. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 7, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-307. - New and unlisted uses. 
(a)  Review of new and unlisted uses. New and unlisted land uses which were not originally anticipated will likely be considered for location within the city. Such uses shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and the city council for inclusion in specific zoning districts or as part of a planned development (PD) zoning request. 
(b)  Criteria for consideration. When considering requests for a new land use, the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall consider the potential effects of the use on adjacent properties in terms of such issues as the following: 
(1)  Requirements for services; 
(2)  Visual impact; 
(3)  Traffic generation; 
(4)  The extent to which the use is consistent with other uses allowed in the district; and 
(5)  Other issues they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 8, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-308. - Commercial indoor amusements. 
    If a commercial indoor amusement is to be located closer than 300 feet from a single-family zoning district, it must first obtain a specific use permit. The measurement shall be made by drawing a straight line between the closest points of the two properties. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 9, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 118-309. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
(a)  Age of structure. Bed and breakfast establishments are limited to structures 40 years of age or older, or of recognized historic or architectural significance. 
(b)  Length of stay. Maximum length of stay is limited to 14 consecutive days in any 30-day period. 
(c)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each bedroom requested for such bed and breakfast facility use, plus two for the resident's use. 
(d)  Location and paving of parking. The off-street parking spaces required for guests in A, R-1, and R-2 districts shall be paved with an all-weather surface, and shall be located in the side or rear yard of the residence. In all remaining zoning districts where such use is allowed, such parking shall not be located in the required front yard. 
(e)  Screening of parking. The required off-street parking for bed and breakfast guests shall be screened by a solid six-foot fence or by dense bushes or shrubbery along the side and rear lot lines. 
(f)  Exterior building alterations. No alterations or modifications shall be made to the exterior of the building as a residence if it is located in a residential zone. 
(g)  Signs. If located in a residential zone, no signs shall be permitted on the premises to advertise the bed and breakfast establishment. 
(h)  Compliance with codes. All other city codes, including building and fire codes, shall be complied with. 
(i)  Location in residential districts. A bed and breakfast establishment shall be located in a single-family residence or a one-family dwelling and not in a duplex, two-family dwelling, or apartment. 
(j)  Resident owner. The residence shall be the full-time place of residence of the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 10, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 118-310. - Billiard parlor or pool hall. 
    If a billiard parlor or pool hall is to be located closer than 300 feet from a single-family zoning district, it must first obtain a specific use permit. The measurement shall be made by drawing a straight line between the closest points of the two properties. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 11, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 118-311. - Accessory apartment. 
    An accessory apartment may be allowed on a property in a residential or commercial zoning district provided that it is ancillary to the primary use and that only one such facility is provided. The area of such dwelling unit shall not exceed 30 percent on the main structure. The occupancy of the apartment is limited to servants or caretakers employed on the property and family members to the second degree of consanguinity and affinity. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 12, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-312. - Private club. 
(a)  Bar not publicly viewable . Private clubs shall have no bar which is publicly visible from a public right-of-way or thoroughfare. 
(b)  All applications for a private club where liquor by the drink is served shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations as required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) and other jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 13, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1431-8-06, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 118-313. - Fairground. 
    If a fairground is to be located closer than 300 feet from a single-family zoning district, it must first obtain a specific use permit. The measurement shall be made by drawing a straight line between the closest points of the two properties. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 14, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-314. - Ice or roller skating rink. 
    If an ice or a roller skating rink is to be located closer than 300 feet from a single-family zoning district, it must first obtain a specific use permit. The measurement shall be made by drawing a straight line between the closest points of the two properties. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 15, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 118-315. - Industrialized housing. 
    Single-family or duplex industrialized housing units shall: 
(1)  Be installed in a manner consistent with traditional site-built single-family and duplex dwellings. 
(2)  Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for each county in which the properties are located. 
(3)  Have exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located. 
(4)  Any person who intends to construct, erect, install or move any industrialized housing in the city shall first submit all required applications to the building inspection department and obtain all required permits. In addition to any information otherwise required for permits, a building permit application for industrialized housing shall: 
a.  Be accompanied by a document identifying by address each single-family or two-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located, and show the taxable value for each such dwelling as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for Nacogdoches County. 
b.  Be accompanied by at least one photograph, with identifying address, of the front of each single-family or two-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located; 
c.  Be accompanied by a document signed and stamped by a licensed architect, certifying the proposed industrialized housing meets subsection 118-315(3). The document shall state: "I have reviewed the single-family structures within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, and I hereby certify the industrialized housing shown in the attached plans have exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with aforementioned single-family dwellings." 
d.  Show proof of the value of the improved property by providing: 
1.  A copy of the sales receipt, signed by the purchaser, of the industrialized housing unit, including the value of the lot, if the lot is included in the sale. 
2.  A copy of the sales receipt, signed by the purchaser, of the industrialized housing unit, and documentation showing the taxable value of the lot as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for Nacogdoches County, if the lot is not included in the sale of the housing unit or if the value of the lot is not included on the sales receipt. 
(5)  Failure to provide any documentation as required in subsection 118-315(4) will be considered grounds to deny a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 16, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1560-10-10, 10-19-2010) 
Sec. 118-316. - Liquor by the drink. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited within 300 feet of a church, public school or public hospital. 
(b)  Measurement of distances. 
(1)  The measurement of the distance between the places of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street front and from front door to front door and in a direct line across intersections. 
(2)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a public school shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business and in a direct line across intersections. 
(c)  See also section 118-174 regarding specific use permit requirements for private clubs where liquor by the drink is served. 
(d)  Should the location at which liquor by the drink is closer than 300 feet from a single-family residential zoning district, the owner must first obtain a specific use permit. This measurement shall be made in a direct line from the business serving alcoholic beverages by the drink and the property line of the single-family residential zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 17, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1431-8-06, 8-1-2006) 
Sec. 118-317. - Manufactured housing. 
    In addition to the other specific requirements indicated in this chapter, manufactured homes shall only be used for residential purposes and shall have the following requirements: 
(1)  Manufactured homes shall be secured to the ground through the appropriate use of tie downs as required by the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be skirted with suitable, weatherized material similar in type of material and color to the siding of the manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 18, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1350-2-04, 2-3-2004) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1265-9-01, adopted Sept. 4, 2001 amended the Standard Building Code to International Building Code. 
Cross reference- Manufactured homes, mobile homes and parks, ch. 66. 
Sec. 118-318. - Nightclub or dancehall. 
    If a nightclub or dancehall is to be located closer than 300 feet from a single-family zoning district, it must first obtain a specific use permit. The measurement shall be made by drawing a straight line between the closest points of the two properties. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 19, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-319. - Pawnshops. 
    Any establishment operating as a pawnshop is expressly prohibited unless it maintains a valid pawnshop license issued by the consumer credit commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 20, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-320. - Radio, TV, microwave, or cellular transmission towers. 
    All Radio, TV, microwave, or cellular transmission towers shall be in conformance with Federal Communications Commission and any local requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 21, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-321. - Private recreation club or area. 
    If a private recreation club or area is to be located closer than 300 feet from a single-family zoning district, it must first obtain a specific use permit. The measurement shall be made by drawing a straight line between the closest points of the two properties. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 22, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-322. - Satellite dishes. 
    Satellite dishes shall be allowed in any residential district as an accessory use and in any commercial district as a permitted use provided that they meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Location. The location shall be as follows: 
a.  In residential districts, satellite dishes exceeding one meter in diameter shall not be located within front or side yards. They shall be located only in rear yards. 
b.  In commercial and industrial districts, satellite dishes exceeding two meters in diameter shall not be located in the front or side yards, but may be located on a roof. 
(2)  Screening. Screening shall be as follows: 
a.  In residential districts, satellite dishes exceeding one meter in diameter shall be fully screened from view from public streets. When located on ground level, they shall be screened to the full height of the structure with landscaping. 
b.  When a satellite dish exceeding two meters in diameter is located on a rooftop in a commercial or industrial district, the dish shall be located and screened so as to minimize visual impact from other properties in the area. 
(3)  Size. Satellite dishes shall not exceed three meters in diameter, nor 12 feet in height when the dish is vertically positioned. Larger dishes may be approved as a specific use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 23, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-323. - Fence or hedge required for junkyards, salvage yards and reclamation yards. 
    The property on which any junkyard, salvage yard or reclamation yard within the city is located shall be enclosed by an appropriate fence or hedge, which shall be kept in a neat condition. No junk of any character or parts or machinery of any kind shall be allowed to remain outside such fence or hedge. 
(Code 1971, § 16-9) 
Sec. 118-324. - Teen clubs. 
    If a teen club is to be located closer than 300 feet from a single-family zoning district, it must first obtain a specific use permit. The measurement shall be made by drawing a straight line between the closest points of the two properties. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 25, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-325. - Urban core overlay district sidewalks. 
(a)  In areas of the urban core overlay district where sidewalks do not already exist, sidewalks shall be constructed concurrent with construction of: 
(1)  The first structure on any lot or tract of land, whether or not the tract of land is platted or being subdivided; 
(2)  The first structure of any size on a lot or tract of land after all previously existing structures were demolished and removed on or after January 1, 2017; 
(3)  The addition to an existing building of 5,000 square feet or greater; 
(4)  An additional building(s) of 2,500 square feet or greater; 
(5)  An improvement or renovation of an existing building and the cost of such changes exceed fifty percent of the fair market value of the building improvements prior to the subject improvements or renovation. 
(b)  The sidewalk shall be constructed to the full length of the property line of the lot or tract involved along the portion of the lot adjacent to state or federal highways. 
(c)  The sidewalk shall meet standard details and specifications on file in the city engineering office. 
(d)  The sidewalk shall be placed within the adjacent street right-of-way or a publicly dedicated access easement. 
(e)  All required sidewalks must be constructed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless a written request for a temporary certificate of occupancy to allow for a later construction of sidewalks is approved in writing by the city manager or their designee. 
(f)  Sidewalks must connect to existing adjacent sidewalks, or be designed and placed to allow connection to future adjacent sidewalks. 
(g)  Sidewalk plans shall be included on a site plan in the building permit submittal for the project described in subsection (a) above. 
(h)  Payment in lieu of sidewalk installation. 
(1)  An applicant may request to pay a fee instead of installing a sidewalk by filing a written request at the time the applicant submits a permit application for a project requiring sidewalk installation. An applicant, who has not filed a request at the time of application, may later amend the application to request to pay a fee instead of installing a sidewalk. 
(2)  For a project requiring sidewalk installation, the city manager may approve payment of a fee instead of installation of a sidewalk, if the city manager determines the property is only used for a residential use and has no more than two dwelling units. 
(3)  For a project requiring sidewalk installation, the city manager may approve a fee in lieu of installation of a sidewalk, if the city planner determines the installation is impractical because: 
a.  Installation of the sidewalk would require the removal of a tree larger than one foot in diameter or other major obstruction within the right-of-way; 
b.  A stormwater drainage ditch or similar public utility prevents installation of the sidewalk, and neither the sidewalk nor the facility can be reasonably relocated to accommodate both the sidewalk and the facility; 
c.  Adequate right-of-way does not exist nor can be obtained to wholly contain the sidewalk; 
d.  The topography would require the construction of a retaining wall more than two feet high to accommodate the sidewalk; or 
e.  Other unusual circumstances make the sidewalk installation requirement unreasonable or inappropriate. 
(4)  The amount of the fee is the current sidewalk installation cost, as determined in accordance with the fee schedule on file in the city engineer's office. 
(5)  A fee paid under this section must be used to install a sidewalk or curb ramp in the urban core overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 1738-7-17 , § 3, 8-8-2017) 
Secs. 118-326-118-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Sexually oriented business regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 

Sec. 118-351. - Applicability. 
    Nothing in this division shall approve, legalize, validate, condone, authorize or in any manner permit any activity, business, display, sale, exhibition, showing or material otherwise illegal or not permitted under the laws, regulations, ordinances or rulings of the United States, the state or the city or which is a public or private nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 24.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-352. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, discs or reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video discs or cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers, as its principal business, accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video discs or cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video discs or cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical area or by specified sexual activities. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the employees of the establishment is in a state of nudity or seminude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 24.2, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-353. - Distance from other uses. 
    Sexually oriented businesses may not be located within 1,000 feet of a church, a public or private elementary or secondary school, a public park, or the boundary of a residential or agriculture district as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 24.3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-354. - Measurement. 
    Measurement of distance as required in section 118-353 shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park or residential or agriculture district. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 24.4, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-355. - Distance between sexually oriented businesses. 
    The operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business shall be prohibited. The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 24.5, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-356. - Nonconformity as to time. 
    Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives that is in violation of this division shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years unless sooner terminated for any reason, or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use, and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 24.6, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-357. - Nonconformity due to other uses. 
    A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, or residential or agriculture district within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This section applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. III, § 24.7, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 118-358-118-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 118-386. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the creation of planned development zoning districts. These districts are intended to provide for the development of land as an integral unit for single or mixed use in accordance with a plan that may vary from the established regulations of other zoning districts. The planned development (PD) district is intended to implement the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. It is also meant to encourage flexible and creative planning to ensure the compatibility of land uses, to allow for the adjustment of changing demands to meet the current needs of the community, and to provide for a development that is superior to what could be accomplished in other zoning districts by meeting one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Provides for a superior design of lots or buildings. 
(2)  Provides for increased recreation and/or open space opportunities for public use. 
(3)  Provides amenities or features that would be of special benefit to the property users or community. 
(4)  Protects or preserves natural amenities and environmental assets such as trees, creeks, ponds, floodplains, and slopes or hills. 
(5)  Protects or preserves existing historical buildings, structures, features or places. 
(6)  Provides an appropriate balance between the intensity of development and the ability to provide adequate supporting public facilities and services. 
(7)  Implements the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan better than would standard zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.1.A, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-387. - Nature of district and plans required. 
    There are three types of plans that may be used in the planned development process. The general purpose and use of each plan is described as follows: 
(1)  Concept plan. This plan is intended to be used as the first step in the planned development process. It establishes the most general guidelines for the district by identifying the land uses and intensities, thoroughfare locations, open space and project boundaries and illustrates the integration of these elements into a master plan for the whole district. 
(2)  Development plan. This plan is intended to be used most often as the second step of the planned development process. The development plan contains all the information of a concept plan, but includes more detailed information as to the specific land uses and their boundaries. The purposes of a development plan are to ensure that the development project proceeds in orderly fashion consistent with the approved concept plan and to ensure that the standards applicable within the district are met for each phase of the project. A development plan may also be used to establish the district. 
(3)  Planned development site plan. The planned development site plan is the final step of the planned development process. The purposes of a planned development site plan are to ensure that the development of individual building lots, parcels or tracts within a project are consistent with the approved development plans and to ensure that the standards applicable within the district are met for each individual building site. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.1.B, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-388. - Notice, hearing, and written protests. 
    Approval of concept plans and development plans are considered amendments to this chapter. The provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 relating to notices, public hearings, and written protests for changes in zoning districts or regulations shall apply to requests for approval or amendment of concept plans and development plans. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.1.C, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-389. - Compliance with approved plan. 
    No development shall begin and no building permit shall be issued for any land within a planned development district until a planned development site plan that is consistent with the concept plan and the development plan for the tract has been approved. All districts shall be developed, used and maintained in compliance with the approved planned development site plan for the district. Compliance with standards and conditions set forth in the ordinance establishing the district, the ordinance approving the development plan and attached to the planned development site plan shall be construed as conditions precedent to granting of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.1.D, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-390. - Permitted uses. 
    Any use or combination of uses approved by the city council may be permitted within a planned development district. However, no land use may be authorized which is not generally consistent with the land use element of the city's comprehensive plan. The uses to be permitted in any specific planned development district shall be enumerated in the ordinance that establishes the district. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.1.E, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-391. - Variances. 
    Amendment of planned development district standards and plans shall be in accordance with subsection 118-392(d). The board of adjustment may not grant a variance or special exception within a planned development district. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.1.F, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-392. - Procedures. 
(a)  Establishment of district. Procedures for establishment of a planned development district are as follows: 
(1)  Zoning amendment. An application for establishment of a planned development district shall be made to the planning and zoning commission and shall be considered an application for a zoning amendment pursuant to subdivision II of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(2)  Concept plan. An application for establishment of a planned development district shall be accompanied by a concept plan or, at the applicant's option, a development plan, which shall be processed simultaneously with the zoning amendment application. If the zoning amendment application is approved, the concept plan or development plan shall be incorporated within such amendment. Where establishment of the district is to be based on a development plan, in addition to the considerations for establishment of the district in this subsection, the development plan must meet the criteria specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section and must include the elements set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
a.  Concept plan graphics. The concept plan shall graphically depict the following elements at a scale of 1?=100': 
1.  The configuration of proposed and existing land uses by category for each tract or subarea to be developed. 
2.  Proposed density by type of residential uses, including maximum numbers of dwelling units for the project. 
3.  Proposed total floor area or floor area ratios by category of nonresidential land uses. 
4.  Proposed open space. 
5.  Proposed and existing thoroughfares, boulevards and large streets. 
6.  Land uses by zoning district, together with existing and planned thoroughfare extensions, for adjoining land. 
b.  Informational statement. The concept plan shall be accompanied by an informational statement containing the following: 
1.  A general statement setting forth how the proposed district will relate to the adopted comprehensive plan elements and the degree to which it is or is not consistent with that plan. 
2.  The total acreage within the proposed district. 
3.  If the project is to be developed in phases, a proposed phasing plan that identifies the general sequence of development and a time schedule including the general sequence for installation of major capital improvements to serve the development. 
4.  A metes and bounds description shown on the boundaries of the plan map. 
The informational statement shall not be considered part of the concept plan or the ordinance establishing the district. The property owner shall update the phasing plan from time to time, but in any event concurrent with any change to the concept plan and with each development plan submitted. 
c.  Complete application. No application for establishment of a planned development district shall be deemed to be filed with the city until the concept plan or development plan has been determined to be complete by the city planner. 
(3)  Planning and zoning commission recommendation. The planning and zoning commission, after the required notice and public hearing procedures, shall formulate its recommendation with respect to establishment of the district, including any conditions to be applied. The recommendation of the commission shall be forwarded to the city council for decision. 
(4)  City council decision. Following receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the city council shall conduct a public hearing and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for establishment of the planned development district. 
(5)  Approval criteria for planned development district. Based upon the concept plan or development plan, the planning and zoning commission in making its recommendations to the city council, and the city council, in determining whether the planned development district should be established, shall consider whether the following criteria have been met: 
a.  The plan of development is generally consistent with the future land use policies and map in the adopted comprehensive plan. 
b.  Proposed uses and the configuration of uses are compatible with existing and planned adjoining uses. 
c.  The general arrangement of streets conforms to the adopted thoroughfare plan. 
d.  Proposed uses and development densities and intensities are consistent with the purposes and standards of the planned development district regulations. 
e.  The proposed plan for development furthers the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(6)  Conditions. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may require such conditions and modifications of the concept plan or development plan, where applicable, such as are reasonably necessary to ensure that the approval criteria are met, including but not limited to conditions related to the extent of the property for which the concept plan is proposed, the size of the project, and the timing of development within the district. 
(7)  Adopting ordinance. The ordinance establishing a planned development district shall incorporate a concept plan or development plan, which shall be attached as an exhibit to the ordinance, and shall set forth the following: 
a.  A statement as to the purpose and intent of the district. 
b.  The uses authorized for each tract or subarea in the district, by use category, the location of such uses, and the residential densities and nonresidential intensities associated with phases of the project, in conformance with the approved concept plan or development plan. 
c.  The conditions applicable to development within the district, as established by the city council. 
The graphic depiction of these features on the incorporated concept plan or development plan shall be considered as regulatory standards applicable within the district. Change or modification to such features shall be in accordance with the procedures in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Development plans. Procedures for development plans are as follows: 
(1)  Following establishment of a planned development district. If a district is established based upon a concept plan, the city council may thereafter approve by ordinance a development plan for all or part of the district, a copy of which shall also be attached to the ordinance creating the district. Approval of the development plan shall be in accordance with procedures for amending this chapter and shall be considered as an amendment to the planned development district that supplies additional standards and conditions which must be met prior to approval of a detailed planned development site plan and prior to approval of any building permit or certificate of occupancy within that part of the district subject to the development plan. 
(2)  Substitution for concept plan. The developer may submit a development plan in substitution for a concept plan in conjunction with an application for establishment of the planned development district. In such a case, approval of the development plan shall be in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection (a)(5) of this section for establishment of the planned development district, subject to the additional standards in this article. A development plan may be prepared and submitted for the entire development at one time or for individual phases of development. 
(3)  Submittal requirements for development plan. Submittal requirements for the development plan shall be as follows: 
a.  Graphic elements. The development plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Site boundaries and dimensions, lot lines, site acreage and square footage, and approximate distance to the nearest cross streets. 
2.  Location map, north arrow, title block and site data summary table. 
3.  The boundaries of the different land uses and the boundary dimensions. 
4.  Preliminary building locations and footprints. 
5.  Preliminary elevations and perspectives to show the relationship of building heights to surrounding topography. 
6.  Drainageways, creeks, and limits of the 100-year floodplain and floodway as shown on current Federal Emergency Management Agency mapping or the city's adopted master drainage plan, including location and acreage, together with a general plan for accommodating floodwaters and drainage. 
7.  Proposed and existing land uses and zoning classifications on adjacent properties. 
8.  Proposed parking areas and structures for multifamily and nonresidential uses, including areas for off-site parking. 
9.  Proposed buffers from existing uses. 
10.  A general plan for circulation of traffic and pedestrians within and external to the development, including designated points of access. 
11.  Any amenities proposed for purposes of achieving density or intensity bonuses. 
b.  Informational statement. The development plan shall be accompanied by an informational statement containing the following: 
1.  Name and address of the landowner and date of preparation of the plan. 
2.  Name and address of architect, landscape architect, planner, engineer, surveyor, or other person involved in the preparation of the plan. 
3.  A table listing the specific permitted uses proposed for the property, or specific areas of the property, as appropriate. 
4.  Development standards for each proposed land use, as follows: 
i.  Minimum lot area. 
ii.  Minimum lot width and depth. 
iii.  Minimum front, side, and rear yard areas. 
iv.  Maximum height of buildings. 
v.  Minimum parking standards for each general multifamily and nonresidential land use if they vary from the provisions of division 2 of article VI of this chapter. 
5.  A detailed description of how open space requirements will be satisfied for the phase of development represented by the development plan, including any proposed dedications of open space to the public or a private maintenance organization. 
6.  If the development plan is a phase of the project authorized by the concept plan, depiction of the area subject to the development in relation to subsequent phases of the development the current phasing plan, together with any proposed changes to updates of the current phasing plan that was submitted with the concept plan as part of the applicant's original informational statement. 
(4)  Planning and zoning commission recommendation. Upon determination by the city planner that the application for the development plan is complete, the planning and zoning commission shall determine whether the development plan is in accordance with the approved concept plan, the standards set forth in the ordinance establishing the planned development district, and with the standards generally applicable to development plans. The commission, following notice and a public hearing, shall make its recommendations to the city council for approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the development plan. 
(5)  City council decision. Upon receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, and following a public hearing thereon, the city council shall approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the development plan. 
(6)  Approval standards. The planning and zoning commission, in making its recommendations to the city council, and the city council, in acting upon the development plan, shall determine whether the plan meets the following general standards for the phase of the project to which the development plan is applicable: 
a.  The development plan generally is consistent with the approved concept plan and the standards and conditions set forth in the adopting ordinance. 
b.  The plan provides for a compatible arrangement of buildings and land uses within the project. 
c.  The general plan for traffic circulation and pedestrians provides for adequate and safe circulation inside and external to the development, consistent with the adopted thoroughfare plan. 
d.  The general plan for accommodation of floodwaters and drainage is adequate. 
e.  The plan does not adversely affect adjoining neighborhoods or properties outside the plan, taking into consideration proposed buffers. 
f.  The amenities proposed in the development plan application, if any, are sufficient to justify increased densities or intensities on the site. 
g.  The sequence of development and timing of the phases are consistent with the overall phasing of capital facilities intended to serve the site and with the city's overall growth. 
(7)  Conditions. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may require such conditions and modifications of the development plan as are reasonably necessary to ensure that the approval criteria are met. 
(8)  Approving ordinance. The ordinance approving the development plan shall set forth the following standards. The concept plan or development plan shall be incorporated as an exhibit to the ordinance: 
a.  A table of the specific land uses permitted in the area subject to the development plan, together with a description of the tracts or subareas to which such uses are restricted; 
b.  The residential densities and nonresidential intensities of each permitted land use; 
c.  A table showing the dimensions of each permitted land use, including the following information: 
1.  Minimum lot area; 
2.  Minimum lot width and depth; 
3.  Minimum front, side, and rear yard areas; 
4.  Maximum height of buildings; 
5.  Minimum parking standards for each general multifamily and nonresidential land use; 
d.  A description of the elements of the general circulation plan to serve the development; 
e.  Provisions governing amenities, if any, to serve the area subject to the development plan; and 
f.  Such additional conditions as are applicable to development within the area subject to the development plan, as established by the city council. 
(c)  Planned development site plans. Procedures for planned development site plans are as follows: 
(1)  Delegation to planning and zoning commission and city planner. The planning and zoning commission is delegated the authority to approve or deny a planned development site plan or the amendment of a planned development site plan for property for which a development plan has been approved by the city council, except for landscaping matters under subsection (c)(2)f of this section which are delegated to the city planner. 
(2)  Submittal requirements. The following information shall be submitted with the application for planned development site plan approval: 
a.  Size. Required site plans shall be prepared on a standard sheet size of 30? x 42? or 24? x 36?, and at an engineering scale of 1? = 50' or larger. Required site plans shall be prepared by registered engineer, architect or landscape architect. The required site plan may be submitted on one or more sheets. 
b.  General information required. 
1.  North arrow; 
2.  Total site acreage; 
3.  Submission date; 
4.  Scale (written and graphic); 
5.  Vicinity map; 
6.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of designer, engineer, developer and owner; 
7.  Accurate survey of the boundaries of the site with the location of proposed land uses; 
8.  Adjacent subdivision names and property lines; and 
9.  Adjacent land uses and structures. 
c.  Structures. 
1.  Location, dimensions and use of all existing facilities and proposed building sites. 
2.  Setback and separation distances between building sites. 
3.  Proposed construction type and facade materials for all nonresidential buildings. The commission may require elevations and perspective drawings. 
4.  Proposed density of each use. 
5.  Proposed location of screening along the collector roadways shown on the thoroughfare plan. 
d.  Streets and sidewalks. 
1.  Location and width of all rights-of-way and easements; 
2.  Location and dimensions of all pavement and curbing; 
3.  Location and width of all sidewalks; 
4.  Location and width of all ingress/egress points; 
5.  Location and width of all medians and median breaks; and 
6.  Location of any special traffic regulation facilities. 
e.  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
1.  Number, location and dimension of spaces; 
2.  Type of surface material of parking facility; 
3.  Dimension of aisles, driveways, maneuvering areas and curb return radii; 
4.  Distance between spaces and adjacent rights-of-way; 
5.  Location of all existing and proposed fire lanes and hydrants; 
6.  Proposed lighting diagram is required if not in accordance with division 2 of article VI pertaining to parking and loading standards; and 
7.  Location and type of trash receptacle screening. 
f.  Landscaping. 
1.  Location and size of proposed plant materials to be used for street tree planting or screening against adjacent single-family residential property. 
2.  Number and type of each landscape element. 
3.  Height and type of all fencing or buffering. 
4.  Location of visibility triangles where required. 
g.  All items submitted as part of the development plan approval, but in final form and meeting all applicable city ordinances. 
h.  The acreage in the plan and metes and bounds description shown on the plan, as certified by a registered surveyor. 
i.  Accurate outlines of proposed dedications and reservations of land for public or common use, including but not limited to rights-of-way, easements, parkland, open space, drainageways, floodplains, and facility sites. 
j.  Any other features necessary to satisfy conditions stated in the ordinance approving the development plan. 
k.  All proposed signage within the development including ground, wall, temporary and directional signage. 
(3)  Decision by planning and zoning commission. The city planner shall review the planned development site plan application for completeness. Thereafter, the planning and zoning commission shall approve, approve subject to modification or deny the planned development site plan. 
(4)  Approval criteria. The planning and zoning commission in approving, conditionally approving or denying a planned development site plan shall consider the following criteria: 
a.  The plan complies with the development plan approved for that portion of the planned development district; 
b.  The plan complies with all standards and conditions set forth in the ordinance approving the development plan; 
c.  Unless modified by the ordinance approving the development plan, the plan complies with the following additional standards generally applicable to development within the city, as set forth in this chapter: 
1.  Performance standards as set forth in article VII of this chapter pertaining to performance standards; and 
2.  Setback, landscaping and off-street parking and loading standards; 
d.  The plan provides for appropriate ingress and egress points for access, parking and loading, including existing and proposed ingress/egress/access easements, queuing and internal circulation; 
e.  The plan provides for fire safety and adequate measures for fire control and dealing with fire or explosive hazard; and 
f.  The plan provides for adequate utilities, roads, drainage, and other infrastructure, as required by the city's subdivision regulations. 
(5)  Conditions. The planning and zoning commission, or the city council on appeal, may establish such conditions and may require such modifications to ensure that the planned development site plan is consistent with the approved development plan and the approval criteria set forth in this section. 
(6)  Appeal from planning and zoning commission action. If the planning and zoning commission disapproves a planned development site plan, or imposes conditions, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written request with the city secretary within ten days of the decision. 
(7)  Appeal from planning director. If the city planner disapproves landscaping in a PD site plan, or imposes conditions, the applicant may appeal the decision to the zoning board of adjustment by filing a written request with the city secretary within ten days of the decision. 
(d)  Amendment of plans. Procedures for amendment of plans shall be as follows: 
(1)  Concept and development plans. Any changes to the standards or conditions in the ordinance establishing the planned development district or the regulatory standards depicted on the concept plan, and any changes to the standards or conditions in the ordinance approving the development plan or the regulatory standards depicted on the development plan, require enactment of an amendatory ordinance pursuant to the procedure for changing zoning districts. 
(2)  Planned development site plans. Upon request of the applicant, the city planner may authorize minor amendments, correct errors, or correct omissions to a planned development site plan so long as such minor amendments do not necessitate a change to the ordinance establishing the planned development district or the regulatory standards depicted on the concept plan, or a change to the standards or conditions in the ordinance approving the development plan or the regulatory standards depicted on the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.2, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1490-5-08, 5-6-2008; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-393. - Expiration of plans and rezoning. 
(a)  Failure to submit development plan. A development plan shall be submitted for approval within three years from establishment of the planned development district for a portion or all of the area within the district, unless otherwise provided by the ordinance establishing the district. If a development plan for all or a portion of the project is not submitted within such period, the authority to submit such development plan shall lapse pending action by the city council, and the planning and zoning commission or the city council may institute proceedings to determine whether the land should be rezoned. In such event, the planning and zoning commission shall deliver its recommendation, with a copy to the owner of the affected land, to the city council, who shall conduct a public hearing on such recommendation and shall determine what action is to be taken with respect to the planned development district and whether to revoke or reinstate the developer's authorization to submit development plans. 
(b)  Failure to submit planned development site plan. A planned development site plan shall be submitted for approval within four years from approval of the applicable development plan. If a planned development site plan is not submitted within such period, the authorization to submit such planned development site plan shall lapse pending action by the city council, and the planning and zoning commission or the city council may institute proceedings to determine whether the development plan for the property should be modified or the property subject to the development plan should be rezoned, and whether to revoke or reinstate the developer's authorization to submit a site plan. 
(c)  Expiration of planned development site plan. For any planned development site plan approved in accordance with this article, if a building permit has not been obtained within two years following such approval for a use authorized thereunder, the site plan shall automatically expire and no longer be valid. 
(d)  Extension of planned development site plan. The planning and zoning commission may, prior to expiration of a planned development site plan, for good cause shown and upon written application submitted prior to expiration of the planned development site plan, extend the time for which the planned development site plan is valid. The request for extension shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission in the same manner as for approval of the planned development site plan, and the planning and zoning commission may attach additional conditions to the extension of the plan. If no extension is granted, the planning and zoning commission or city council may institute proceedings in order to determine what actions should be taken with respect to the development plan in the manner provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Project review. If the city council finds that conditions imposed on development of the project have not been timely fulfilled, or for any other reasons related to reasonable exercise of the powers conferred by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 or successor statute that zoning for the planned development district should be reexamined, the city council may initiate review of the district in order to determine whether the authorized uses, standards and conditions applicable to development within the district should be changed for part or all of the undeveloped land within the district. If the city council makes such determination, it shall refer the matter to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendation and thereafter shall take appropriate action to modify the uses, standards or conditions applicable to development within the district in accordance with procedures applicable to zoning amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.3, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1535-11-09, § 3, 11-17-2009) 
Sec. 118-394. - Effect on existing planned developments. 
(a)  Site plans. For any planned development district established under prior planned development regulations, for which at least one site plan has been approved pursuant to such regulations, the sections of this article and subdivision II of division 4 of article II of this chapter shall not apply, except that procedures related to approval of site plans pursuant to subsection 118-392(c)(4) and provisions relating to expiration and extension of site plans pursuant to subsections 118-393(c) and (d) shall apply to any complete application for site plan approval filed more than 30 days after the effective date of the amended planned development regulations in this article and subdivision II of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(b)  District amendments. Any amendments to a concept or development plan, or to the ordinance establishing the planned development district, approved under prior planned development regulations which are proposed after the effective date of the amended planned development regulations in this article and subdivision II of division 4 of article II of this chapter shall be subject to the procedures for approval stated in this article and subdivision II of division 4 of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VIII, § 3.4, 11-3-1998) 
Secs. 118-395-118-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, adopted June 21, 2016, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 118-421-118-433, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1130, art. IV, §§ 1.1-1.6, 3-9; art. V, § 1; Ord. No. 1362-5-04, adopted May 4, 2004; Ord. No. 1673-6-14, § 2, adopted June 17, 2014. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-421. - Purpose. 
(a)  Enhance the view and image of the community. 
(b)  Contribute to the overall quality and visual appearance of individual developments. 
(c)  Reduce glare from paved surfaces and break up large expanses of paving. 
(d)  Replenish oxygen supply and provide natural air purification. 
(e)  Provide visual relief and open space within urbanized developments. 
(f)  Ensure that the local stock of native trees and vegetation is replenished. 
(g)  Safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment. 
(h)  Preserve and protect the unique identity and environment of the City of Nacogdoches and preserve the economic base attracted to the City of Nacogdoches by such factors. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-422. - Applicability. 
    Except as provided in section 118-430(b), no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use unless it is in conformity with the minimum requirements specified in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-423. - General requirements. 
(a)  Requirements for a building permit. No permit for the construction of a building upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions: 
(1)  Subdivided. The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the city, and filed in the plat records of the county. 
(2)  Planned development (PD) district. The site, plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the city planning and zoning commission, in accordance with subdivision II of division 4 or article II and article V of this chapter pertaining to zoning-related applications, which site plan shows all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets and other public improvements necessary to meet the normal requirements for platting including the designation of building areas and such easements, alleys, and streets as are required and have been properly dedicated, and the necessary public improvements which have been provided. 
(3)  Unplatted prior to ordinance or annexation. The plot, tract, or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or prior to annexation to the city, whichever is applicable. 
(b)  Single-family. Only one main building for one-family (attached or detached) or two-family dwelling purposes may be located upon a platted lot or tract zoned R-1, single-family residential, R-2, single-family residential, or R-3, two-family residential, except where building arrangements have been approved in accordance with subdivision II of division IV of this chapter pertaining to zoning-related applications. 
(c)  Multiple-family and nonresidential. More than one main building for multiple-family, office, retail, commercial, industrial, or institutional use may be erected upon an officially platted lot or tract zoned R-4, multi-family residential, B-1, local business, B-2 general business, B-3, central business, M, medical, I-1 light industrial, or I-2, heavy industrial, provided such building arrangements comply with the applicable requirements for land use. 
(d)  Multiple buildings with common roof. Two or more buildings or structures covered by a common roof shall be considered as a single building. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-424. - Projections into setbacks. 
    Eave and roof extensions may project into the required front, side or rear yard setback for a distance not exceed two feet. Ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features may project into the required setback for a distance not to exceed one foot. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-425. - Yard requirements for planned development districts. 
    Minimum yard requirements in a planned development district shall be established on the site plan in accordance with the provisions for planned development districts in this chapter or by reference in the planned development ordinance to a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-426. - Visibility triangles. 
(a)  Street visibility triangles. The street visibility triangle is a triangular area formed by extending the two curb lines, or edges of pavement, a designated distance based upon the street types involved from their point of intersection, and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby creating a triangle. Figure 1 illustrates the required street visibility triangle. 
Figure 1 Visibility Triangle 

(b)  Distance requirements. The distance along the through-street is determined by street type, as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan in the City of Nacogdoches Comprehensive Plan. For arterial through-streets, the distance shall be 100 feet; for collector through-streets, the distance shall be 75 feet; and for local through-streets, the distance shall be 50 feet. 
(c)  Prohibitions. Fences, walls, screens, signs, structures, and parked vehicles are prohibited within the visibility triangle. Foliage of hedges or trees shall be maintained in such a manner as to not obstruct or interfere with a clear line of sight for the drivers of approaching motor vehicles within the visibility triangle between 30 inches and eight feet above the average grade of the street. This shall not be interpreted to prohibit traffic signposts and control boxes, utility poles, street signs or tree trunks within the visibility triangle area. 
Figure 2 Prohibitions within Visibility Triangle 

(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-427. - District development standards. 
(a)  District development chart. 
Figure 3 District Development Standards Chart 
Zoning District Density Lot Width Lot Depth Minimum Setbacks Residential 
Min. Lot 
Size 
(ft. 2 /du) Non- 
Residential 
Max (FAR) Front Rear Side A Agricultural 2 ac 75 110 25 20 6 R-1 Single Family 8,250 75 110 25 20 6 R-2 Single Family 6,000 60 100 20 15 6 R-3 Two Family 100 20 10 6 -Single Family Detached 5,000 50 -Single Family Attached 2,500 25 -Duplex 3,000 50 R-4 Multi-Family 100 20 10 6 -Single Family Detached 5,000 50 -Single Family Attached 2,000 20 -Duplex 2,500 50 -Multi-Family 1,500 50 B-1 Local Business 1,500 50 100 10 10 6 B-2 General Business 1,500 50 100 20 10 0, 10 B-3 Central Business 1,500 10:01 50 100 0 10 0 MD Medical 1,500 50 100 20 10 6 I-1 Light Industrial 2:01 50 100 20 20 20 I-2 Heavy Industrial 4:01 50 100 20 20 20  
Figure 4 Lot Lines and Setbacks 

(b)  Front yard setbacks. 
(1)  Building lines established by ordinance. Where a building line has been established by ordinance and such line requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this chapter for the district in which the building is located, the minimum required front yard shall comply with the building line so established by such ordinance. 
(2)  Platted building line. Where a building line is shown on a subdivision plat recorded with the county clerk prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives and such building line requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this chapter for the district in which the subdivision is located, the building lines as so shown on the plat shall be interpreted as establishing the minimum front yard requirement for lots in the subdivision. 
(3)  Double frontage lots. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
Figure 5 Corner Lots 

(4)  Service station canopy. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline service station may extend into the required front yard, provided such extension shall not be closer than ten feet to the front lot line. 
(5)  Fences. No fence shall be constructed closer than 12 feet from the back of a curb where a curb exists, or 12 feet from the central flow line of a ditch paralleling such uncurbed streets, or behind the property line, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Side yard setbacks. 
(1)  Side yard abutting a street. Single-family attached dwellings need not provide a side yard, except that where such side yard abuts a street, a minimum side yard of 20 feet shall be provided. 
(2)  Duplex and multi-family dwelling units. For the purpose of applying side yard requirements, two-family and multi-family dwelling units covered by a continuous roof shall be considered as one building occupying a lot. 
(d)  Maximum density; parking structures excluded. The floor area of structures used for the off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the floor area ratio of a structure. 
(e)  Accessory uses and structures in residential districts. 
(1)  Accessory uses in main building. Accessory uses located in the main building or in structures attached to the main building shall observe the same front, side, and rear yard requirements as the main building. 
(2)  Accessory buildings in front half of lot. Detached accessory buildings within the front 50 percent of the lot shall observe the same front and side yard requirements as the main building. 
(3)  Accessory buildings near residential. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located nearer than ten feet to a residential structure. 
(4)  Accessory buildings near rear lot line. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located nearer than ten feet to any rear lot line. 
(5)  Accessory buildings on corner lot. Detached accessory buildings on a corner lot shall not be located nearer the side lot line along the side street than the main building. 
(6)  Accessory buildings near interior side lot line. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located nearer than five feet to any interior side lot line. 
(7)  Emergency access. No off-street parking areas shall be so located or arranged so as to obstruct direct fire protection and emergency access to any multiple-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-428. - Commercial and industrial district screening from view. 
(a)  Required screening. Where required elsewhere in this chapter, service areas and outside storage shall be screened using the standards established in this section. 
(b)  Screening. Standards and maintenance of screening shall be as follows: 
(1)  Screening wall standards. The screening wall shall be constructed of solid masonry material on a concrete foundation, or solid wood fence with metal structural supports to a minimum height of six feet tall. All screening walls shall be constructed according to minimum specifications approved by the building official. 
(2)  Maintenance of screening. It shall be the responsibility of the commercial or industrial property owner to maintain the screening wall in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-429. - Commercial sites with residential adjacency. 
(a)  Applicability. Where nonresidential sites are immediately adjacent to residentially zoned properties, including adjacencies where there is an intervening alley, the standards of this section shall apply. 
(b)  Building setback. Minimum building setbacks on side and rear yards of nonresidential properties, which are immediately adjacent to residential properties, shall be the more restrictive of either the nonresidential zoning district, or the adjacent residential zoning district. 
Figure 6 Building Setback Adjacent to Residential District 

(c)  Screening. Screening shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Generally. A solid screening wall shall be constructed on the nonresidential property in close proximity to the residential property line in order to screen views and windblown trash and debris. In addition, a ten-foot wide landscaped buffer with one tree for each 25 feet of common adjacency shall be provided. The tree shall be a preserved tree or, if a newly planted tree, shall be a minimum container size of five gallons at the time of planting. 
(2)  Screening wall standards. The screening wall shall be constructed of solid masonry material on a concrete foundation, or solid wood fence with metal structural supports to a minimum height of six feet tall. The finished side of the wall shall be constructed to face the residential property. All screening walls shall be constructed according to minimum specifications approved by the building official. 
(3)  Screening tree standards. Required trees shall be non-deciduous in order to provide year-round screening and shall be of a type and species listed in subsection 118-430(f)(2) below. 
(4)  [Maintenance of screening.] It shall be the responsibility of the nonresidential property owner to maintain the screening wall in good condition and to maintain the screening trees in a healthy condition at all times. This may include the installation of an irrigation system if conditions warrant. Screening trees shall be replaced with new trees as the trees die or are removed. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-430. - Commercial district landscaping. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all commercial development where any of the following conditions are present: 
(1)  New construction. 
a.  Any new building construction requiring a permit and is greater than 500 square feet or valued at more than $2,500.00, or 
b.  Any construction of a new parking lot for which a permit is required, 
(2)  Additions/renovations. 
a.  Any building addition or renovation exceeding 50 percent of the existing building area as defined by the footprint of the existing building for which the building permit is required. 
b.  Any parking lot addition within the front 50 percent by more than 5,000 square feet or ten percent in area of the existing parking lot whichever is greater for which a building permit is required. 
(b)  Exceptions. Exceptions to this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses other than multi-family apartments. 
(2)  Exterior or interior finishing and remodeling that does not increase the existing building area or parking area of the existing development. 
(3)  Subsection 118-430(e) is excepted for the existing portions of parking area expansion projects as described in subsection 118-430(a)(2)b. 
(c)  Landscaping plan. 
(1)  When the requirements of this section must be met, a landscaping plan shall be submitted and must be approved by the city planner or their designee before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project. This plan may be provided as a combined exhibit for parking and landscaping. The plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Date, scale, north arrow. 
b.  Location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the lot and any artificial lot lines, street address, approximate centerline of existing watercourses and the location of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable; the approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, utility easements, driveways, and sidewalks on or adjacent to the lot. 
c.  Location, height and material of proposed screening and fencing between residential and non-residential property, if such screening and fencing is required. 
d.  Location and description, by type and size, of existing trees proposed to be retained. Such trees shall be marked and dripline of said trees shall be protected prior to and during all construction, including dirt work. 
e.  Location of plant materials to be installed, container sizes at installation, spread, and spacing. 
f.  Identification of visibility triangles on the lot for all driveway intersections with public streets. 
g.  Complete description of plant materials to be installed, including names, locations, quantities, heights, spread, and spacing. 
h.  For plans which include trees to be preserved and be eligible for tree preservation credit under section 118-430. 
(2)  Phasing of landscaping plan. The landscaping plan may be submitted in two phases. 
a.  Phase 1 shall be submitted at the time the building permit application and plans are submitted and shall contain items a. through f. as shown in subsection 118-430(c)(1) above. 
b.  Phase 2 shall be submitted prior to the request for a final certificate of occupancy inspection and shall contain all items as shown in subsection 118-431(c) above. 
(d)  Street landscaping. 
(1)  For each 100 feet of frontage, three small mature-height or two tall mature-height trees as listed in subsection 118-430(f) shall be planted between the front property line and a line measured 35 feet from the front property line. 
(2)  The maximum separation between trees shall be no more than 50 percent of the lot width. 
(e)  Interior parking lot landscaping for large parking areas. 
(1)  Subsection 118-430(e) shall apply to parking areas of 120 spaces or more. 
(2)  A minimum of five percent of gross parking areas shall be devoted to pervious planting areas which includes mulch, grass, ground cover, plants, shrubs, or trees. Gross parking area is measured from the edge of the parking and/or driveway paving and the back of the adjacent curb or sidewalk. 
(3)  There shall be a minimum of one tree planted for each 150 square feet of required pervious area. 
(4)  Credit for trees required in this subsection 118-430(e) may be given for trees planted as required in subsection 118-430(d) above. 
(5)  No parking space shall be more than 100 feet from the center point of any tree. 
(f)  Tree standards. 
(1)  Trees required by this chapter shall be a minimum container size of five gallons. 
(2)  Tree species. 
a.  Small deciduous. 
1.  Chalk maple. 
2.  Japanese maple. 
3.  Redbud - Cercis canadensis, Cercis Mexicana. 
4.  Desert willow.* 
5.  American or Chinese fringe tree.* 
6.  Dogwood. 
7.  Parsley hawthorn.* 
8.  Mayhaw. 
9.  Eve's necklace.* 
10.  American or Japanese snowbell. 
11.  Two-winged silverbell. 
12.  Chastetree.* 
13.  Deciduous magnolia. 
14.  Crape myrtle.* 
15.  Possumhaw holly. 
16.  Purple Pride plum. 
17.  Mexican plum.* 
18.  Flowering apricot. 
19.  Persian witch hazel. 
20.  Black cherry. 
21.  Carolina buckthorn.* 
22.  Mexican buckeye.* 
23.  Rusty blackhaw viburnum.* 
b.  Large deciduous. 
1.  Southern sugar maple. 
2.  Red maple. 
3.  River birch. 
4.  Pecan. 
5.  Shagbark hickory. 
6.  American beech. 
7.  Ginko. 
8.  Black gum. 
9.  Bald cypress. 
10.  Basswood. 
11.  Lacebark elm. 
12.  Japanese zelkova. 
13.  Cherrybark oak. 
14.  Mexican white oak. 
15.  Overcup oak. 
16.  Swamp chestnut oak. 
17.  Shumard oak. 
18.  White oak. 
19.  Sawtooth oak. 
20.  Nutall oak. 
c.  Small evergreen. 
1.  Texas mountain laurel. 
2.  Cherry laurel. 
3.  Yaupon. 
4.  Wax myrtle.* 
d.  Large evergreen. 
1.  Southern magnolia. 
2.  Sweetbay. 
3.  American holly. 
4.  Eastern red cedar. 
5.  Southern live oak. 
6.  Longleaf pine. 
7.  Loblolly pine. 
8.  Shortleaf pine. 
9.  Arizona cypress. 
Species marked with an "*" are overhead utility line compatible trees. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 1783-11-18 , § 2, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 118-431. - Administration and enforcement of commercial district landscaping. 
(a)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Administrative exception. 
a.  The city planner may, upon review and unanimous recommendation from the building official and the city engineer, approve minor variations in the location of required landscape materials due to unusual topographic constraints, siting requirements, preservation of existing stands of native trees or similar conditions. These minor changes may vary the location of required landscape materials, but may not reduce the amount of required landscape area or the required amount of landscape materials. The landscape plan shall be submitted to the city planner and shall specify the modifications requested and present a justification for such modifications. 
b.  In determining the practicality and acceptability of the alternate proposal, the city planner shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The configuration of the lot or tract in question. 
2.  The square footage of the property in question. 
3.  The square footage of the property to be developed. 
4.  The zoning districts and landscaping on adjacent property. 
5.  The topography and soil on the property in question. 
6.  The existing plant materials and plant materials to be preserved. 
7.  Alternate proposals of similarly situated properties, and/or 
8.  Other factors relevant or material to the circumstances of the site in question. 
(2)  If a unanimous approval of the city planner, city engineer, and building official cannot be reached regarding a request for an administrative exception, the request for an exception shall be denied. 
(3)  An appeal of the decision regarding an administrative exception may be made to the zoning board of adjustments in accordance with the requirements and procedures in article II, division 3 of this chapter. 
(4)  Within five days following the approval of an administrative exception, written notice of the approval shall be sent to each owner indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax role, of real property within 200 feet of the property on which the exception is granted. 
(5)  Within five days following the approval of an administrative exception, notice of the exception shall be posted in the agenda notification area at City Hall, and shall remain posted for ten days. 
(6)  Variances other than those as described in subsection 118-431(a)(1) above shall be requested through the zoning board of adjustments as described in article II, division 3 of this chapter. The zoning board of adjustments may grant variances to section 118-430 upon finding that: 
a.  Such variance is in harmony with the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and this chapter; 
b.  Such variance will not adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of the public; 
c.  The variance sought is due to unique circumstances affecting the property or the owner's use of the property. Financial consideration shall not be grounds for a variance; and 
d.  The owner has made provisions for alternative landscaping reasonably equivalent in value and utility to the requirement sought to be varied. 
(b)  Deferral of planting. 
(1)  If a certificate of occupancy is sought during a season in which the city planner determines it would be impractical to install landscaping and trees, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official. 
(2)  The temporary certificate of occupancy shall have a term of up to six months. 
(3)  Failure to comply within the temporary term of six months shall constitute a violation of this article and subject the owner to enforcement penalties and procedures. 
(c)  Tree planting equivalency credits. 
(1)  Credit toward the total tree requirement shall be given for planting trees that exceed the minimum size required by this article at the rate of two trees for each tree planted with a caliper of four inches and greater, as measured three feet above the ground. 
(2)  Credit for the preservation of existing on-site trees. 
a.  Credit for the preservation of existing on-site trees may be granted when requested and depicted on the landscape plan. 
b.  Credit for preserving existing trees shall be granted based upon figure 7 below. 
Figure 7 Tree Preservation Credit Chart 
Caliper of tree to be preserved Credit Less than 4" No credit 4" to 5.99" 2 trees 6" to 11.99" 4 trees 12" and greater 6 trees  
c.  To receive credit for trees preserved under this section, the following conditions must be met: 
1.  An appropriate aeration system or alternative method of protecting the tree to be preserved must be documented in the landscaping plan and provided as designed in the landscaping plan. 
2.  At least 50 percent of the dripline area of the tree to be preserved must be a permeable surface. 
(d)  Artificial lots. 
(1)  If a building site is over two acres in size, the city planner may, upon request, designate an artificial lot to satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(2)  If designated, the artificial lot shall be consistent with the purposes and policies of this chapter as determined from the criteria below. No artificial lot may be delineated by the city planner unless it: 
a.  Wholly includes the area on which the construction work is to be done, and 
b.  Has an area that does not exceed 50 percent of the area of the building site. 
(e)  Utility lines. 
(1)  Trees shall be planted no closer than 20 feet from the nearest underground utility line. 
(2)  Where the location of existing overhead utility lines conflict with the required street trees, planting of small mature height trees from subsection 118-430(f)(2)a. and c. shall be required. 
(3)  Where easements containing underground utilities conflict with the area where street trees are required to be planted, the city planner may authorize the planting of street trees outside the easement area. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 118-432. - Historic overlay district. 
    All properties within a historic overlay district shall comply with the standards and requirements established in article II of chapter 50 pertaining to historic preservation. 
(Ord. No. 1708-6-16 , § 2, 6-21-2016) 
Secs. 118-433-118-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 102-151 et seq. 

Sec. 118-461. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of required parking spaces is to provide enough on-site parking to accommodate the majority of traffic generated by the range of uses which might locate at the site over time. Parking requirements should be balanced with an active pedestrian network to minimize pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle conflicts as much as possible. Construction of bicycle parking may be substituted for some required parking on a site to encourage alternative forms of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 118-462. - Applicability. 
(a)  Construction or creation of use. Any building, improvement, or use of land approved or erected shall include the necessary off-street parking spaces, and require off-street/on-site loading facilities subject to the standards established in this division. 
(b)  Change of use. Whenever any building, improvement, or use of land is proposed to be changed to a new use, the provision of off-street parking and loading shall be required for the new use in accordance with this division. 
(c)  Expansion of existing use. If any building, improvement, or use of land is expanded, the provisions for parking and loading shall be provided for the portion of land use and/or building that has been added. 
(d)  Renovation or redevelopment. Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, if any building, improvement, or use of land is repaired, renovated, altered, expanded or redeveloped, and the cost of such changes exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the building improvement prior to the subject improvements, the parking and loading facilities set forth in this division shall be made conforming. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-463. - Calculation of parking spaces. 
(a)  Fractional number of spaces. In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional spaces shall be counted to the nearest whole space. Parking spaces located in buildings used for repair garages or auto laundries shall not be counted as meeting the required minimum parking. 
(b)  Parking structures excluded. Floor area of structures devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the floor area for off-street parking requirements. 
(c)  Requirements for uses not listed. The off-street parking requirements for a use not specifically listed in the parking requirement schedule shall be the same as required for a use of a similar nature as determined by the city planner. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 3.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-464. - Location of parking and loading spaces. 
    The required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served, except off-street parking may also be located as follows: 
(1)  Off-site location. When an increase in the number of off-street parking spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use, or where off-street parking spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required off-street parking spaces may be located at a distance not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building served or 500 feet from any other nonresidential building served; provided, however, that a written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as provided in this section. The distance from the land use requiring parking to the off-site parking site shall be measured along the shortest legal pedestrian path between one site and the other. 
_____ 
(2)  Joint use of parking. Parking adjustments may be allowed according to the following percentages by time of day: 
FIGURE 1 PARKING ADJUSTMENT PERCENTAGES BY TIME OF DAY 
Time of Day Office Retail Restaurant Theater Hotel 6:00 a.m.-12:00 noon 1.00 0.97 0.50 0.30 1.00 12:00 noon-1:00 p.m. 0.90 1.00 0.70 0.70 0.30 1:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m. 0.97 0.97 0.60 0.70 0.45 4:00 p.m.-6:00 p.m. 0.47 0.82 0.90 0.80 0.70 6:00 p.m.-8:00 p.m. 0.07 0.89 1.00 1.00 1.00 8:00 p.m.-12:00 midnight 0.03 0.61 1.00 1.00 1.00  
FIGURE 2 JOINT USE PARKING EXAMPLE: 
1. A sample mixed use Development comprised of Office at 50,000 sf Retail at 20,000 sf Restaurant at 8,000 sf 2. Individual Parking Requirements = Office at 1 space per 300 = 50,000 / 300 = 167 Retail at 1 space per 200 = 20,000 / 200 = 100 Restaurant at 1 space per 45 = 8,000 / 45 = 178 445 3. Shared Parking Requirement =  
Time of Day Office Retail Restaurant TOTAL 6 AM - 12 Noon 1.00 X 167= 167 0.97 X 100= 97 0.50 X 178= 89 353 12 Noon - 1 PM 0.90 X 167= 150 1.00 X 100= 100 0.70 X 178= 125 375 1 PM - 4 PM 0.97 X 167= 162 0.97 X 100= 97 0.60 X 178= 107 366 4 PM - 6 PM 0.47 X 167= 78 0.82 X 100= 82 0.90 X 178= 160 320 6 PM - 8 PM 0.07 X 167= 12 0.89 X 100= 89 1.00 X 178= 178 279 8 PM - 12 Midnight 0.03 X 167= 5 0.61 X 100= 61 1.00 X 178= 178 344 4. Parking Required = 375 spaces. (Highest total for any time period.) This is a reduction of 70 spaces (15.7%) over the individual parking requirements.  
_____ 
(3)  Off-site parking agreement. When the required off-street parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served or when the required off-street parking spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more establishments, a written agreement which ensures the retention of such spaces for this purpose, and for a period of not less than two years, shall be drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, and filed with the application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy if a change in use is involved. If the off-site parking is terminated for any reason, alternative parking meeting the standards of this division shall be acquired, or the property shall lose its certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Parking in front yards of residential and agriculture districts. No required off-street parking space shall be located in the required front yard in any residential or agricultural district. 
(5)  Parking in front yards of nonresidential districts. In any nonresidential district, the required off-street parking space may be located in the required front yard. However, off-street parking spaces shall be located one foot behind the property line or 12 feet behind the back of curb of the adjacent street, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 3.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-465. - Lighting of parking and loading areas. 
(a)  Spillover lighting. All lighting facilities for off-street parking shall be so arranged as to reflect the illumination away from any adjacent property. Such lighting facilities shall provide illumination within parking areas not to exceed a maintained average of one footcandle at ground level, and shall distribute not more than two-tenths of one footcandle of light upon any adjacent residential property. 
(b)  Nuisance or safety hazard. All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not intrude on residential property or create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or other public way. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 3.3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-466. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Schedule of off-street parking. The schedule of off-street parking requirements in this section establishes parking requirements for all zoning districts except the B-3 central business district. 
(b)  CBD parking requirements. In the B-3 central business district, off-street parking space for all buildings shall be provided at the ratio of one space for each 2,000 square feet of floor area; provided, however, if the computed number of required off-street parking spaces is less than ten spaces, no off-street parking spaces need be provided. 
(c)  Urban core parking requirements. In the urban core overlay, off street parking requirements as described in section 118-467 shall be decreased by ten percent in total. 
FIGURE 3 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Permitted Use Parking Requirement AGRICULTURAL USES Farm, Ranch, Garden or Orchard No Requirement Farm or Ranch for live stock and Animal Specialties No Requirement Feed Store and Tack for live Stock - No Mill 1 for each 1,000 sf Livestock Auction Pens or Sheds 1 for each 1,000 sf of auction area Poultry Hatchery 1 for each 300 sf of office space Stables (Commercial) 1 per each 2 stalls RESIDENTIAL USES Household Units Home Occupation N/A Multifamily - Apartments 1 for each bedroom + 5% additional for visitors Single Family Attached 2 for each dwelling unit Single Family Detached 2 for each dwelling unit Single Family Zero Lot Line 2 for each dwelling unit Two Family Dwelling 2 for each dwelling unit Special Unit Types Industrialized Housing* 2 for each dwelling unit Manufactured Home 2 for each dwelling unit Mobile Home (House Trailer, Camp) N/A Manufactured Home Park 2 for each lot, plot, or stand Mobile Home Park N/A Travel Trailer/RV Park 1 for each lot, plot, or stand Lodging/Group Quarters Bed and Breakfast* - 4 or Less Patrons 1 for each guest room or residence unit Bed and Breakfast* - 5-8 Patrons 1 for each guest room or residence unit Boarding or Rooming House 1 for each guest room or residence unit Accessory Apartment* 1 for each bedroom Convent or Monastery 1 for each 3 residents, minimum 2 Family Group Home 2 spaces, and 0.3 for each client Family Home 2 for each dwelling unit Foster Home 2 for each dwelling unit Guest House (Detached) 1 for each bedroom Half-way House - Criminal 1 for each bedroom Hotel or Motel 1 for each guest room + 5% additional for visitors Orphanage 1 for each employee on largest shift Retirement Home 1 for each bedroom Pool House N/A AMUSEMENT/RECREATION USES General Recreation Amusement, Commercial - Indoors* 1 for each 100 sf Amusement, Commercial - Outdoors 1 for each 1,000 sf of site area Billiard Parlor or Pool Hall* 1 for each 100 sf Carnival or Circus (Temporary) 1 for each 1,000 sf of site area Country Club (Private Membership) 3 for each game court, 5 for each golf green, and 1 for each 250 sf of assembly area, 25% of required parking may be on a pervious surface Fairground* 1 for each 1,000 sf of site area, parking surface may be pervious Golf Course (Public or Private) 5 for each golf green Golf Driving Range 1 for each tee box + 1 for each employee on largest shift Health Club or Studio 3 for each Game Court, and 1 for each 200 sf of remaining area Ice or Roller Skating Rink* 1 for each 100 sf of skating area Night Club or Dance Hall* 1 for each 100 sf Race Track 1 for each 4 seats and 1 for each employee on largest shift Recreation Club or Area (Private)* 3 for each game court and 1 for each 200 sf of remaining area Recreation Facility (Public) 3 for each game court and 1 for each 200 sf of remaining area Teen Club* 1 for each 100 sf Tennis Court (Lighted) 4 per court and 1 for each 4 fixed seats Tennis Court (No Lights) 4 per court and 1 for each 4 fixed seats Theater - Movie or Live (Enclosed) 1 for each 2 fixed seats Zoo, Zoological Park, Animal Park, or 
Aviary 1 for each 1,000 square feet of site area Adult Recreation Adult Arcade* 1 for each 100 sf Adult Book Store or Video Store* 1 for each 250 sf Adult Cabaret* 1 for each 100 sf Adult Motel* 2 for each guest room Adult Motion Picture Theater* 1 for each 2 fixed seats Adult Theater* 1 for each 2 fixed seats Escort Agency* 1 for each 300 sf Nude Model Studio* 1 for each 300 sf Sexual Encounter Center* 1 for each 100 sf INSTITUTIONAL, UTILITY and GOVERNMENT USES Government/Utility Government Facility As determined by the city planner Library, Art Gallery or Museum (Public) 1 for each 500 sf, 5 minimum Post Office 1 for each 300 sf of office and customer service area, 5 minimum Postal Distribution Facility 1 for each 1,000 sf Radio or TV Trans. Station (Commercial) 1 for each 1,000 sf Radio Tower (Non-Commercial)* No requirement Radio, TV, Microwave, or Cellular Transmission Tower (Comm.)* No requirement Satellite Dish* No requirement Utility Facilities (Major) As determined by the city planner Utility Lines and Transmission As determined by the city planner Schools/Organizations College or University 1 for each 2 students and staff Daycare - 3 or less Attendees As determined by the city planner Daycare - 4-6 Attendees 1 for each 10 pupils Daycare Center - 7 or more Attendees 1 for each 10 pupils School - Vocational 1 for each student + 1 for each staff School, K-12 (Public or Private) 1/25 elementary students, 1/18 junior high students, 1/5 high school students Church or Place of Worship 1 for each 2.5 seats in sanctuary Club, Private 1 for each 200 sf Community Center - Private 1 for each 250 sf of assembly area Community Center - Public 1 for each 250 sf of assembly area Fraternity/Sorority House 1 for each resident, and 6 for each 100 sf of assembly area Lodge or Fraternal Organization 1 for each 100 sf OFFICE AND PROFESSIONAL Office - General Advertising Agency 1 for each 300 sf Architectural/Engineering Services 1 for each 300 sf Banks and Financial Institutions 1 for each 300 sf Banks with Drive In Facilities 1 for each 300 sf Legal Services 1 for each 300 sf Offices - General or Professional 1 for each 300 sf Medical/Healthcare Animal Hospital or Clinic 1 for each 300 sf Animal Hospital or Clinic w/Outside Pens 1 for each 300 sf Animal Pound (Public or Private) 1 for each 300 sf Emergency Ambulance Service 2 for each ambulance Hospice 1 for each 6 beds and 1 for each employee on the largest shift Hospital - Acute Care In accordance with statutory regulations of Texas Department of Health Hospital - Chronic Care In accordance with statutory regulations of Texas Department of Health Medical or Dental Office or Clinic 1 for each 200 sf Medical or Dental Office or Clinic with In-House Lab 1 for each 150 sf Nursing/Convalescent Home 1 for each 6 beds and 1 for each employee on largest shift Psychiatric Hospital or Institution 1 for each 6 beds and 1 for each employee on largest shift Veterinary Office (No Hosp. or Clinic) 1 for each 300 sf Business or Personal Services Auction - Goods & Equipment (Indoors) 1 for each 250 sf Beauty Parlor/Barbershop 1 for each 250 sf Cabinet and Woodwork Shop (Custom) 1 for each 300 sf Caretaker/Security Quarters 1 per bedroom Cemetery or Mausoleum 2 spaces Communications/Electronics Equipment - Installation and Repair 1 for each 250 sf Conventions, Trade Shows or Exhibits 1 for each 1,000 sf of public area Exterminator Service 1 for each 300 sf Exterminator Service Storage 1 for each 1,000 sf Household Appliance and Equipment Repair 1 for each 250 sf Information Processing 1 for each 300 sf Laundry/Dry Cleaning - <4,000 s.f. w/Customer Service 1 for each 300 sf Laundry/Dry Cleaning - >4,000 s.f. 1 for each 300 sf Laundry/Dry Cleaning - Drop Off/Pick Up 1 for each 250 sf Laundry/Dry Cleaning -Self Service 1 for each 250 sf Locksmith 1 for each 300 sf Mailing Service (Private) 1 for each 300 sf Mortuary or Funeral Home 1 for each 100 sf of assembly area Photocopying or Duplicating Services 1 for each 250 sf Photographic Studio 1 for each 300 sf Sewing and Millinery (Custom) 1 for each 250 sf Shoe Repair 1 for each 250 sf Studio - Art, Drama, Dance, Music - Performing Arts 1 for each 200 sf Tailor Shop 1 for each 250 sf Tattoo Salon/Piercing Studio 1 for each 250 sf Taxidermist 1 for each 250 sf Temporary Field or Construction Office N/A Temporary Retail Use 1 for each 250 sf of site area Travel Agency 1 for each 300 sf Upholstery Shop or Furniture Repair (non-auto) 1 for each 250 sf Food and Beverage Services Club (Private) 1 for each 100 sf Catering Service 1 for each 300 sf Eating Place 1 for each 100 sf Eating Place - Drive-thru only 1 for each employee on largest shift (min. 4 spaces) Food Preparation or Food Service 1 for each 100 sf Liquor By the Drink* 1 for each 100 sf Retail Alcohol Sales - Off Premise Consumption 1 for each 250 sf Antique Shop 1 for each 250 sf Art Dealer 1 for each 250 sf Art Gallery 1 for each 500 sf Bait or Tackle Shop 1 for each 250 sf Bakery Shop 1 for each 250 sf Bicycle Sales or Repair 1 for each 250 sf Book or Stationery Shop 1 for each 250 sf Building Material Sales (Outside Storage) 1 for each 250 sf Camera or Photographic Supply Shop 1 for each 250 sf Cloth or Fabric Store 1 for each 250 sf Clothing Store 1 for each 250 sf Confectionery Shop 1 for each 250 sf Consignment Shop 1 for each 250 sf Convenience Store 1 for each 250 sf Department Store 1 for each 250 sf Drapery Shop 1 for each 250 sf Drug Store or Pharmacy 1 for each 250 sf Farmers Market - Outdoor 2 for each vendor stall Flea Market - Outdoor 1 for each 1,000 sf of site area Florist Shop 1 for each 250 sf Furniture Sales - New (Indoor Only) 1 for each 1,000 sf Garden Shop and Plant Sales - Display or Greenhouse 1 for each 1,000 sf of site area Grocery 1 for each 250 sf Hardware Store 1 for each 250 sf Hobby, Handicraft or Art Supplies 1 for each 250 sf Lawnmower Sales or Repair 1 for each 250 sf Major Appliance Sales (Indoor) 1 for each 1,000 sf Mobile/Manufactured Home Dealer (Sales Only) 1 space for each 5,000 sf of site area Monument Sales Yard 1 for each 250 sf Optical Shop 1 for each 250 sf Paint and Wallpaper Store 1 for each 250 sf Pawn Shop* 1 for each 250 sf Pet Shop 1 for each 250 sf Plumbing Shop (Retail and Wholesale) 1 for each 250 sf Retail or Convenience Store with Gasoline 1 for each 250 sf Sporting Goods 1 for each 250 sf Swimming Pool Sales and Supply 1 for each 250 sf Used Merchandise - Furniture, Rummage, Secondhand Store (Inside) 1 for each 250 sf TRANSPORTATION Automobile Related Auto Brake, Muffler, Glass, Seat Covers or Tire Sales and Service 1 for each 200 sf of retail area plus 1 for each bay Auto Dealer - Primarily New/Used Autos 1 for each 200 sf of retail area plus 1 for each bay Auto Dealer - Primarily Used Autos 1 for each 250 sf Auto Interior Shop 1 for each 250 sf of retail area plus 1 for each bay Auto Paint/Body Repair 1 for each 250 sf of retail area plus 1 for each bay Auto Rental 1 for each 250 sf Auto Repair - General 1 for each 250 sf of retail area plus 1 for each bay Auto Storage or Auction Auction - 1 for each 5,000 sf of site area storage - N/A Auto Supply - Used Parts Store with No On-Site Salvage 1 for each 250 sf Auto Supply Store for New and Rebuilt Parts 1 for each 250 sf Auto Wrecker Service 1 for each 250 sf office area Auto/Truck Parts and Accessories 1 for each 250 sf Car Wash Self-service - 1 per wash bay Drag Strip or Commercial Racing 1 for each 4 fixed seats Parking - Accessory to Another Use N/A Parking - Commercial Lot or Garage N/A Lube/Oil Change 2 for each oil change bay, and 1 for each employee on largest shift Service Station 2 for each repair bay, and 1 for each employee on largest shift State Vehicle Inspection 1 for each 300 sf of office and customer service area Bus or Truck Related Bus or Truck Parking or Storage N/A Bus Station and Terminal As determined by the city planner Truck Stop, Including Gas Sales 1 for each 250 sf Truck/Heavy Equipment Driving School 2 for each student during peak hour Truck/Recreation Vehicle Sales 1 for each 300 sf Truck/Trailer Rental 1 for each 300 sf Trucking Company 1 for each 300 sf Railroad or Airport Related Airport or Landing Field As determined by the city planner Railroad Freight Depot 1 for each 1,000 sf Railroad Passenger Station As determined by the city planner Railroad Yard and Shops 1 for each 1,000 sf or 1 for each employee, whichever is greater Vehicle - General Boat Dealer - Sales Only 1 for each 300 sf Boat Repair or Storage 1 for each 250 sf customer service area plus 1 per bay Go Cart Track 1 for each 2,000 sf site area Motorcycle Sales or Service 1 for each 250 sf office area plus 1 per each 1,000 sf service area Transfer/Storage Terminal 1 for each 1,000 sf Vehicle Maintenance - Private N/A Vehicle Wash - Private N/A WHOLESALE TRADE and STORAGE Wholesale Trade Apparel, Piece Goods, Notions - Wholesale 1 for each 1,000 sf Groceries/Related Products - Wholesale 1 for each 1,000 sf Heavy Machinery Sales 1 for each 1,000 sf Lumber Sales - Wholesale 1 for each 1,000 sf Paper or Paper Products - Wholesale 1 for each 1,000 sf Petroleum Products Storage and Wholesale 1 for each 1,000 sf Tool or Equipment Rental - Indoor 1 for each 300 sf Tool or Equipment Rental - Outdoor 1 for each 5,000 sf of site area Storage Contractor or Maintenance Yard As determined by the city planner Hazardous Gases/Chemicals Storage As determined by the city planner Mini Warehouse 1 for each 300 sf of office area. Units must have ample space for temporary parking in drive area Open Storage (No Enclosure) As determined by the city planner Open Storage (Screened) As determined by the city planner Warehouse/Storage (Inside) 1 for each 1,000 sf Wrecking, Junk, Salvage or Reclamation Yard 1 for each 300 sf office area MANUFACTURING and MINING USES Food-Related Products Animal or Poultry Slaughtering 1 for each 1,000 sf Bakery Products; Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Beverage Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Bottling or Canning of Soft Drinks and Carbonated Water 1 for each 1,000 sf Bottling Works 1 for each 1,000 sf Canned, Frozen, and Preserved Fruits, Vegetables and Other Foods 1 for each 1,000 sf Dairy Products - Processing or Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Fats and Oils Manufacturing or Processing 1 for each 1,000 sf Grain Mill Products; Processing and Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Ice Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Meat Products; Processing or Manufacturing - Not Including Slaughtering 1 for each 1,000 sf Sugar and Confectionery Products, Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Sugar Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Articles and Equipment Apparel Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Broom and Brush Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Cabinet and Woodworking Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Chemical and Allied Products Manuf. 1 for each 1,000 sf Concrete or Asphalt Batch Plant - Temp. N/A Costume Jewelry, Novelties, Buttons and Misc. Notions Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Fabricated Metal Products Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Fur Dressing and Dying 1 for each 1,000 sf Jewelry, Silverware and Plateware Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Laboratory - Medical or Dental 1 for each 200 sf Laboratory - Scientific Testing 1 for each 300 sf Land Fill (Private or Municipal) 1 for each 200 sf of building area Light Manufacturing/Assembly 1 for each 1,000 sf Linoleum, Asphalt - Felt Base and Other Hard Surfaced Floor Covering Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Machine Shop 1 for each 1,000 sf Match Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Musical Instruments and Parts Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Paper and Allied Products Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Pens, Pencils and Other Office and Artists' Materials Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Printing Publishing and Allied Industries 1 for each 1,000 sf Professional, Scientific and Controlling Instruments; Photographic and Optical Goods; Watches and Clocks Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Rubber and Misc. Plastics Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Salvage and Reclamation (Enclosed) 1 for each 1,000 sf Sign and Advertising Display Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Textile Mill Product Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Tobacco Products Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Toys, Amusement, Sporting and Athletic Goods Mfg. 1 for each 1,000 sf Welding Shop 1 for each 1,000 sf Natural Resources Lumber and Wood Products Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Oil and Gas Extraction N/A Oil and Gas Field Services 1 for each 200 sf of building Petroleum Refining and Related Industries 1 for each 1,000 sf Primary Metal Products Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Petroleum Products Storage and Warehouse 1 for each 1,000 sf Stone, Clay, Glass and Concrete Products Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 sf Stone, Sand, Gravel and Mineral Extraction N/A Stone, Sand, Gravel or Earth Sales and Storage 1 for each 5,000 sf of site area  
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 4.1, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 1185-12-99, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 1588-2-12, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 1626-5-13, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 118-467. - Off-street parking standards. 
(a)  Head-in parking. An off-street parking space shall not be located on a public street or alley. Head-in parking adjacent to a public street wherein the maneuvering of the vehicle in parking or leaving a parking space is done directly onto a public street shall not be allowed in nonresidential zoning districts nor shall it be allowed in conjunction with multifamily residential land uses. 
(b)  Parking spaces and aisle surfaces. All parking spaces, aisles and maneuvering areas shall have an all-weather surface, whether enclosed or unenclosed, and shall be connected by an all-weather surfaced driveway to a street or alley. 
(c)  Parking space and aisle dimensions. All parking spaces and aisle dimensions shall conform to Figure 5, Off-Street Parking Standard Diagram, unless specifically approved by the building official. 
(d)  Site access for vehicles. Access to a lot or tract shall conform to the access control guidelines in the city's comprehensive plan. A driveway conforming to city driveway standards shall be constructed for each approved access point. A permit must be obtained from the city to construct a driveway within the city. 
FIGURE 5 OFF-STREET PARKING
STANDARDS DIAGRAM 

(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 4.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec 118-468. - Parking lot accessibility. 
    All parking lots shall conform to Texas accessibility standards. 
(Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, amended § 118-468 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 118-468 pertained to handicapped parking and derived from Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 4.3, adopted Nov. 3, 1998. 
Sec. 118-469. - Reductions in required parking. 
(a)  Landscaping credit for off-street parking. 
(1)  The minimum off-street parking requirement may be reduced a maximum of ten percent for those parking facilities where a percentage of the total required parking spaces has been retained and/or developed as landscaped open space. The area to be retained and/or developed shall be equal or larger than the area of the number of parking spaces reduced. 
(2)  A minimum of one tree shall be retained or planted on the site for each 300 square feet or portion thereof of landscaped open space. Acceptable tree species are indicated in section 118-431. The property owner or agent shall maintain trees in a healthy condition. Removed trees shall be replaced as necessary to maintain the credit. 
(3)  If the property owner or the owner's agent does not replace dead or removed trees within 30 days of notification by the city planner or his or her designee, the parking credit shall be lost and the otherwise required parking shall be provided within 90 days. 
(b)  Bicycle parking. 
(1)  For every five bicycle parking spaces provided, the vehicle parking space requirement is reduced by one space, up to ten percent of the original required parking. 
(2)  Existing vehicle parking may be converted to take advantage of this provision. 
(3)  To utilize this exemption, the property must provide bicycle racks and must meet the following requirements: 
a.  The bicycle frame and one wheel can be locked to the rack with a high security, U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle. 
b.  A space two feet by six feet must be provided for each bicycle parking space, so a bicycle six feet long can be securely held with its frame supported so the bicycle cannot be pushed or fall in a manner that will damage the wheels or components. 
(c)  Motorcycle parking. 
(1)  Motorcycle parking may substitute for up to five percent of required parking. 
(2)  For every five motorcycle parking spaces provided, the vehicle parking space requirement is reduced by one space. 
(3)  To utilize this exemption, the property must provide motorcycle parking spaces meeting the following standards: 
a.  A space two feet by six feet must be provided for each motorcycle space. 
b.  All motorcycle spaces shall be located on a paved surface. 
(Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1720-9-16 , § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, amended § 118-469 to read as set out herein. Former § 118-469 pertained to landscaping crecdit for off-street parking and derived from Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 4.4, adopted Nov. 3, 1998. 
Sec. 118-470. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    Any use that receives or distributes material, supplies or merchandise by motor vehicle shall provide off-street loading space in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Retail, commercial and industrial uses. 
FIGURE 6 COMMERCIAL OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
Gross Floor Area (s.f.) Minimum Required Loading Spaces 0 to 10,000 None 10,001 to 50,000 1 50,001 to 100,000 2 100,001 to 200,000 3 Each additional 100,000 1 additional  
(2)  Auditoriums, exhibitions halls, hotels, restaurants and sports arenas. 
FIGURE 7 RESTAURANTS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
Gross Floor Area (s.f.) Minimum Required Loading Spaces 0 to 10,000 None 10,000 to 150,000 2 150,001 to 300,000 4 300,001 to 600,000 5 Each additional 100,000 1 additional  
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 5.1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-471. - Off-street loading standards. 
    Loading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width, 65 feet in length, and 14 feet in height except as required for kindergartens, day care centers or similar child training and care establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. V, § 5.2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-472. - Dumpster screening requirements. 
(a)  Screening required. Dumpster enclosures shall be screened from view from a public right-of-way. The dumpster area shall be in a location accessible to city sanitation vehicles and constructed according to the standards shown in figures 8 and 9. 
FIGURE 8 DUMPSTER PAD DIAGRAM 

FIGURE 9 DUMPSTER SCREENING DIAGRAM 

(b)  Maintenance of screening. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the screening wall in a good condition at all times. 
(c)  Alternative methods and construction of screening. The city manager or his designee may grant approval of screening materials and construction methods provided in this section. 
(d)  Variances to screening requirements. The board of adjustment may grant variances to this section upon finding that: 
(1)  Such variance is in harmony with the intent and purpose of the comprehensive plan and this chapter; 
(2)  Such variance will not adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(3)  The variance sought is due to unique circumstances affecting the property or the owner's use of the property. Financial consideration alone shall not be grounds for a variance; and 
(4)  The owner has made provisions for alternative screening reasonably equivalent in value and utility to the requirement sought to be varied. 
(Ord. No. 1478-2-08, 2-5-2008) 
Secs. 118-473-118-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 118-501. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations which protect the public from the potential negative effects of industrial and intense commercial development by regulating smoke and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire or explosive materials, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, open storage, glare and fuel supply in the vicinity of such sites. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 1, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-502. - Applicability. 
    The performance standards in this article shall apply to all zoning districts in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 2, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-503. - Glare into residential properties. 
    No use or operation in any district shall be located or conducted so as to produce glare, or either direct or indirect illumination across the bounding property line from a source of illumination into a residentially zoned property, nor shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. For the purposes of this section, a nuisance shall be defined as more than two-tenths of one footcandle of light measured at the residential property line. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 3, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-504. - Noise. 
(a)  Measurement. Measurement of noise shall be made at the residential property line with a sound level meter and octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. 
(b)  Noise levels at residential property lines. Standards for noise levels at residential property lines shall be as follows: 
(1)  Nighttime noise level. Noise levels shall not exceed 49 dBA at a residential property line between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  Daytime noise level. Noise levels shall not exceed 56 dBA at a residential property line. 
(3)  Octave band standards. Noise in any octave band shall not exceed standards set out in the following chart: 
FIGURE 1 NOISE STANDARDS 
At no point along the bounding property line of any lot or parcel in a residential district shall the sound pressure level of any operation or activity exceed the decibel limits specified in the octave band groups designated in the following table: 
Octave Band Range (cps) Decibel Band Limit (dB re 0.0002 microbar) 37-75 80 75-150 68 150-300 61 300-600 55 600-1200 51 1200-2400 48 2400-4800 45 4800-9600 43 A scale (for monitoring purposes only) 56  
Noise level adjustments: 
Nighttime noise-between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.-Subtract 7 dB 
Impulsive noise-Subtract 7 dB 
(Meter reading changes at a rate greater than 10 dB per second) 
(1)  Higher ambient noise levels. Where ambient noise levels from traffic or multiple sources already exceed the standards, the subject source may not increase that existing noise level. 
(2)  Public facilities and activities excluded. Public facilities and activities are excluded from this standard. Such activities may include the following: 
a.  Any activity the city or its agents conduct in pursuit of its usual activities such as trash removal, police and fire protection. 
b.  Any public event which may occur from time to time such as concerts and other events sponsored by a public or nonprofit organization, excluding fraternities and sororities. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 4, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-505. - Smoke and particulate matter. 
(a)  Standards. No industrial operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than three minutes in any one hour of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are: 
(1)  In violation of the standards specified by the state natural resources conservation commission, or subsequent agency, located under title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended; or 
(2)  Of such capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in subsection (a)(1) of this section except that, when the presence of steam is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the outside atmosphere, performance shall be considered to comply with this section. 
(b)  Combined standards. The emission of particulate matter from all sources in a district subject to this article shall not exceed the level specified by the state natural resources conservation commission, or subsequent agency, located under title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended. 
(c)  Standards measured at property line. Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of wind or airborne dust or other particulate matter; or which involve dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment including but not limited to paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting shall be conducted such that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary property line of the tract on which the use is located in concentration exceeding standards set by the state natural resources conservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 5, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-506. - Toxic and noxious matter. 
    No industrial operation or other use shall emit toxic or noxious matter in any concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which operation or use is located. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 6, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
Sec. 118-507. - Vibration. 
    No use in districts subject to this article shall at any time create earthborne vibration which, when measured at the boundary property line of the source operation, exceed the limits of the following displacement: 
FIGURE 2 VIBRATION STANDARDS 
Frequency 
(cycles per second) Displacement 
(inches)  0-10 0.010 10-20 0.007 20-30 0.005 30-40 0.004 40 and over 0.003  
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 7, 11-3-1998) 
Sec. 118-508. - Fire or explosive hazard material. 
(a)  Explosive material. No industrial use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted in districts subject to this article, except that chlorates, perchlorates, phosphorous, and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists, or wholesalers may be permitted. 
(b)  Flammable material. The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film solvents and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the city, as well as the water pollution control standards and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1130, art. VI, § 8, 11-3-1998) 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1971 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1971 Code, as updated through September 7, 1999, which are included herein. Sections of the 1971 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1971 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4 1-11 1-5 1-9 1-6-1-8 1-12-1-14 2-2 2-51 2-31(a)-2-31(i) 2-141-2-149 2-32-2-35 2-150-2-153 2-35.1-2-35.8 2-154-2-161 3-3 18-234 3-4 102-3 31/4-1 10-1 31/4-2 10-4 31/4-3 10-3 31/4-4 10-2 31/4-5(a) 10-57 31/4-5(b) 10-56 5-1-5-7 6-61-6-67 5-9, 5-10 6-97, 6-98 5-12 6-96 5-13-5-15 6-99-6-101 5-16, 5-17 6-33, 6-34 5-18 6-31 5-19 6-35 5-29 6-1 5-30(a)-5-30(d) 6-161-6-164 5-31(a) 6-165 5-31(b), (c) 6-164 5-32 6-32 5-33(b)-(d) 6-64 5-34, 5-35 6-191, 6-192 5-36 6-131 5-41 6-246 5-42 6-249 5-43, 5-44 6-247, 6-248 7-16, 7-17 114-61 7-18 114-62 7-19-7-24 114-26-114-31 7-28, 7-29 114-92, 114-93 7-31-7-51 114-94-114-114 7-53-7-55 114-115-114-117 7-56 114-91 7-63-7-65 114-146-114-148 7-71 114-176 7-72 114-177 
114-180 7-73-7-75 114-178-114-180 7-75a 114-181 7-76-7-79 114-182-114-185 7-87-7-90 114-32-114-35 7-96, 7-97 114-211, 114-212 7-98 86-27 7-99 114-118 7-100 114-241 8-1 14-1 8-13-8-15 14-31-14-33 8-16(a)-8-16(e) 14-897-14-901 8-16(f) 14-898 8-16(g) 14-896 8-35 14-386 8-40(a) 14-416 8-40(b) 14-418 8-40(c), (d) 14-419 8-40(e)-8-40(g) 14-420-14-422 8-41 14-417 8-42(a) 14-506 8-42(b) 14-452 8-42(c) 14-509 8-42(d) 14-507 8-42(e) 14-762 8-42(f) 14-451 8-42(g) 14-508 8-42(h) 14-510 8-43 14-511 8-44 14-423 8-45(a)-8-45(i) 14-591-14-599 8-46(a)-8-46(e) 14-626-14-630 8-47 14-656 8-48(a)-8-48(r) 14-681-14-698 8-49(a)-8-49(d) 14-726-14-729 8-50 14-756 8-50(1)-8-50(5) 14-757-14-761 8-50(6)-8-50(8) 14-763-14-765 8-51 14-766 8-52(a) 14-476 8-52(b), 8-52(c) 14-478, 14-479 8-52(d) 14-477 8-52(e) 14-480 8-53(a), 8-53(b) 14-536, 14-537 8-54 14-422 8-60 14-856 8-61-8-69 14-859-14-867 8-71 14-858 8-72 14-857 8-91 34-181 8-92, 8-93 34-183, 34-184 8-94 34-246 8-94(1), (2) 34-181 8-94(c) 34-185 8-95(a)-8-95(d) 34-216-34-219 8-95(e)-8-95(i) 34-247-34-251 8-96(a)-8-96(c) 34-252-34-254 8-96(d) 34-185 8-97 34-186 91/2-1 26-1 91/2-2 26-4 91/2-3-91/2-8 26-31-26-36 91/2-9 26-2 91/2-10 26-5 91/2-11 26-3 10-1, 10-2 30-61, 30-62 10-3 30-1 10-4 30-63 10-5(a) 30-91, 30-92 10-5(b) 30-93 10-6 30-8 10-7, 10-8 30-5, 30-6 10-9 30-4 10-10 30-7 10-11, 10-12 30-2, 30-3 101/2-11, 101/2-12 54-51, 54-52 101/2-13-101/2-15 54-118-54-120 101/2-16 54-54 101/2-17-101/2-19 54-86-54-88 101/2-20 54-55 101/2-21 54-117 101/2-22, 101/2-23 54-56, 54-57 101/2-24 54-53 11-1, 11-2 14-61, 14-62 11-3-11-5 14-64-14-66 11-15 14-156 11-16 14-158 11-17 14-157 11-18 14-159 11-19-11-23 14-126-14-130 11-24, 11-25 14-165, 14-166 11-26-11-28 14-168-14-170 11-29 14-164 11-30 14-167 11-31 14-160 11-32 14-163 11-33 14-63 11-34, 11-35 14-161, 14-162 11-41 14-67 11-57, 11-58 14-196, 14-197 11-59 14-96 11-60 14-198 11-64 14-201 11-65, 11-66 14-207, 14-208 11-67 14-199 11-68-11-70 14-204-14-206 11-71 14-203 11-72 14-202 11-74 14-200 12-3 38-1 12-14-12-16 38-91-38-93 12-19 38-56 12-21-12-23 38-57-38-59 12-24 38-96 12-25-12-30 38-60-38-65 12-33, 12-34 38-94, 38-95 12-41 38-127 12-42 38-126 12-43, 12-44 38-128, 38-129 121/2-1 42-26 121/2-2-121/2-4 42-28-42-30 121/2-5 42-27 121/2-6-121/2-9 42-31-42-33 121/2-16-121/2-19 42-61-42-64 121/2-26-121/2-29 42-121-42-124 121/2-36, 121/2-37 42-151, 42-152 121/2-41-121/2-45 42-91-42-95 121/2-51-121/2-55 42-181-42-185 13-1 82-1 13-2 82-66 13-3 82-3 13-4, 13-5 82-96, 82-97 13-6, 13-7 82-67, 82-68 13-8, 13-9 82-98 13-10-13-12 82-99 13-13 82-100 13-14-13-16 82-131-82-133 13-17 82-36 13-18 82-4 13-19 82-2 13-20, 13-21 82-5, 82-6 13-22 82-101 13-32 34-26 13-33(a) 34-27 13-33(b) 34-30 13-34 34-28 13-35 34-32, 34-33 13-36 34-33 14-1 46-1 14-2 46-61 14-3 46-31 14-4-14-7 46-62-46-65 14-8(c) 6-2 14-8(e)-(h) 34-63 14-8(k) 34-63 14-9-14-11 46-66-46-68 14-12, 14-13 34-61, 34-62 14-28, 14-29 18-56, 18-57 14-30 18-86 18-141 18-196 14-30(1)a 18-87 
18-142 14-30(1)b 18-142 14-30(2) 18-87 18-142 18-197 14-113, 14-114 14-821, 14-822 14-115 14-828 14-116 14-827 14-117 14-829 14-118 46-2 14-119(a)-14-119(c) 14-823-14-825 14-119.1 14-826 141/2-36 50-251 141/2-37-141/2-39 50-281-50-283 141/2-40(a), (b) 50-284 141/2-40(c) 50-285 15-1 18-226 15-2, 15-3 18-261, 18-262 15-4 18-265 15-5 18-263 15-6, 15-7 18-266, 18-267 15-8 18-264 15-9 18-231 15-10 18-268 15-11 18-230 15-12, 15-13 18-232, 18-233 15-14, 15-15 18-269, 18-270 15-16-15-18 18-227-18-229 16-9 118-323 16-26 34-116, 34-117 16-27(a) 34-119, 34-120 16-27(b) 34-118 16-28(1), (2) 34-121 16-29 34-124 16-30(a) 34-122, 34-123 16-30(b) 34-125 161/2-1-161/2-11 18-296-18-306 17-1 62-1 17-2 62-116 17-17(a) 62-56 17-17(b) 62-86 17-18(a) 62-57 17-18(b) 62-87 17-19 62-58 62-88 17-20 62-59 62-89 17-21 62-60 62-90 171/2-1 18-336 171/2-2 18-371 171/2-3 18-376 171/2-4-171/2-7 18-372-18-375 171/2-8 18-377 171/2-9, 171/2-10 18-340, 18-341 171/2-11, 171/2-12 18-338, 18-339 171/2-13, 171/2-15 18-342, 18-343 171/2-16 18-337 173/4-1-173/4-4 14-356-14-359 18-1 66-1 18-3 66-2 18-14-18-28 66-31-66-45 19-2, 19-3 70-51 19-4, 19-5 70-81, 70-82 19-10 70-111 19-14(a)-19-14(e) 34-151-34-155 19-16(a) 74-62 19-16(b) 86-26 20-1 74-61 20-2 74-64 20-3, 20-4 74-63 20-16-20-19 74-26-74-29 20-20 74-32 20-21 74-30 20-26 74-33 20-29 74-31 22-1 14-236 14-326 22-2(a) 14-298 22-2(b)(1), 22-2(b)(2) 14-296, 14-297 22-2(c)(1)a, 
22-2(c)(1)b 14-266, 
14-267 22-2(c)(1)c-(c)(1)e 14-266 22-2(c)(2), 22-2(c)(3) 14-268, 14-269 22-3 14-237 22-5 14-238 23-5 58-1 241/4-1 18-407 241/4-2 18-406 241/4-3 18-408 241/4-4 18-446 241/4-5 18-448 241/4-6 18-447 241/4-7 18-418 241/4-8-241/4-12 18-449-18-453 241/4-13(a) 18-411 241/4-14-241/4-19 18-412-18-417 241/4-20, 241/4-21 18-409, 18-410 25-1-25-3 86-28-86-30 25-5 86-31 25-15 86-61 25-16 86-91 25-17 86-94 25-18, 25-19 86-92, 86-93 25-20-25-24 86-121-86-125 25-25, 25-26 86-64, 86-65 25-27, 25-28 86-62, 86-63 25-34-25-39 86-151-86-156 26-1, 26-2 90-2, 90-3 26-3 90-1 26-4(A), (B) 90-61 26-4(C), 26-4(D) 90-62, 90-63 26-4(E) 90-6 26-4(F), 26-4(G) 90-64, 90-65 26-5 90-8 26-6 90-7 26-7, 26-8 90-91, 90-92 26-9-26-11 90-121-90-123 26-12 90-36 26-13 90-151 26-13(A)-26-13(F) 90-181-90-186 26-13(G)-26-13(I) 90-188-90-190 26-13(J) 90-216 26-13(K) 90-187 26-13(L), 26-13(M) 90-217, 90-218 26-13(N)(1)-26-13(N)(3) 90-246-90-248 26-13(O) 90-276 26-13(P) 90-219 26-13(R), 26-13(S) 90-277, 90-278 26-14 90-152 26-15, 26-16 90-4, 90-5 27-13 94-26 27-16 94-56 27-32(a) 94-171 27-32(b), (c) 94-172 27-33 94-141 27-34-27-37 94-173-94-176 27-38 94-142 27-39-27-42 94-177-94-180 27-43 94-206 27-44-27-49 94-231-94-236 27-49.1-27-49.10 94-237-94-246 27-50 94-81 27-61 94-82 27-81 94-112 27-82 94-111 27-91-27-98 94-276-94-283 28-1 110-26 28-2-28-5 110-158-110-161 28-6 110-27 28-7 110-156 28-8-28-20 110-162-110-174 28-21 110-157 28-23-28-30 110-271-110-278 28-31-28-38 110-56-110-63 28-39-28-48 110-91-110-100 28-54-28-59 110-126-110-131 28-73-28-76 110-201-110-204 28-77-28-89 110-231-110-243 281/2-21 98-28 281/2-22 98-26 281/2-23-281/2-30 98-86-98-93 281/2-31 98-29 281/2-32-281/2-36 98-94-98-98 281/2-37, 281/2-38 98-56, 98-57 29-2 102-56 29-3 102-1 29-6 102-2 29-19-29-24 102-86-102-91 29-26 102-4 29-37 102-121 29-39 102-122 29-53-29-68 102-152-102-167 29-69 102-151 29-70-29-71 102-168 29-75-29-81 102-196-102-202 29-96 102-257 29-96.1 102-256 29-96.2-29-96.6 102-258-102-262 29-104 102-291 29-110 102-292 29-122-29-124 102-321-102-323 29-135-29-139 102-351-102-355 30-12 106-1 31-1 106-2 31-2-31-9 106-31-106-38 31-11 106-39 31-16 106-321 31-21-31-35 106-351-106-365 31-41-31-47 106-391-106-397 31-48 106-66 31-49(a)-31-49(k) 106-141-106-151 31-50(a) 106-176 106-211 31-50(b)-31-50(i) 106-177-106-184 31-51(a)-31-51(l) 106-246-106-257 31-52(b)-31-52(g) 106-212-106-217 31-53(b)-31-53(h) 106-287-106-293 31-54 106-40 31-54(a) 106-286 31-55-31-57 106-67-106-69 31-58(a)-31-58(k) 106-101-106-111 31-59, 31-60 106-70, 106-71 31-61-31-69 106-671-106-679 31-71-31-79 106-426-106-434 31-91-31-95 106-461-106-465 31-101 106-491 31-102-31-105 106-493-106-496 31-106 106-492 31-121 106-526 31-122-31-131 106-528-106-537 31-132 106-527 31-133-31-143 106-591-106-601 31-145-31-150 106-632-106-637 31-151 106-631 31-152-31-155 106-638-106-641  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1971 Code, as updated through September 7, 1999, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1971 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede September 7, 1999, but which were never included in the 1971 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since September 7, 1999, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 1130 11- 3-1998 art. I, § 2- 118-2-118-6 art. I, § 6 art. II, § 1, 118-266, 118-267 art. II, § 2 art. II, § 3.1- 118-268-118-270 art. II, § 3.3 art. II, § 4, 118-271, 118-272 art. II, § 5 art. III 118-1 art. III, § 1 118-273 art. III, § 2- 118-301-118-322 art. III, § 23 art. III, § 24.1- 118-351-118-357 art. III, § 24.7 art. III, § 25 118-324 art. IV, § 1.1- 118-421-118-426 art. IV, § 1.6 art. IV, § 2.1- 118-201-118-203 art. IV, § 2.3 art. IV, § 3- 118-427-118-433 art. IV, § 9 art. V, § 1, 118-461, 118-462 art. V, § 2 art. V, § 3.1- 118-463-118-465 art. V, § 3.3 art. V, § 4.1- 118-466-118-469 art. V, § 4.4 art. V, § 5.1, 118-470, 118-471 art. V, § 5.2 art. VI, § 1- 118-501-118-508 art. VI, § 8 art. VII, § 1 118-131 art. VII, § 2.1- 118-132-118-134 art. VII, § 2.3 art. VII, § 3- 118-135-118-142 art. VII, § 10 art. VIII, § 1.1- 118-171-118-173 art. VIII, § 1.3 art. VIII, § 2 118-174 art. VIII, § 3.1.A- 118-386-118-391 art. VIII, § 3.1.F art. VIII, § 3.2- 118-392-118-394 art. VIII, § 3.4 art. IX, § 1 118-66 art. IX, § 2.1, 118-67, 118-68 art. IX, § 2.2 art. IX, § 3 118-69 art. IX, § 4 118-36 art. X, § 1 118-96 art. X, § 2.1, 118-97, 118-98 art. X, § 2.2 art. X, § 3- 118-99-118-101 art. X, § 5 art. XI, § 1 50-26 art. XI, § 2.1- 50-27-50-29 art. XI, § 2.3 art. XI, § 3 50-61 art. XI, § 3(A)- 50-62-50-67 art. XI, § 3(F) art. XI, § 3(H), (I) 50-68 art. XI, § 4 50-96, 50-97 art. XI, § 5.1- 50-126-50-129 art. XI, § 5.4 art. XI, § 6 50-130 art. XI, § 7, 50-156, 50-157 art. XI, § 8 art. XI, § 9.1- 50-158-50-162 art. XI, § 9.5 art. XI, § 10.1(A)- 50-191-50-194 art. XI, § 10.1(D) art. XI, § 11.1- 50-221-50-225 art. XI, § 11.5 art. XI, § 12- 50-30-50-32 art. XI, § 14 art. XII, § 1- 118-231-118-239 art. XII, § 9 1184-12-99 12- 7-1999 118-273 1185-12-99 12- 7-1999 118-1 118-273 118-466 1192-2-00  2- 1-2000 1 98-27 1197-4-00  4-18-2000 1 34-182 1202-5-00  5-16-2000 V 50-286 1204-5-00  5-16-2000 118-273 1207-6-00  6- 6-2000 I-XIV 106-66-106-79 1217-9-00  9-19-2000 28-90, 28-91 110-306, 110-307 28-95-28-102 110-310-110-317 28-103-28-112 110-336-110-345 28-116-28-121 110-371-110-376 28-126-28-136 110-396-110-406 28-141-28-151 110-426-110-436 28-158, 28-159 110-308, 110-309 1221-9-00  9-19-2000 31-23 106-321 1225-10-00 10-16-2000 24-1 78-2 24-2 78-1 24-3, 24-4 78-3, 78-4 24-5, 24-6 78-76, 78-77 24-7-24-11 78-6-78-10 24-12-24-16 78-96-78-100 24-17-24-19 78-56-78-58 24-20 78-5 24-21 78-31 24-22, 24-23 78-33, 78-34 24-24 78-76 24-25, 24-26 78-78, 78-79 24-27-24-31 78-35-78-39 24-32 78-32 app. A, § 8 78-126, 78-127 app. A, § 8(1)- 78-128-78-132 app. A, § 8(5) Table 1 78-101 1232-10-00 10-17-2000 9-1-9-4 22-1-22-4 9-5-9-11 22-31-22-37 9-18, 9-19 22-56, 22-57 9-26, 9-27 22-76, 22-77 9-33 22-96 1238-12-00 12-19-2000 241/2-4 78-4 241/2-6 78-77 241/2-26 78-79 1240-12-00 12-19-2000 31-93 106-463 1243-2-01  2- 6-2001 13-1 82-1 13-2 82-66 13-3 82-3 13-4, 13-5 82-96, 82-97 13-6, 13-7 82-67, 82-68 13-8, 13-9 82-98 13-10-13-12 82-99 13-13 82-100 13-14-13-16 82-131-82-133 13-17 82-36 13-18 82-4 13-19 82-2 13-20, 13-21 82-5, 82-6 13-22 82-101 13-32 34-26 13-33(a) 34-27 13-33(b) 34-30 13-35 34-32, 
34-33 13-36 34-33 13-42 34-28 1247-3-01  5-16-2000 I 50-251 II-VI 50-281-50-586 1248-3-01  2-20-2001 102-72-102-75 1251-3-01  3-20-2001 72-1-72-8, 72-20-72-24, 72-26, 72-36-72-52 1252-4-01  4-17-2001 1-7 Adopting Ord., p. xi 1256-6-01  6- 5-2001 102-365-102-370, 102-382-102-401 1265-9-01  9- 4-2001 14-31, 14-238, 14-236, 14-326, 14-356, 38-91 1264-9-01  9- 4-2001 82-1-82-6, 82-36, 82-66-82-68, 82-96-82-101, 82-131-82-133 1263-9-01  9-18-2001 106-321 1274-12-01 12- 4-2001 14-416-14-423, 14-451, 14-452, 14-476-14-480, 14-506-14-511, 14-536, 14-537, 14-591-14-599, 14-626-14-630, 14-656, 14-681-14-698, 14-726-14-729, 14-756-14-763 1276-2-02  2-19-2002 1-14 18-481-18-496, Exh. A, Exh. B 1290-7-02  7-23-2002 82-134 106-321(f) 1291-9-02  9- 3-2002 82-5 1295-9-02  9-17-2002 82-1-82-6, 82-36 82-66-82-68, 82-96-82-101 82-131-82-133 1296-9-02  9-17-2002 14-61(a) 1297-9-02  9-17-2002 106-321(a)-(h) 1298-10-02 10-22-2002 82-1-82-6, 82-36 82-66-82-68, 82-96-82-101, 82-131-82-134 1315-1-03  1-21-2003 I 50-251 II-VI 50-281-286 1316-2-03  2-18-2003 I-XIII 94-276-94-288 1318-4-03  4- 1-2003 62-1, Div. 2(tit.), 62-56-62-60 1323-5-03  5-20-2003 74-62 1324-6-03  6-10-2003 6-1, 6-64 1329-9-03  9- 2-2003 118-273 1333-9-03  9-16-2003 106-321 1335-9-03  9-16-2003 82-1-82-6, 82-36, 82-66-82-68, 82-96-82-101, 82-131-82-133 1336-10-03 10- 7-2003 94-281 1339-11-03 11- 4-2003 38-93 1347-12-03 12-16-2003 1-9 10-2 1349-1-04  1-20-2004 46-61 1350-2-04  2- 3-2004 118-1, 118-202, 118-268, 118-273, 118-304, 118-317 1351-2-04  2- 3-2004 118-1 1360-4-04  4- 6-2004 14-34       Rpld 14-96       Rpld 14-266-14-269       Rpld 14-476-14-480 1362-5-04  5- 4-2004       Added 118-427(b)(6) 1364-6-04  6- 1-2004 18-226-18-233 18-235, 18-236 18-261-18-263 18-265-18-271 1367-7-04  7- 6-2004       Added 78-133, 78-134 1371-9-04  9- 7-2004 28-1 110-26 28-2-28-5 110-158-110-161 28-6 110-27 28-7 110-156 28-8-28-14 110-162-110-168 28-15.1 110-175 28-15 110-169 28-17.1 110-176 28-16-28-20 110-170-110-174 28-21 110-157 28-23-28-30 110-271-110-278 28-31-28-38 110-56-110-63 28-39-28-48 110-91-110-100 28-54-28-59 110-126-110-131 28-73-28-76 110-201-110-204 28-77-28-89 110-231-110-243 1373-9-04  9-21-2004 106-321 1374-9-04  9-21-2004 82-1-82-6, 82-36 82-66-82-68 82-96-82-101 82-131-82-133 1380-11-04 11- 2-2004 50-27, 50-30, 50-156 50-191, 50-192 50-194-50-201 50-221, 50-224-50-227 1353-2-05  2-15-2005 1-8 34-181-34-188 1356-3-05  3-15-2005 14-61(a) 1361-4-05  4- 5-2005 78-1-78-10, 78-31-78-39 78-56-78-58, 78-76-78-79 78-96-78-101, 78-126 78-133, 78-134 1362-5-05  5- 3-2005 14-33 1367-7-05  7- 5-2005       Dltd 62-116 1369-7-05  7-19-2005 1 106-631-106-641 1370-7-05  7-19-2005 1 106-591-106-602 1371-7-05  7-19-2005 62-56-62-60 1372-8-05  8- 2-2005 1-3 86-156 1373-8-05  8- 2-2005 118-138(a)(2) 1386-9-05  9-20-2005 106-321 1387-9-05  9-20-2005 82-1-82-6 82-36, 82-66-82-68 82-96-82-101 82-131-82-133 1388-9-05 10- 1-2005 6-64(a)(c) 6-162 6-191(c) 6-192(b) 14-33(b) 14-128 14-237 14-358 14-386(c) 18-87(a) 18-142(b) 18-197 78-79(a) 86-93 118-5 1392-11-05 11-15-2005       Rpld 106-671-106-679       Added 106-671-106-678 1408-3-06  3-21-2006 118-137(c)(1)       Dltd 118-172 1409-3-06  3-21-2006 6-1-6-24, 6-30-6-35, 6-40-6-47, 6-60-6-75 1417-5-06  5-16-2006 82-131(c)(4)a 1418-6-06  6- 6-2006 74-34, 74-35 1429-8-06  8- 1-2006       Rpld 102-365-102-370, 102-382-102-401       Added 102-365-102-370, 102-383-102-390 1430-7-06  7-18-2006 14-31, 14-35, 14-236, 14-326, 14-356 38-91 1431-8-06  8- 1-2006 118-174, 118-273, 118-312, 118-316 1432-8-06  8- 1-2006 118-139 1433-9-06  9- 5-2006 14-237 38-93 1436-9-06  9-19-2006 106-321 1437-9-06  9-19-2006 82-1-82-6 82-36, 82-66-82-68 82-96-82-101 82-131-82-133 1439-10-06 10- 3-2006 118-1 118-273 1446-12-06 12- 5-2006 50-28 50-96 50-191-50-193 50-199-50-201 1449-2-07  2- 6-2007       Rpld 94-281 1456-4-07  4-17-2007 34-152(14) 1461-8-07  8- 7-2007 2-51 1462-8-07  8-21-2007 10-3 1463-8-07  8- 7-2007       Added 78-79(c) 1474-11-07 11-20-2007 1       Added 94-57 1475-11-07 11-20-2007 10-2 1477-12-07 12-18-2007 102-365-102-370 102-382-102-390 1478-2-08  2- 5-2008       Added 118-472 1481-2-08  2- 5-2008 118-140 1484-3-08  3- 4-2008       Added 28-1-28-29 1485-3-08  3-18-2008 102-365-102-370 102-382-102-390 1486-3-08  3-18-2008       Rpld 102-365-102-370 102-382-102-390       Added 102-365-102-370 102-382-102-390 1488-4-08  4-15-2008       Added 78-102 1489-4-08  4-15-2008       Added 46-100-46-113 1490-5-08  5- 6-2008       Added 118-392(c)(2)k. 1492-6-08  6- 3-2008       Rpld 50-251 50-281-50-286       Added 50-251 50-281-50-286 1493-7-08  7-15-2008       Rpld 62-56-62-60 1495-7-08  7-15-2008       Rpld 6-1-6-24 6-30-6-35 6-40-6-47 6-60-6-75       Added 6-1-6-24 6-30-6-35 6-40-6-47 6-60-6-67 6-69-6-75 1497-9-08  9- 2-2008 82-131(b) 1498-9-08  9- 2-2008 94-277-94-280 1499-9-08  9- 2-2008 78-36(c)       Added 78-36(d) 1504-9-08  9-16-2008 106-321 1505-9-08  9-16-2008       Rpld 102-365-102-370 102-382-102-390       Added 102-365-102-370 102-382-102-390 1506-9-08  9-16-2008 82-131(c)-(h) 1508-10-08 10-21-2008 94-231(a) 1516-5-09  5- 5-2009 118-1 
118-273 1520-06-09  6-16-2009 74-62 1533-11-09 11- 3-2009 1-15       Added 106-721-106-735 1535-11-09 11-17-2009 3 1-1, 2, 11, 12 2-51, 145, 146, 151, 153, 201 6-73 10-2, 3, 56, 47, 86, 88, 147 14-33, 34, 157, 158, 207, 357, 597, 763, 764, 766, 824 18-270, 407, 410, 452 28-1, 7, 31-33, 35-39, 43, 44, 48, 59, 76, 80, 87, 89 30-1, 7, 61, 62 34-33, 122, 123 38-57, 93, 95 42-29, 91, 95 46-31, 64, 65 50-26-29, 62, 65, 67, 127-129, 162, 193, 195, 196, 200, 225, 282-284, 286 54-52, 86 72-2, 8, 20, 22, 24, 26 74-31, 32, 62 78-33, 34, 36 82-2, 131 86-27, 61 90-4, 6, 64, 152 94-176, 231, 232, 234, 239, 246, 276, 284 98-26-28, 56, 57, 86, 94 102-1, 196, 198, 202 106-428, 430, 463, 464, 494, 528-532, 536, 537, 598, 641, 672, 674 110-26, 27, 56-63, 91, 95, 96, 100, 131, 156,204, 234, 241, 306, 310, 311-317, 336, 340, 341, 345, 376 114-26, 27, 91, 93, 106, 182 118-1, 3, 36, 66, 69, 96, 97, 99, 132, 133, 135-138, 140, 174, 235, 270, 302, 303, 307, 390, 392, 393 1539-4-10  4- 6-2010 Ch. 42, Arts. I-V 1540-4-10  4-20-2010 1       Added 14-2 2       Rpld 14-34 3 Ch. 14, Art. VIII., Div. 4 1541-5-10  5-18-2010 Ch. 50, Art. III 1547-7-10  7-20-2010       Added 188-202(4) 1554-9-10  9-21-2010 106-321 1560-10-10 10-19-2010 118-273, 118-315 1562-12-10 12-21-2010 38-93 1565-2-11  2- 1-2011 14-1 1568-2-11  2-15-2011 78-36(c) 1570-4-11  4- 5-2011       Rpld 102-365-102-390       Added 102-365-102-390 1573-5-11  5-17-2011 1 Ch. 34, Art. V. (tit.) 2 34-151 3 34-152 4 34-152(1) 5 34-152(2) 6 34-152(4) 7 34-152(7) 8       Added 34-156 9       Added 34-157 1574-6-11  6-21-2011 74-62 1580-10-11 10-18-2011       Added 102-123-102-125 1581-11-11 11- 1-2011 I-XIV 106-66-106-79 1583-12-11 12- 6-2011 106-631-106-643 1585-12-11 12-20-2011 28-8 1586-1-12  1-17-2012 10-56 1587-2-12  2- 7-2012       Added 78-11 78-98(4), (5), (7) 1588-2-12  2- 7-2012 118-466 1592-3-12  3- 6-2012 50-251 50-281-50-286 1605-8-12  8-21-2012       Added 74-65 1608-10-12 10- 2-2012 94-276-94-280 1614-11-12 11-20-2012 74-62 1617-2-13  2- 5-2013 14-31 14-35 14-236 14-326 14-356 38-91 14-61       Added 14-906       Added 14-921 1626-5-13  5- 7-2013 6-2 Ch. 6, Art. IV (tit.)       Added 6-50-6-52 118-1 118-273 118-466 1627-5-13  5- 7-2013 82-131(c)-(h) 1629-5-13  5-21-2013 2 34-157 1632-6-13  6-18-2013 2.A. 22-1 2.B. 22-2(a), (b) 2.C. 22-4 2.D. 22-31(e) 2.E. 22-33(b)-(d) 2.F. 22-34(c) 2.G. 22-35 2.H. 22-36 2.I. 22-37(b)-(h) 2.J. 22-57 2.K. 22-77 1639-8-13  8- 6-2013 II., III.       Added 34-63(6), (7) 1637-6-13  6-18-2013 14-33 38-93 1649-10-13 10- 1-2013 2 78-1       Added 78-4(8)c. 78-77(a)(23) 1652-12-13 12-17-2013       Rpld 94-276-94-280 
94-282-94-288       Added 94-276-94-279 94-282, 94-283 1653-1-14  1- 7-2014 2       Rpld 102-198 1654-1-14  1- 7-2014 1-8       Added 18-497 1655-1-14  1-21-2014 78-100 1658-3-14  3- 4-2014 106-321 1661-3-14  3- 4-2014 50-251 50-281-50-286 1662-3-14  3- 4-2014 2 78-1 78-4(8)c. 78-77(a)(23) 78-96(4) 3 34-152(3) 1665-5-14  5- 6-2014       Rpld 82-5 38-93 1673-6-14  6-17-2014 2 118-431(b) 1676-7-14  7-15-2014 118-273 1678-8-14  8-19-2014 2.A. 74-66 1679-8-14  8-19-2014 2 118-5 1685-11-14 11-18-2014 1 38-56, 38-57 1689-12-14 12- 2-2014 94-231(a)(2), (5), (6), (b) 94-232 94-235 1695-4-15  4-21-2015 2 86-27 1702-10-15 10- 6-15 34-26, 34-27 1708-6-16  6-21-2016 2 118-1 18-421-18-432 1711-7-16  7-19-2016 2       Added 14-922, 14-923 1712-7-16  7-19-2016 2       Rpld 50-251 50-281-50-286 1713-8-16  8-16-2016 106-321 1714-8-16  8-16-2016 82-131(c)-(h) 1720-9-16  9-20-2016 2 118-268(b)       Added 118-270(c)       Added 118-325 118-461 118-466(c)(1) 118-468 118-469 1721-10-16 10-18-2016 2 118-273 1725-12-16  1-17-2017 2 28-6(c) 28-8 28-32(a) 28-35 110-27(c) 110-162 110-57(a) 110-60 28-1       Rpld 28-9 110-26       Rpld 110-163 1727-3-17  3-21-2017 II       Added 106-690-106-706 1732-6-17  6- 6-2017 2       Rpld 62-86-62-91 1738-7-17  8- 8-2017 2 118-270 3 118-325(h)(3)-(5) 1739-7-17  7-18-2017 2 18-57 2       Added 18-58-18-61 3 18-226 18-228 18-232(17) 4 18-262(b) 1743-9-17  9- 5-2017 82-131(c)-(h) 1745-9-17  9- 5-2017 II       Added 98-99-98-112 1461-8-07  8- 7-2007 2-51 1533-11-09 11- 3-2009 1-15       Added 106-721-106-735 1743-9-17  9- 5-2017 82-131(c)-(h) 1756-12-17 12- 5-2017 II       Added 106-751-106-761 1760-1-18  1-16-2018 I, II 38-91 38-93 1765-03-18  3- 6-2018 II       Added 62-117-62-122 1768-04-18  4-17-2018 II 106-758 1779-09-18  9-18-2018 82-131(c)-(h) 1783-11-18 11- 6-2018 2 118-430  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to state law. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. 
Article Section  Section 
this Code 312 50-281 1105b Char. Art. II, § 15 1173 Char. Art. II, § 2 1175(15) Ch. 22 5221f 14-419 Ch. 66 66-1 6243-101 Ch. 14, Art. IV 14-296 3(a)(2) Ch. 14, Art. IV, Div. 3 4-8B Ch. 14, Art. IV, Div. 2 5B 14-236 12 Ch. 14, Art. IV, Div. 3 14-297 155(c) 14-298  
V.T.C.A. Agricultural Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 251.002 106-692 106-695 106-696  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. 18-26 11.38 18-26 Ch. 12 118-1 61.36 18-26 Ch. 62 118-1  
V.T.C.A. Education Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 61.003 94-141  
V.T.C.A. Election Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 61.004 34-152 85.001 78-1 85.036 78-1  
V.T.C.A. Finance Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 371.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 311.001 et seq. 1-2 311.027 1-4 312.003(a) 1-2 312.008 1-2 418.001 et seq. Ch. 30 551.001 et seq. 50-68 ch. 552 98-98  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.001 et seq. Ch. 46 121.001 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II, Div. 2 121.034 46-61 222.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV 242.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV ch. 341 106-724 341.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV Ch. 82 341.064 Ch. 14, Art. IX Ch. 18, Art. V 341.066 Ch. 18, Art. IV 342.001 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 342.006(a) 34-31 342.006(b)-(d) 34-29 342.007 34-33 343.011 Ch. 18, Art. V 355.002 106-696 ch. 361, subch. W 106-722 361.805 106-724 106-729 365.001 et seq. 82-6 433.001 et seq. 18-56 437.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 438.031 et seq. 18-57 535.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV 753.001 et seq. Ch. 38 791.001 et seq. Ch. 38 ch. 821 6-18 ch. 822 6-50 821.076 et seq. 6-18 822.006 6-60 822.042 6-66 822.043 6-66 822.0423 6-64  
V.T.C.A. Human Resource Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 121.002 22-1  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 42.001 et seq. 90-3 42.021 90-2, 90-3 51.071 et seq. Char. Arts. I-VII 53.001 et seq. 1-1 14-2 14-756 ch. 54, subch. C 14-575 54.001 1-14, 18-494 54.012 118-239 141.001-143.001 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II ch. 211 118-388 118-393 211.001 et seq. Ch. 118 211.0011 118-101 211.003 Ch. 14 211.0035 Ch. 18, Art. VI 211.007 Ch. 118, Art. II, 
Div. 2 211.008-211.011 Ch. 118, Art. II, 
Div. 3 212.001 et seq. Ch. 90 90-2 90-3 212.004 Ch. 90, Art. II 212.009 90-122 213.001 et seq. Ch. 14 214.001 et seq. Ch. 14 214.101 Ch. 14, Art. IX 215.001 70-51 215.072 34-63 215.073 Ch. 110, Art. II 215.075 Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. VI ch. 216 78-33 217.042 34-63 241.001 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. III 241.032 10-86 241.032(d) 10-149 241.041 10-151 241.044 10-88 241.901 10-90 243.001 et seq. 18-407 Ch. 118, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 251.001 Ch. 62 Ch. 74 ch. 283 98-110 283.001 et seq. 98-26 98-28 ch. 284 98-100 98-101 98-105 284.054 98-110 284.157 98-105 284.302 98-111 341.003 Ch. 58 341.903 34-63 342.011 Ch. 38, Art. II 362.001 et seq. 58-1 Ch. 378 94-277 94-282 378.004 94-277 Ch. 380 94-277 94-282 401.002 34-63 402.001 et seq. Ch. 106 551.006(e) 106-692  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 455.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VIII 455.005 Ch. 18, Art. VIII ch. 1301 106-695 1803.001 et seq. Ch. 26 1804.001 et seq. Ch. 26 1903.002(c)(1) 106-695 1956.053-1956.060 18-497 2154.001 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. II, 
Div. 3 2155.001 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV ch. 2303 102-365  
V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section  Section 
this Code tit. 4 114-61 31.001 et seq. Ch. 114, Art. II, 
Div. 3 114-94 31.064 114-102 31.065 114-111 31.066 114-104 31.067 114-107 31.068 114-108 31.069 114-109 31.095 114-95 31.096 114-96 31.101 114-97 31.104 114-100 31.106 114-101  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 21, ch. 22 18-448 21.01 18-451 ch. 25 18-448 37.11 30-2 ch. 43 18-448 43.01 et seq. 18-372 43.24 18-417 49.06 114-113 42.09 et seq. 6-15  
V.T.C.A. Property Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 301.001 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. II, 
Div. 2 301.004 54-116 301.021 54-118 301.022 54-118 301.026 54-119 301.027 54-120 301.041 54-54 301.043 54-54 301.044 54-54 301.061 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. II, 
Div. 2, Subdiv. II 301.142 54-54  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.01 et seq. Ch. 94 Ch. 94, Art. II 11.13(d)-(f) 94-81, 94-82 11.251 Ch. 94, Art. II, 
Div. 2 94-56 11.253 94-57 21.001 et seq. Ch. 10 21.001 10-1 33.01 et seq. 94-26 33.07 94-26 33.91 et seq. 34-33 111.060 94-142 156.001 94-141 156.103(c) 94-172 311.001 Ch. 86 ch. 312 50-281 94-277 94-279 312.001 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. V 321.001 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. III 321.101 94-276 321.103 94-276 321.210(b) 94-112 351.001 94-141 351.001 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. IV 
94-176 94-245 351.0025 94-173 351.004 94-142 94-178 351.0041 94-179 351.005 94-180 351.006 94-172 351.101 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 541.001 et seq. Ch. 102 541.302(5) 1-2 542.202 Ch. 102, Art. VII 102-1 
102-122 542.202(12) 102-121 542.207 Ch. 102, Art. V 544.002 Ch. 102, Art. III 545.303 102-160 545.303(c) 102-152 545.307 102-167 551.001 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. VII 552.001 et seq. Ch. 102, Art. VIII 552.007(a) 102-323 681.002 102-73 681.0101(d)-(e) 102-73 681.0101H. 102-74 682.001 et seq. 102-151 683.001 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV 683.071 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 683.071 34-116 683.072 34-119 683.074(b)(3), (f) 34-125 683.074(d), (e) 34-118 683.075 34-121 683.076 34-122 683.077 34-120 683.077(b) 34-116  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 545.424 102-125 545.425 102-125 ch. 601 102-385  
V.T.C.A. Utilities Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 11.001 et seq. 98-26 51.002 98-101 54.024 98-110 ch. 66 98-110  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 7.251 106-76 11.039 106-599 106-636 16.13 Ch. 42, Art. II 16.315 42-1  
