CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PEARSALL, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Mary Moore 
Mayor 
____________ 
Patty Vinton, Place 1 
Julian Hernandez, Place 2 
Aurora Garza, Place 3 
Brenda Treviño, Place 4 
Robert Villarreal, Place 5 
Ben Briscoe, Place 6 
Chris Valadez, Place 7 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles Jackson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Krystal Garcia 
City Clerk  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Pearsall, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances as adopted by the City Council through October 10, 2017. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Colleen Dalton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Jose Trevino, City Manager, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pearsall, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pearsall, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Pearsall, Texas. 2018.  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF PEARSALL 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter for the City of Pearsall, Texas, as adopted by a majority of the qualified voters of the City at a special election held May 7, 1994. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Adoption, amendment, etc., of Home Rule Charters, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION AND TERRITORY 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Corporate name. 
All inhabitants of the City of Pearsall, Frio County, Texas, residing within the boundaries and limits of said City as herein established or may hereafter be established, are hereby constituted and shall continue to be a municipal body politic, incorporated under, and shall continue to be a municipal body politic, incorporated under, and to be known by, the name and style of the "City of Pearsall," hereinafter referred to as "the City" and by that name shall have perpetual succession and shall have and succeed to all the rights, property of every kind or class (whether real, personal, or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, moveable or immovable, and whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property including, but not limited to, any charitable or trust fund, that the City obtained by gift, deed, devices, purchase, eminent domain or other manner), immunities, powers, privileges and franchises now held, possessed and enjoyment by the City or granted herein, and shall be subject to all its present duties and liabilities, subject to the limitations prescribed in this Charter.  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries. 
The bounds and limits of the City shall be those as established and described in ordinances previously passed or which may be duly passed by the City Council of the City in accordance with state law. The City Clerk shall at all times keep a correct and complete map that shows the boundaries of the City, together with recent annexations or deannexations. The bounds and limits of the City on the date of the adoption of this Home Rule Charter are as follows: All of those bounds and limits of the City of Pearsall as more fully described in an instrument marked as "Exhibit "A" attached to this Charter and expressly incorporated in this Charter by reference at this point as though set out here in full. 
Editor's note— The metes and bounds description of the City boundaries were adopted and included as "Exhibit A" of the Charter, and are available for public examination in the Office of the City Clerk.  
Sec. 1.03. - Additional territory. 
The City may from time to time alter its boundaries by annexing any territory adjoining its present or future boundaries or denuding any territory within its bounds and limits in the size, shape and amount, as may be authorized by and in the manner and form prescribed by state law. The City may annex additional territory lying adjacent to the City without the consent of the territory and the inhabitants of the territory annexed, where the same is not inconsistent with the state law. The City may annex area only in its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless the City owns the area. Such annexations or deannexations shall be accomplished by ordinance. The additional territory annexed shall be a part of the City and the property situated therein shall bear its prorated part of the taxes levied by the City as provided by state law. The inhabitations thereof shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of all citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances and resolutions of the City.  
ARTICLE 2. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2.01. - Powers of the City. 
The City shall have all powers that are now are, or hereafter may be, granted to municipalities by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas; and all such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed herein, in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council of the City.  
Sec. 2.02. - Delineation of general and other basic powers of City. 
Par. 1. Authority of local self-government. 
(a)  The City has full power of local self-government. 
(b)  The grant of powers to the City by this Charter does not prevent, by implication or otherwise, the City from exercising the authority incident to local self-government. 
Par. 2. Form of government. The City hereby adopts and shall operate under the Manager-Council form of government. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective Council which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the City Manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City. All powers of the City shall be exercised prescribed in this Charter, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Par. 3. Creation of municipal offices. The City has the right to: 
(a)  create offices; 
(b)  determine the method for selecting officers; and 
(c)  prescribe the qualifications, duties, and tenure of office for officers. 
Par. 4. Officers. The City Council of the City has the right to set the amount of compensation for each officer of the municipality. 
Par. 5. Authority to annex area and take other actions regarding boundaries. The City has the right to take the following actions consistent with the procedural rules prescribed by state law: 
(a)  fix the boundaries of the City; 
(b)  extend the boundaries of the City and annex areas adjacent to the municipality; and 
(c)  exchange area with other municipalities. 
Par. 6. Disannexation. The City has the right to disannex an area in the City consistent with the procedural rules prescribed by state law. 
Par. 7. Perpetual succession. The City has the right to act in perpetual succession as a body politic. 
Par. 8. Authority relating to lawsuits. The City has the right to plead and be impleaded in any court action. 
Par. 9. Garnishment. The City's municipal funds are not subject to garnishment proceedings. 
Par. 10. Authority relating to property; execution. 
(a)  The City has the right to hold property of every kind or class, whether said property is real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, and whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements, and appurtenances connected with or related to said property including, but not limited to, any charitable or trust fund, that the City obtains by gift, deed, devise, purchase, eminent domain or other manner. 
(b)  Any property owned or held by the City is not subject to any kind of execution. 
Par. 11. Liability for damages. The governing body of the City has the right to adopt rules, as it considers advisable, governing the City's liability for damages caused to a person or property. The City, however, shall be immune from all liability for death or injury to person and damage to property except as otherwise provided for law. 
Par. 12. Water system. 
(a)  The City has the exclusive right to own, construct, reconstruct, extend, operate, maintain, repair and improve a water system for the use of the City and its residents. The City has the right to regulate the system and prescribe rates for the water furnished. 
(b)  The City, for the purposes of the acquisition, ownership, construction, reconstruction, extension, operation, maintenance, repair or improvement of said water system, has the means, property of every kind or class suitable for such purposes, whether said property is real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, and whether wholly or partially vested or contingent or related to said property, inside or outside the City, including any necessary rights-of-way. 
(c)  The City has the right to take the necessary action to acquire, own, construct, reconstruct, extend, operate, maintain, repair and improve the system and to require water customers to pay charges imposed for the water furnished. 
(d)  The City has the right to create, from revenue received from operating the water system, a separate fund dedicated solely to maintaining, repairing, and improving the water system. This revenue may be pledged for paying the principal of and providing an interest and sinking fund on bonds issued for these purposes. 
Par. 13. Use of streets; franchises. The City has the right to prohibit the use, by any person, firm or corporation, of any street, alley, highway or grounds of the City by any non-municipally owned water, wastewater, refrigerated water, steam, natural gas, electricity, cable television, telegraph, telephone, street railway, interurban railway, steam railway, solid waste collection, carrying passengers for hire or any other character of utility without first requiring the person, firm or corporation proposing to operate or conduct such a public service or utility to obtain the consent of the City Council of the City expressed by ordinance and upon the prior payment by the person, firm or corporation so proposing to operate or conduct such public service or utility of such compensation as may be prescribed and upon such condition as may be provided by any such ordinance. The City has the right to determine, fix, and regulate the charges, fares or rates of any person, firm or corporation enjoying, or that may enjoy the franchise, or exercising any other public privilege in the City and to prescribe the kind of service to be furnished by such person, firm or corporation, and the manner in which it shall be rendered, and from time to time alter or change such rules, regulations and compensation; provided that in adopting such regulations and in fixing or changing such compensation, or determining the reasonableness thereof, no stock or bonds authorized or issued by any corporation enjoying the franchise shall be considered unless proof is presented to the City that the same and used for the development of the corporate property, labor done or property actually received in accordance with the laws and Constitution of this State applicable thereto. In order to ascertain all facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is or should be a reasonable rate or regulation, the City Council of the City has the right to inspect the books and compel the attendance of witnesses for such purpose. 
Par. 14. Certain public services and utility systems. 
(a)  In this section, "public service" includes a public telephone system, cable television system, street railway system, fertilizing plant, slaughterhouse, municipal railway terminal, dock, wharf, ferry, ferry landing, or shipping facility, including loading and unloading devices. 
(b)  The City, for the purpose of the acquisition, ownership, construction, reconstruction, extension, operation, maintenance, repair and improvement of a gas system, electric light plant, sewage plant, or other public services or public utility has the right to acquire by purchase, donation, eminent domain or other means suitable property of every kind or class, whether real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property, whether inside or outside the municipal limits including, but not limited to, any necessary rights of way and to require and receive compensation for services furnished for private purposes or otherwise. The City has the right to use eminent domain authority to appropriate property of every kind or class suitable for such purposes, whether said property is real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property necessary to efficiently carry out those objects. The City has the right to condemn the property of every kind or class suitable for such purposes, whether said property is real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property of any person, firm or corporation that conducts such a business or utility service for the purpose of acquiring, owning, constructing, reconstructing, extending, operating, maintaining, repairing, and improving the public utility services or other public services in the City. 
(c)  The City has the right to manufacture its own electricity, gas, or anything else needed or used by the public. The City has the right to purchase, and make contracts for the purchase of gas, electricity, oil, water, rights or any other commodity or article used by the public and may sell the same to the public on terms determined by the City Council to be in the best interests of the City. 
(d)  The City has the right to require water works corporations, gas companies, street car companies, telephone companies, electric companies, cable televisions companies, or other persons, firms or corporations who hold a franchise from the City to extend their services to territory as required by the City Council of the City. 
Par. 15. Right of eminent domain. 
(a)  When the City Council of the City considers it necessary, the City has the right to exercise the right of eminent domain for public purposes to acquire public or private property of every kind or class suitable for such purposes, whether said property is real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property, whether located inside or outside the municipality, for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  the providing, enlarging, or improving of a City hall; police station; jail or other law enforcement detention facility; fire station; library; school or other educational facility; academy; auditorium; hospital; sanitarium; market house; slaughterhouse; warehouse; elevator; railroad terminal; airport; ferry; ferry landing; pier; wharf; dock or other shipping facility; loading or unloading facility; alley, street, or other roadway; park, playground, or other recreational facility; square; water works system, including reservoirs, other water supply sources, watersheds, and water storage, drainage, treatment, distribution, transmission, and emptying facilities; sewage system, including sewage collection, drainage, treatment, disposal, and emptying facilities; electric or gas power system; public telephone system; cable television system; cemetery; and crematory; 
(2)  the determining or acquisition of riparian rights, appropriate rights and other water rights relative to the City water works; 
(3)  the straightening or improving of the channel of any stream, branch, or drain; 
(4)  the straightening, widening, or extending of any alley, street, or other roadway; and 
(5)  for any other municipal purpose the City Council of the City considers advisable. 
(b)  The City condemning any property interest under this section has the right to take a fee simple or other unencumbered title or any lesser interest in and to public or private property of every kind or class suitable for such purposes, whether said property is real, property is real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property, whether located inside or outside the municipality, so condemned, inside or outside the City, including any necessary rights-of-way if the City Council expresses the intention to do so by ordinance. The City's rights under this paragraph are further outlined in article 18 of the Charter. 
(c)  The rights, responsibilities and procedures for the above-described eminent domain or condemnation actions by the City shall be governed by the provisions of article 18 of the Charter. 
Par. 16. Street improvements. The City has exclusive dominion, control, and jurisdiction in, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys, highways and boulevards, and public grounds of the City and the right to provide for the improvement of any public streets, alleys, highways, avenues and boulevards by paving, raising, grading, filling, or otherwise improving the same and to charge the cost of making such improvement against the abutting property, by fixing a lien against the same, and a personal charge against the owner thereof. The City has the power to provide for the construction and building of sidewalks, including the curb and gutter, against the owner for such cost and provide by special assessment a lien against such property for such cost; to provide for the improvement of any such sidewalk or the construction of any such curb and gutter by penal ordinance and to declare defective sidewalks to be a public nuisance. The City's rights under this paragraph are further outlined in Article 17 of the Charter. 
Par. 18. Control of obstruction on street; street closure. The City has the right to control, regulate and remove all obstructions or other encroachments or encumbrances on any public street, alley or ground, and narrow, alter, widen or straighten any such streets, alleys boulevards, and to vacate and abandon and close any such streets, alleys, avenues or boulevards, and to regulate and control the moving of buildings or other structures over and upon the streets or avenues of such City. 
Par. 19. Dairies; slaughterhouses. The City has the right to inspect dairies, slaughterhouses, or slaughter pens, in or outside the municipal limits, from which milk or meat is furnished to the residents of the municipality. 
Par. 20. Nuisance. 
(a)  The City has the right to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the municipality and within the area outside the limits allowed by state law. 
(b)  The City has the right to enforce all ordinances necessary to prevent and summarily abate and remove a nuisance. 
Par. 21. Authority to police municipally owned property outside City. The City has the right to police the following areas owned by and locate outside the municipality: 
(a)  parks and grounds; 
(b)  lakes and land contiguous to and used in connection with a lake; 
(c)  speedways and boulevards; and 
(d)  any other areas allowed by state law. 
Par. 22. Protection of streams and watersheds. 
(a)  The City has the right to prohibit the pollution of and may police a stream, drain, or tributary that may constitute the source of water supply of the City. 
(b)  The City has the right to provide for the protection of and may police any watersheds. 
(c)  The authority granted by this section may be exercised inside or outside the municipality's boundaries. 
Par. 23. Licensing of vehicles. The City has the right to license, operate and control the operation of all character of vehicles using the public streets, including motorcycles, automobiles or like vehicles, and to prescribe the speed of the same, the qualification of the operator of the same, and the public streets or alleys of the City for carrying passengers or freight for compensation. 
Par. 24. Vehicles for hire. The City has the right to license, fix the charges or fares made by, or otherwise regulate any person who owns, operates, or controls any type of vehicle used on the public streets or alleys of the City for carrying passengers or freight for compensation. 
Par. 25. Theaters; shows; amusements. The City has the right to regulate the location and conduct of: 
(1)  theaters; 
(2)  movie theaters; 
(3)  bowling alleys; and 
(4)  other places of public amusements. 
Par. 26. Police power. The City has the right to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to the police power of the City. 
Par. 27. Regulation of signs. 
(a)  The City has the right to license, regulate, control, or prohibit the erection of signs or billboards by ordinance. 
(b)  Subsection (a) does not authorize the City to regulate the relocation, reconstruction, or removal of a sign in violation of state law. 
Par. 28. Designation of fire limits; removal or destruction of structures. 
(a)  The City has the right to establish fire limits and may prescribe the kind and character of structures and other improvements erected within those limits. 
(b)  The City has the right to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within certain limits and may condemn dangerous buildings or other structures, dilapidated buildings, or buildings considered to increase the hazard of fire. The City has the right to provide for the manner of the removal or destruction of those buildings or structures. 
Par. 29. Zoning regulations generally. 
(a)  The City Council of the City has the right to regulate: 
(1)  the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; 
(2)  the percentage of a lot that may be occupied; 
(3)  the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; 
(4)  population density; and 
(5)  the location and use of buildings, other structures, and land for business, industrial, residential, or other purposes. 
(b)  In the case of designated places and areas of historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance, the City Council of the City has the right to regulate the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or razing of buildings and other structures. 
(c)  The City has the right to regulate the bulk of buildings. 
Par. 30. Zoning districts. 
(a)  The City Council of the City has the right to divide the City into districts of a number, shape, and size the City Council considers in the best interest of the City. Within each district, the City Council of the City has the right to regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or use of buildings, other structures, or land. 
(b)  Zoning regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of building in a district, but the regulations may vary from district to district. The regulations shall be adopted with each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view toward conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land in the City. 
Par. 31. Conflict with other laws; exceptions. 
(a)  If a zoning regulation adopted under authority of this Charter requires a greater width or size of yard, court, or other open spaces; requires a lower building height or fewer number of stories for a building; requires a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied; or otherwise imposes higher standards than those required under another statute or local ordinance or regulation, the regulation adopted under the authority of this Charter controls. If the other statute or local ordinance or regulation imposes higher standards, that statute, ordinance, or regulation controls. 
(b)  This section of the Charter does not authorize the City Council of the City to require the removal or destruction of property that exists at the time the City Council implements this section of the Charter and that is actually and necessarily used in a public service business. 
(c)  This section of the Charter does not apply to a building, other structure, or land under the control, administration, or jurisdiction of state or federal agency. 
Par. 32. Police force. The City has the right to provide for a police department for the purpose of police protection and control. 
Par. 33. Fire department. The City has the right to provide for a fire department for the purpose of fire protection and control. 
Par. 34. Sewer connections. 
(a)  The City has the right to: 
(1)  provide for a sanitary sewer system; and 
(2)  require property owners to connect to the sewer system. 
(b)  If the owner does not connect to the sewer system, the City has the right to: 
(1)  fix a lien against the owner's property; 
(2)  charge the cost of the connection to the owner as a personal liability; and 
(3)  impose a penalty on the owner. 
Par. 35. Preservation of health, property, good government, and order. The City has the right to enforce ordinances necessary to protect health, life, and property and to preserve the good government, order, and security of the City and its inhabitants. 
Par. 36. Energy Conservation. The City has the right to require that the construction of buildings comply with the accessibility, safety and energy conservation standards in the City's building code. 
Par. 37. Authority Regarding Substandard Building. 
(a)  The City has the right, by ordinance, to require the vacation, relocation or occupants, securing, repair, removal, or demolition of a building that is: 
(1)  dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation; and 
(2)  a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the City has the right to vacate, secure, repair, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. 
(c)  If the City incurs expenses under subsection (b), the City has the right to assess the expenses on, and the City has the right to file a lien against (unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution) the property on which the building is located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner of another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the City for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the municipality, and the balance due. 
Par. 38. Utility extension policy. At such time as the City population exceeds twenty-five thousand (25,000) inhabitants, the City Council of the City, when the public service of the City may require the same, shall have the right and power to compel any street railway or other public utility corporation to extend its lines of service into any section of the City not to exceed two miles in any one year. The City at any time, regardless of population, shall have the fight to formulate, adopt, administer and enforce any policies for the extension of its water, wastewater, gas, electric, telephone, cable television and other utility system into areas not currently being served by the City. 
Par. 39. Acquisition of public utility. Whenever the City determines to acquire any public utility using an occupying its streets, alleys, and avenues as hereinbefore provided, and it shall be necessary to condemn the property of any kind or class suitable for such purposes, whether said property is real, property is real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property, whether located inside or outside the municipality, so condemned, inside or outside the City, including any necessary rights-of-way of the said public utility, the City may obtain funds for the purpose of acquiring in compliance with the procedures set out in Article 18 of this Charter said property of the said public utility and paying the compensation therefor from its current funds or revenues, or by issuing bonds, notes or other evidence of indebtedness and shall secure the same by fixing a lien upon the said properties constituting the said public utility so acquired by condemnation or purchase or otherwise; said security shall apply alone to said properties so pledged. 
Par. 40. Other municipal functions. The City, in its discretion, may also provide the following services in the interest of the general public: 
(a)  health and sanitation services; 
(b)  street construction and design; 
(c)  bridge construction and maintenance and street maintenance; 
(d)  cemeteries and cemetery care; 
(e)  garbage and solid waste removal, collection and disposal; 
(f)  establishment and maintenance of jails; 
(g)  hospitals; 
(h)  sanitary and storm sewers; 
(i)  airports; 
(j)  repair garages; 
(k)  parks and zoos; 
(l)  museums; 
(m)  libraries and library maintenance; 
(n)  civic, convention centers and coliseums; 
(o)  community, neighborhood, or senior citizen centers; 
(p)  operation of emergency ambulance service; 
(q)  dams and reservoirs; 
(r)  warning signals; 
(s)  regulation of traffic; 
(t)  transportation system; 
(u)  recreational facilities, including but not limited to, swimming pools; 
(v)  vehicle and motor-driven equipment maintenance; 
(w)  parking facilities; tax collection; 
(x)  fireworks display; 
(y)  building codes and inspection; 
(z)  zoning, planning and plat approval; 
(aa)  engineering functions; 
(bb)  maintenance of traffic signals, signs and hazards; and 
(cc)  animal control. 
Par. 41. [Miscellaneous Powers.] The City shall have all powers granted to cities, including home rule cities, that can be exercised inside its City limits, outside its City limits but within its extraterritorial jurisdiction as well as any area outside its extraterritorial jurisdiction.  
Sec. 2.03. - Cumulative powers of City. 
The enumeration of particular powers, and the specification of the manner of exercising the same by this Charter, shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, nor construed as a limitation upon the general power herein granted, or upon their exercise in any other lawful manner, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City shall have and may exercise all others powers which, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for the Charter specifically to enumerate. The City shall have and exercise all powers conferred upon cities by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment, Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Texas and the Enabling Act relative thereto, and all other laws passed by the Legislature of the State of Texas, relating thereto, or which may hereafter be passed by said Legislature in relation to such matters.  
ARTICLE 3. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Creation, composition and powers. 
There is hereby created as the governing body of the City, a City Council to be composed of seven (7) members, plus the Mayor, nominated and elected in the manner hereinafter provided. Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the City Council shall have and exercise all powers now or hereafter conferred on the City; shall succeed to all powers previously vested in any former governing body of the City; shall have the general care, management and control of the City, its property and finances, and shall enact, alter, modify or repeal all ordinances and resolutions to be consistent with this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the state of Texas. For purposes of this Charter, the terms "City Council" or "Council" include the Mayor, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 3.02. - City Councilmembers; terms, election, and other matters. 
The seven (7) members of the City Council shall be elected at large, by place, by the qualified voters of the entire City, for two-year terms, and in no event shall each be elected for more than three consecutive 2-year terms (i.e., 6-year period of service) at a time and/or until a successor is elected and qualified. Any member of the City Council who serves three consecutive 2-year terms may file to become a candidate for election to the City Council after sitting out one 2-year term. There is no limitation on the number of 6-year periods of service a person may serve as long as there is a 2-year waiting period in between each possible 6-year period of service. If a member of the City Council shall file to become a candidate for nomination or election to any public office, other than that of member of the Council, he or she shall immediately vacate his or her place on the Council and the vacancy thereby created shall be filled as provided in section 3.09 herein. The term limitations specified herein shall begin to apply to candidates elected to the City Council on or after the May 1994 election without regard to the number of prior terms served.  
Sec. 3.03. - Mayor; term, election, other matters. 
The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council. The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the entire City for a term of two years. In no event shall any person be elected to the position of Mayor, or Councilmember, or a combination of both positions, for more than three consecutive 2-year terms at a time (i.e., 6-year period of service). Any person, who has served as Mayor, or Councilmember, or a combination of both for three consecutive 2-year terms, may file to become a candidate for Mayor of the City after sitting out one 2-year term. There is no limitation on the number of 6-year periods of service a person may serve as long as there is a 2-year waiting period in between each possible 6-year period of service. The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council meetings, but shall not participate in any vote except in the case of a tie vote. The Mayor shall not have any veto power. The Mayor shall be elected in odd-numbered years. If the Mayor shall become a candidate for nomination or election to any public office, other than Mayor, he or she shall vacate immediately his or her place as Mayor and the vacancy thereby created shall be filled as provided in Section 3.09. The term limitations specified herein shall begin to apply to candidates elected as Mayor of the City on or after the May 1995 election without regard to the number of prior terms served.  
Sec. 3.04. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
The City Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall perform the duties of Mayor in case of the absence or temporary inability of the Mayor to perform the duties of office, and who shall for such time be vested with all the powers belonging to the Mayor. In case of the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the remaining Councilmembers shall select one of their members to act in the place of the Mayor. The Mayor Pro Tem shall be selected after each election and shall serve a period of one (1) year, subject to removal as Mayor Pro Tem at any time by a vote of 5 members of the total membership of the City Council.  
Sec. 3.05. - Compensation and reimbursements. 
No member of City Council nor the Mayor shall receive compensation. All justifiable, necessary, accountable expenses incurred by members of the City Council and the Mayor in the performance of their official duties shall be paid by the City.  
Sec. 3.06. - No Council interference. 
Neither the Mayor, the City Council, nor any of its committees or members, shall dictate or attempt to dictate the appointment of any person to, or removal from, office or employment by the City Manager or any of the City Manager's subordinates, or in any way interfere in the appointment of officers and employees in the departments of administrative service vested in the City Manager by this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor, the City Council and its members shall deal with the part of the administrative service for which the City Manager is responsible, solely through such City Manager, and neither the Mayor, the City Council, nor any member thereof, shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager in said departments, either publicly or privately.  
Sec. 3.07. - Council misconduct. 
Willful violation of any provision of this Charter by the Mayor and/or any member of the City Council shall constitute official misconduct, and shall authorize the Council, by a vote of two-thirds of the total membership of the Council, to expel such offending member Mayor and/or City Councilmembers from the City Council, if found to be in willful violation after a public hearing, and thereby create a vacancy in the place held by such member.  
Sec. 3.08. - Forfeiture of office. 
The Mayor and any member of the City Council who ceases to possess the required qualifications for office; or who is convicted, while in office, of a felony or misdemeanor involving a crime of moral turpitude shall forfeit his or her office, which forfeiture shall be declared and enforced by a vote of a majority of the total membership of the Council. The Mayor and any member of the City Council who fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular, special and/or emergency called meetings of the City Council shall forfeit his or her office unless excused by unanimous vote of the City Council, the vote being taken at the beginning of the fourth (4th) meeting after providing the absent Councilmember an opportunity to present his or her excuse or extenuating circumstances to the City Council. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2000, § 1(prop. 3))  
Sec. 3.09. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies in the City Council and the position of Mayor, where the same do not exceed two at any one time, shall be filled by majority vote of the remaining Councilmembers and shall serve only until the next general City Council election. A vacancy filled as in the case of an original election shall be only for the unexpired period of the term of the Mayor and/or Councilmember whose office is to be filled. Where more than two vacancies shall develop at any one time, then a special election shall be called to elect their successors to fill their unexpired terms on the first authorized uniform election date as provided by state law occurring on or after the 30th day after the date the election is ordered; provided, that if such vacancies shall occur within 180 days before a general City Council election, then no special election to fill such vacancies shall be called, but in that event the remaining members of the Council shall, by a majority vote, fill such vacancies, and the persons so selected shall serve only until the next general City Council election, when such vacancies shall be filled, as in the case of an original election.  
Sec. 3.10. - Regular meetings. 
On the day the Mayor and Councilmembers take office, and on each and every meeting of the Council thereafter, the City Council shall meet within the corporate City limits at such places and such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution; but not less than one regular meeting shall be posted as authorized by, and in the manner and form prescribed by, state law. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2000, § 1(prop. 4))  
Sec. 3.11. - Special and emergency meetings. 
Special and emergency meetings shall be called by the City Clerk, upon the written consent of the Mayor, the City Manager, or three members of the City Council. Any such notice shall be posted in advance of the meeting and shall state the subject to be considered at the special or emergency meeting as authorized by, and in the manner and form prescribed by, state law. No other subject shall be considered.  
Sec. 3.12. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the City Council and all committees thereof, shall be open to the public, and the rules of the Council shall provide that citizens of the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such meetings, in regard to any matter there considered. Any such meetings shall comply with all applicable laws of the state of Texas.  
Sec. 3.13. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall consist of five members: Mayor and four Councilmembers, or five Councilmembers, except where the number of Councilmembers, due to vacancies, is reduced to less than five, in which event a quorum shall consist of all of the remaining Councilmembers; but a number less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner, and under such penalties, as shall be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 3.14. - Voting and rules of procedure. 
The "yes" or "no" votes shall be taken on the passage of all ordinances or resolutions and entered in the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, and every ordinance or resolution shall require for final passage the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present. No member shall be excused from voting, except on matters involving the consideration of the member's own official conduct, or where such member has a substantial interest (as defined by law) in a business entity or in real property that is involved with a matter under consideration by the City Council, or is related in the first degree of consanguinity or affinity to a person who has a substantial interest (as defined by law) in a business entity or in real property that is involved with a matter under consideration by the City Council, in which case the interested Mayor and/or Councilmember shall file an affidavit stating the nature and extent of such interest as required by state law.  
Sec. 3.15. - Council rules. 
The City Council shall determine its rules and order of business and keep minutes of its proceedings. It shall have power to compel the attendance of absent members. The City Council, by a vote of not less than four members, may expel a member from a Council meeting for disorderly conduct or the violation of its rules. The Mayor and each member of the City Council shall be personally responsible for becoming familiar with the City's affairs as soon as possible after their election to office in order to be able to carry out their duties and obligations as Mayor or City Councilmember.  
Sec. 3.16. - Council evaluation of City Manager. 
The City Council shall adopt a policy setting out the procedures for evaluating the performance of the City Manager and shall periodically review the performance of the City Manager.  
ARTICLE 4. - NOMINATION AND ELECTION OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCILMEMBERS 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Designated places. 
The places of the seven (7) Councilmembers shall be designated as Place No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7. All seven (7) Councilmembers shall be elected at large, by place, by a vote of the qualified voters of the City.  
Sec. 4.02. - Qualifications. 
The Mayor and each member of the City Council shall, in addition to the other qualifications prescribed by law, be a resident of the City for one year previous to the date of election, be at least 21 years of age on the date of election, must reside in the City during his or her term of office and shall not be in arrears in the payment of any ad valorem taxes or other obligations, such as utility payments, citations or permits, due to the City. The Mayor and each member of the City Council shall have a period of seventy-two (72) hours from time of notification to either satisfy any outstanding payment or to file a protest in accordance with the standard City procedures for protesting said arrearage. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2000, § 1(prop. 5))  
Sec. 4.03. - Election date. 
The City Council General Election shall be held annually in the City on a permissible uniform election date selected by the City Council by ordinance. Councilmembers designated Place No. 1, 2, 3, and 4 shall be elected in even-numbered years, while the Mayor, as well as Councilmembers designated Place No. 5, 6 and 7 shall be elected in odd-numbered years.  
Sec. 4.04. - Filing of candidates. 
Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for Mayor shall file with the City Clerk a sworn application that meets the requirements imposed by state law, and those described above in Section 4.02, and file same on or before the filing deadline imposed by state law. Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for a member of the City Council for a designated Place on the ballot shall file with the City Clerk a sworn application that meets the requirements imposed by law, and those described above in Section 4.02, and file same on or before the filing deadline imposed by State law. 
The City Clerk shall review the qualifications of each applicant and notify same of any deficiencies in qualifications. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2000, § 1(prop. 6))  
Sec. 4.05. - Official ballot. 
The City Clerk shall make up the official ballots by Place numbers from the names of candidates who have filed applications. During odd-numbered years, the official ballot shall also include the position of Mayor, running on an at-large basis, from the names of candidates who have filed applications. The order, in which the names of the candidates for Mayor and/or each Place on the Council shall appear on the ballot, shall be determined by lot, in a drawing held under the supervision of the City Clerk. The election shall be held in conformity with the election laws in the City and the State of Texas, or with those that may be hereafter enacted. The City Clerk shall have the general responsibility for, and supervision of, the preparation of all election supplies, forms, ballots and equipment, and shall be generally charged with the duty of arranging for, and holding of all elections. All members of the City Council shall be elected at large, by place, by a vote of the qualified voters of the City. The Mayor shall be elected at large by a vote of the qualified voters of the City. All qualified voters in the City shall be entitled to vote for candidates for Mayor and Councilmember for each Place number.  
Sec. 4.06. - Election by plurality. 
The candidate for Mayor or Councilmember receiving the largest amount of votes cast as provided in the Charter hereof, for the position of Mayor or Councilmember under the position or Place number under which that person's name appears shall be declared the duly elected Mayor or Councilmember to hold said position.  
Sec. 4.07. - Returns and canvass thereof. 
The returns of an election shall be made in triplicate. The presiding officer of each election precinct shall deliver one copy to the City Clerk, one copy to the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, and shall retain one copy. The City Council shall canvass the returns and declare the results of an election no earlier than the second day, or later than the sixth day, following such election.  
Sec. 4.08. - Tie election and runoff election. 
(a)  In the event of a tie between two or more leading candidates in a vote for the same office at the general election, the Mayor, or in his absence or temporary inability to act, the Mayor Pro Tem of the City shall, according to state law, issue a call for a second election (i.e., runoff election) to be held not earlier than the 20th day, or later than the 30th day, after the date the final canvass of the main election is completed, or as otherwise authorized by State law, unless the tying candidates agree to cast lots to resolve the tie. Any such agreement must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk, who shall supervise the casting of lots. 
(b)  Ballot - The official ballot to be used at the runoff election shall be prepared by the City Clerk. The names of the tying candidates only, shall be printed on the ballot for the run-off election. Write-in votes are not permitted. The order in which the names of the candidates shall appear on the runoff ballot shall be determined by lot 'in a drawing held under the supervision of the Mayor, or in his absence or inability to act, the Mayor Pro Tem, in accordance with law. 
(c)  Withdrawal - A candidate for any election may withdraw from any election provided the withdrawal occurs within the time prescribed by State law. If any candidate shall decide to withdraw, that candidate shall make a written request to the City Clerk, as specified by State law. If a runoff candidate withdraws, the remaining candidate is considered to be elected and the runoff election for that Place shall not be held. If there is more than one remaining candidate, the run-off election shall continue to be held as scheduled. 
(d)  In the event a tie vote makes it impossible to determine the winning candidate or candidates in a run-off election, such tie shall be decided in accordance with state law.  
ARTICLE 5. - RECALL OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCILMEMBERS 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Recall of Mayor and City Councilmembers. 
The Mayor and/or any Councilmember of this City may be recalled and removed from office by the electors qualified to vote.  
Sec. 5.02. - Procedure. 
(a)  A recall petition demanding the recall of the Mayor and/or any Councilmember shall be filed with the City Clerk, provided that such petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds for which the removal is sought. A separate recall petition shall be circulated with respect to each person, whether Mayor and/or Councilmember, whose removal is sought. 
(b)  The recall petition shall be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least fifteen (15) percent of the entire number of persons entitled to vote in the City, as appears on the County Clerk's rolls. 
(c)  Notice shall be given in writing to the City Clerk by five (5) qualified voters on the first day that such recall petition is circulated, and the total signatures of qualified voters required must be secured, and the recall petition filed within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
(d)  The signatures to the recall petition need not all be appended to one (1) recall petition paper and may be duplicated and assembled. For a recall petition signature to be valid, a recall petition paper must contain, in addition to the signature, the signer's printed name, signer's voter registration number, residential address, date of signing, and otherwise comply with any other applicable requirements prescribed by law. 
(e)  All recall petition papers comprising the recall petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one recall petition instrument. Within ten (10) days from the filing of such recall petition instrument, the City Clerk shall verify the signatures, and from the list of qualified voters, ascertain whether or not the recall petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified voters, in accordance with state law. The City Clerk shall attach to the recall petition a certificate showing the result of such examination. 
(f)  If by the City Clerk's certificate the recall petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended by filing a supplementary recall petition instrument upon presentation of additional recall petition papers to the City Clerk, within ten (10) days from the date of said certificate. The City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after such supplementary recall petition instrument is filed, in the event one is filed, make like examination of the amended recall petition, and if the certificate shall show the amended recall petition to still be insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing same, and the City Clerk shall take no further action upon the insufficient amended recall petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a recall petition, or an amended recall petition, shall not prevent the filing of a new petition on the same general grounds. 
(g)  If the recall petition, or amended recall petition, is found to be sufficient, the City Clerk shall without delay submit it, and the certificate declaring the petition to be sufficient, to the City Council. The City Council, in the event that the Mayor and/or any Councilmember elects not to resign, shall order and set an election to be held on the next permissible uniform election date after the submission of the sufficient recall petition. 
(h)  If the Mayor and/or any Councilmember subject to the recall petition resign, no recall election shall be necessary, and the vacancy shall be filled by the City Council as in other cases of vacancies, or as otherwise provided for in this Charter.  
Sec. 5.03. - Appeal. 
Should the City Council fail or refuse to order an election as herein provided for the recall of the Mayor and/or any Councilmember, when all the requirements for such recall election have been complied with by the petitioning citizens in conformity with this article of the Charter, then any one of the District Judges of Frio County, Texas, may, upon proper application being made therefor, order such recall election to enforce the carrying into effect of the provision of this article of the Charter.  
Sec. 5.04. - Ballots in recall election. 
Ballots used in recall elections shall read regarding the Mayor and/or each Councilmember whose removal is sought as follows: "Shall (name of person) BE REMOVED [AS MAYOR]/[AS CITY COUNCILMEMBER] BY RECALL?" Below such question there shall be printed the following as to each member: 
"For the recall of (name of person)." 
"Against the recall of (name of person)."  
Sec. 5.05. - Result of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast are against recall of the Mayor and/or any Councilmember, the Mayor and/or Councilmember(s) shall continue in office for the remainder of the Mayor's and/or Councilmembers term, but subject to recall as before. If a majority of such votes are for the recall of the Mayor and/or any Councilmember(s), the Mayor and/or Councilmember(s) shall be deemed removed from office and a successor shall be appointed.  
Sec. 5.06. - Limitations on recall petitions. 
No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor and/or any Councilmember within three months after he or she takes office nor, in respect to the Mayor and/or any Councilmember subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six months after such recall election.  
ARTICLE 6. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Appointment. 
The City Council, by majority vote, shall appoint a City Manager, who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the City. The City Manager may be appointed without a fixed term for service, or the City Council may choose to enter into a contract with the City Manager for a period not to exceed two (2) years. Whether appointed or engaged by contract, the City Manager shall be removable at the will and discretion of the Council by a majority vote of the entire Council. The City Manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed and periodically amended by the City Council.  
Sec. 6.02. - Qualifications. 
The City Manager shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of executive and administrative training, experience and ability, and, without regard to political affiliations or consideration. The City Manager need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City or the State of Texas, but during the tenure of office shall reside within the municipal corporate limits of the City. No member of the City Council shall, during the time for which elect and one year thereafter, be eligible to serve as City Manager.  
Sec. 6.03. - Absence, disability or suspension. 
In case of the absence, disability, or suspension of the City Manager, the City Council may designate some other qualified administrative official of the City to perform the duties of the office during such absence, disability, or suspension, for a period not to exceed three months.  
Sec. 6.04. - Removal. 
The City Manager serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed at the discretion of the City Council by a majority vote of its entire membership.  
Sec. 6.05. - Powers and duties. 
The exclusive powers and duties of the City Manager shall be as follows: 
(a)  To make certain that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To appoint, promote and remove all directors of City departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the City except as otherwise provided in this Charter; all appointments, promotions and removals to be based upon merit, performance and qualifications, or lack thereof, alone. All appointments are to be subject to other applicable provisions of this Charter and to the rules concerning prohibition of nepotism set out in TEX. LOC. GOV'T CODE ANN. Chapter 171 [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq.] and TEX. GOV'T CODE ANN. Chapter 573 [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 573.001 et seq.], and as they may be from time to time amended. 
(c)  The City Manager shall appoint a City Clerk who shall keep the records of the Council and of the City, and who shall perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter, a City ordinance or the City Manager. 
(d)  To exercise administrative supervision and control over all departments and subdivisions thereof created by the Charter, or that may hereafter be created by the Council. 
(e)  To assure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise contract are faithfully upheld and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the City Attorney, whose duty it shall be to pursue proper remedies as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
(f)  To attend all meetings of the City Council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. The City Manager shall be entitled to notice of all regular, special and emergency meetings. 
(g)  To recommend to the City Council and Mayor for adoption such measures as the City Manager may deem necessary or expedient. 
(h)  To keep the City Council and Mayor at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City. 
(i)  To prepare, or cause to be prepared by other professionals, and submit to the City Council and Mayor the annual budget in the form and by the procedure prescribed by law, and to act as the chief budget officer. 
(j)  To make certain that the City operates within its annual budget. 
(k)  To require any municipal officer or board to furnish information necessary to prepare the budget. 
(l)  To execute deeds and to make and execute all contracts or other legal documents on behalf of the City when authorized by ordinance, resolution, or motion of the City Council. 
(m)  To file a proposed budget with the City Clerk before the 30th day before to the date Council makes its tax levy for the fiscal year. 
(n)  Recommend to the City Council and Mayor the contractual engagement or termination of architectural, engineering, medical, legal and other consultants needed to carry out the powers, duties, and functions of the City and/or protect the City. 
(o)  To provide the City Council and Mayor with all information deemed necessary (and permitted by state law to be disseminated) to allow the Mayor and the members of the City Council to carry out their duties and obligations as Mayor and City Councilmembers. 
(p)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, or any State law. Failure by the City Manager to perform all duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, or by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, or any state law, may be considered by the City Council as grounds for removal as provided herein.  
Sec. 6.06. - Responsible to the Council. 
The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper execution and administration of all City affairs and shall to that end appoint, employ and remove all directors of departments and other employees not otherwise provided for in this Charter, or by ordinance. Appointments by the City Manager shall be made on the basis of the appointee's executive and administrative experience, ability, training, qualifications and efficiency to perform the work, which the appointee is to administer. All directors of departments shall be responsible to the City Manager and may be removed by the City Manager at and time.  
Sec. 6.07. - Councilmembers not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
Neither the Mayor, the City Council, nor any of its committees or members, shall dictate or attempt to dictate the appointment of any person to, or removal from, office or employment by the City Manager, or any of the City Manager's subordinates, or in any way interfere in the appointment of officers and employees in the departments of administrative service vested in the City Manager by this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor, the City Council and its members shall deal with the area of administrative service for which the City Manager is responsible solely through such City Manager, and neither the Mayor, the City Council, nor any member thereof, shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager in said departments, either publicly or privately. Any violations of the foregoing provisions by the Mayor and/or any member of the City Council shall constitute official misconduct, and shall authorize the Council by a vote of two-thirds of its total membership to expel such offending Mayor and/or any City Councilmember from the City Council, if found in violation hereof after a public hearing, and declare the office vacant and appoint a successor.  
Sec. 6.08. - Bond of City Manager. 
The City Council shall require the City Manager, before entering upon the duties of the office, to obtain a bond with a solvent surety company licensed to conduct business in the State of Texas, and approved by the City Council, as surety thereon; said bond to be in such reasonable amount as the Council may demand, payable to the City, and conditioned upon the faithful and lawful performance of the City Manager's duties of office; the annual premium of such bond to be paid by the City.  
Sec. 6.09. - Investigations. 
The City Council, the City Manager or any person or committee authorized by either or both of them shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, agency, or office of the City; to make investigations as to City affairs, and for that purpose compel the appearance of persons, testimony of persons under oath, and production of books, papers and other evidence material to said inquiry. The City Council shall establish any ordinance penalties for contempt in refusing to obey such mandates and subpoenas or for failure to produce books, papers and other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 6.10. - Input from citizens, City employees and City officials. 
The City Manager shall implement a system of procedures for receiving, documenting and reviewing complaints, suggestions, comments or other types of input from citizens, City employees and City officials or any other person about City services, projects or any other matter involving the City. The City Manager shall develop a form(s) to document all such input. These forms shall be available at all City offices or buildings.  
ARTICLE 7. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Creation and control. 
The following administrative departments are hereby created and placed under the control of the City Manager: (a) Finance, (b) Police, (c) Public Works, (d) Parks and Recreation, (e) Planning & Community Development, (f) Library and (g) City Records. In addition to the administrative departments created hereby, the Council shall have power by ordinance to establish, combine, discontinue or redesignate other administrative departments or offices. The City Council may combine any two or more of the departments and/or administrative offices created by this Charter. No functions or duties assigned by this Charter to a particular department or office shall be abolished except as otherwise provided by this Charter, but such functions or duties may be assigned by ordinance to other administrative departments or offices of the City. No administrative department or office shall be established, combined, discontinued or redesignate until the recommendation of the City Manager shall have first been heard by the City Council. Such departments and offices as may hereinafter be created shall be also placed under the control of the City Manager.  
Sec. 7.02. - Administrative code. 
The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the Council for its approval and adoption an Administrative Code, and such amendments, from time to time, as are necessary to maintain the Administrative Code current with regard to the organization, functional operation and such other definitions and delineation's of the organization of the City as are required. The Administrative Code shall include and provide for departments and offices as required by this Charter and other departments and offices created by ordinance. The Administrative Code shall provide for a Director, or other designated officer for each department, and the duties and responsibilities of such Director or officer, and such. Other matters as shall be necessary for the proper control and management of each department or office of the City. Each Director or officer so designated and not appointed by the City Council as provided in the Charter, shall be appointed by the City Manager, and shall serve until removed by the City Manager. The Administrative Code shall define the organizational structure and reporting responsibility of each department or office, whether to the City Manager, Deputy or Assistant City Manager, or other Director or officer of the City, as set out in said Administrative Code. The Administrative Code shall also include the development of a personnel management system including, but not limited to, a system for evaluation of City employees, departmental policies, employment policies, salary and wage scale. Notwithstanding the foregoing, each City employee shall be an employee at will of the City.  
Sec. 7.03. - Responsibility of department directors. 
The Directors of departments appointed by the City Manager shall be immediately responsible to the City Manager for the administration of their departments, and their advice in writing may be required by the City Manager on all matters affecting their departments. The Department Directors shall have supervision and control over their respective departments subject to approval by the City Manager, except as otherwise specifically provided by this Charter. They shall prepare departmental budget estimates, which shall be open to public inspection, and they shall make all their reports and recommendations concerning their departments at stated intervals, or when requested, by the City Manager.  
Sec. 7.04. - Department divisions. 
The work of each department shall be distributed among such divisions thereof as may be established by ordinance; provided, however, that no division shall be established unless the City Manager shall have been given an opportunity to have been heard thereon; provided, further, that pending the passage of an ordinance or ordinances distributing the work of the departments under the supervision and control of the City Manager among specific divisions thereof, the City Manager may establish temporary divisions.  
Sec. 7.05. - Finance Department. 
(1)  Director of Finance; Qualifications. The Director of the Finance Department shall be the head of such department and shall have knowledge of and experience in municipal accounting, taxation, bonds, utilities and franchises and shall have had experience in budgeting and financial control. The director shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the Council may require. The City shall pay the annual premium on said surety bond. 
(2)  Finance Department; Powers and Duties. The Finance Department shall have the authority and be required to: 
[a.]  Administer the financial affairs of the City in accordance with ordinances enacted by the Council. 
[b.]  Prepare the budget for the City Manager and assist the Manager in his administration, after authorization by the City Council, as required by this Charter. 
(3)  Maintain accounting control over the finances of the City government, and perform such other duties pertaining to the financial affairs of the City as the City Council may require. 
(4)  Control the procurement, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual services now or hereafter required by City Council. 
(5)  Provide for the assessment of all property subject to taxation by the City. 
(6)  Collect, have custody of, and disburse all funds belonging to the City, subject to the provisions of this Charter and ordinances enacted thereunder; have custody as fiduciary of all funds of the City; keep a record of investments; have custody of all bonds and certificates of City indebtedness, including bonds and certificates unissued or cancelled; and the receipt and delivery of City bonds and certificates of transfer, registration and exchange. The Finance Department shall exercise such additional powers and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 7.06. - Police Department. 
(a)  Chief of police. The Chief of Police shall be the Director of the Police Department and shall have knowledge of, and experience in, operating and managing a law enforcement organization. 
(b)  Authority and duties of policemen. The officers and policemen of the Police Department shall have all the powers and authority given to them as peace officers under the laws of Texas, this Charter, and all other powers and authority that may lawfully be conferred on them by the Council. Such officers and policemen may exercise their powers and authority within the corporate limits of the City, and within the limits of any property owned, leased or otherwise subject to the control of the City, which lies outside the corporate limits of the City and within any other area allowed by state law. It shall be the duty of each officer and policeman to use his best skills and judgment to attempt to prevent the commission of offenses against the laws of the State and the ordinances and regulations of the City; to observe and enforce all such laws, ordinances and regulations; to detect and arrest offenders against the same; to preserve the good order of the City and to attempt to secure the inhabitants thereof from violence, and the property therein from damage, theft, or loss. Such officers and policemen shall execute any criminal warrant or warrants of arrest, or any writ subpoenas, or other process that may be placed in their hands by the duly constituted authorities of the City. No officer or policeman shall receive any fee or other compensation for any service rendered in the performance of his duty other than the salary and benefits paid him by the City. The Police Department shall exercise such additional powers and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 7.07. - Public Works Department. 
(a)  Director of Public Works; head of department. The Director of Public Works shall be the head of the department and shall have knowledge of, and experience in, operating and managing a public works operation. 
(b)  Public Works Department; powers and duties. The Department of Public Works shall have charge of the planning, opening, construction, maintenance and repair of all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, rivers, watercourses, creeks, ditches and public ways; of the operation of the water production, treatment, storage, transmission and distribution system; of the operation of the wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal system; of the operation of the gas production, storage transmission and distribution system; of the operation of the stormwater collection, transmission and disposal system; and operations of other City owned utility systems; of the construction, maintenance, repair and operation of all public buildings and properties belonging to, or used by, the City, of building, electrical and plumbing inspection; and the issuance of building, electrical, and plumbing permits and other building or construction type permits; of the collection and disposal of solid waste by the City or others. The Public Works Department shall exercise such additional powers and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 7.08. - Parks and Recreation Department. 
(a)  Director of Parks and Recreation; head of the department. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be the head of the department and shall have knowledge of, and experience in, operating and managing a parks and recreation operation. 
(b)  Parks and Recreation Department; powers and duties. The Parks and Recreation Department shall have charge of the management and maintenance of public parks, playgrounds, and all other public recreational facilities, including civic centers, other community centers and programs. The management, operation and maintenance of parks and playgrounds, and of all other public recreational facilities and programs, shall be deemed to be done in the governmental capacity of the City. The Parks and Recreation Department shall exercise such additional powers and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 7.09. - Planning and Community Development Department. 
(a)  Director of Planning and Community Development. The Director of Planning and Community Development shall be the head of such department and shall have knowledge of, and experience in, municipal planning, platting, zoning, annexation, land use, transportation, public improvements and facilities planning matters. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The Department of Planning and Community Development shall carry out the platting, zoning, annexation, general planning, land use, transportation, public improvements and facilities planning functions of the City, as well as assist the City Planning and Zoning commission with its obligations, goals and objectives.  
Sec. 7.10. - Library Department. 
(a)  Director of the Library. The Director of the Library shall be the head of such department and shall have knowledge of and experience in, the operation and management of a public library. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The Library Department shall operate and maintain the library(ies) of the City.  
Sec. 7.11. - City Records Department. 
(a)  City Clerk. The City Clerk shall be the director and head of such department and shall have knowledge of, and experience in, the maintenance of City records. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The City Records Department shall keep and maintain all documents and records of the City, including the records of the City Council and other City boards, commissions and committees. All legal civil process to the City shall be served upon the City Clerk. All notice of claims for injury or death to persons and damage to property for which the claimant alleges City responsibility must be timely filed with the City Clerk in accordance with state law and any ordinances adopted by the City Council governing notices of claims.  
Sec. 7.12. - Employee reimbursements. 
All justifiable, necessary, accountable expenses incurred by employees of the City in the performance of their duties shall be paid by the City.  
ARTICLE 8. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 8.01. - City Attorney. 
The City Council shall appoint, by majority vote, a competent attorney licensed by the State Bar of Texas, and who has been practicing law in the State of Texas for a minimum of two (2) years, who shall be the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall receive compensation for professional legal services rendered as may be fixed, approved, and periodically amended by the City Council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Attorney may be appointed without a definite term of service or, the City Council may choose to enter into a written contract with the City Attorney for a period not to exceed two (2) years. The City Attorney shall be removable at the will and discretion of the Council by a vote of the majority of the entire Council. The City Attorney, and/or other duly licensed practicing attorneys in the United States selected by the City Council as Special Counsel, shall represent the City in all legal matters and litigation, and shall serve as legal advisors of, and attorneys and counselors for, the City. Any and all legal actions and appearances shall be brought or entered in the name of the City Attorney and acting by or through the City Attorney.  
ARTICLE 9. - MUNICIPAL COURT; MUNICIPAL JUDGE; MUNICIPAL PROSECUTOR 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Municipal Court. 
There shall be established and maintained by the City Council, a court designated as a Municipal Court, with all powers and duties as are now, or hereafter may be, prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas relating to Municipal Courts and state courts in general.  
Sec. 9.02. - Municipal Court Judge. 
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council for a term of two years, subject to removal by the City Council at any time by a vote of two-thirds of the total membership of the City Council. The term of the Municipal Court Judge shall run concurrent with the term of the Mayor. While in office, the Judge of the Municipal court shall be a bona fide resident of the City. In the event the Judge of the Municipal Court is temporarily unable to act, the City Council may appoint, by a majority vote a Temporary Judge to serve in the Municipal Court Judge's place during such temporary period not to exceed two years. The City Council may remove the Municipal Court Judge for the reasons and in the manner provided by state law. The City Council shall appoint, by majority vote, a person to fill a vacancy in the office of Municipal Court Judge only for the remainder of any unexpired term of office.  
Sec. 9.03. - Municipal Court Prosecutor. 
The Prosecutor of the Municipal Court shall be the City Attorney or his deputy. Any and all legal actions and appearances shall be brought or entered in the name of the City Attorney and acting by or through the City Attorney.  
Sec. 9.04. - Compensation. 
The Judge, Temporary Judge and Prosecutor shall receive compensation as is approved by the City Council.  
Sec. 9.05. - Municipal Court Clerks. 
The City Manager shall appoint the Clerk of the municipal court and the Deputy Clerks, subject to removal by the City Manager at any time. Said Clerks shall each qualify as a Notary Public and shall have the power and duties to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the Court thereto, issue process, and generally do and perform any and all duties for the municipal court that a county clerk performs for a county court.  
Sec. 9.06. - General laws; act cumulative of. 
The foregoing sections are hereby declared to be cumulative of any laws that may now or thereafter be passed by the Legislature regulating or increasing the jurisdiction of Municipal Courts in cities of the grade and size of the City, and state courts in general.  
ARTICLE 10. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Creation. 
The following Boards and commissions are hereby created: 
(a)  Planning and Zoning Commission 
(b)  Parks and Recreation Commission 
(c)  Board of Adjustment 
(d)  Library Board 
(e)  Ethics Commission. 
The City Council shall have power by ordinance to create, establish and abolish such other Boards and Commissions as the City Council shall determine are necessary and desirable. Such ordinance shall, as a minimum, include: 
(a)  Title of the Board or Commission. 
(b)  Purpose and duties. 
(c)  Number of persons comprising 'membership. 
(d)  Terms of office. 
(e)  Appointment of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. 
(f)  The City Council by ordinance may create boards, commissions or committees to assist in only an advisory capacity, the directors or chiefs of municipal departments in the performance of their duties. The members of any such boards, commissions or committees shall be appointed by the City Council on recommendation of the City Manager, or members of the City Council, and shall receive no compensation from the City.  
Sec. 10.02. - Appointments. 
The City Council shall, by majority vote, appoint members to all Boards and Commissions, selecting from persons who are qualified voters of the City, who have been residents of the State of Texas for at least one (1) year, and residents of the City for at least six (6) months unless otherwise required by law. Appoint to all Boards or commissions shall be for a term of two years, subject to removal by City Council as set forth in this Charter. No person shall be appointed to serve on a board or commission for more than three (3) consecutive two (2) year terms (i.e., 6-year period of service). All Board and Commission members shall serve without compensation. All justifiable, necessary, accountable expenses incurred by members of Boards or Commissions in the performance of their official duties shall be paid by the City. There is no limitation on the number of 6-year periods of service a person may serve as long as there is a 2-year waiting period in between each possible 6-year period of service.  
Sec. 10.03. - Removal and vacancies. 
The City Council may, upon the affirmative vote of the majority of the full membership of the City Council, remove members of any Board or Commission for cause only after proper notice and opportunity for public hearing has been given to the member. If an individual appointed to a Board or Commission shall cease to possess any qualification for appointment, or shall be convicted while on the Board or Commission of a felony or misdemeanor involving a crime of moral turpitude, such individual shall forfeit his or her appointment on the Board or Commission without the need to have the forfeiture declared by a vote of the City Council and such appointment shall be deemed vacant. Vacancies in the appointive Board or Commission, whether by resignation, death, removal, or other cause, shall be filled by City Council appointment only for the unexpired term of that vacant position.  
Sec. 10.04. - Meetings. 
All meetings shall be open to the public unless otherwise provided by law. Written minutes shall be kept and attendance, subject matter and voting shall be recorded. Any notice of a public meeting shall comply with all applicable state laws.  
Sec. 10.05. - Quorum. 
A majority of Board or Commission members shall constitute a quorum.  
Sec. 10.06. - Voting. 
No member of a Board or Commission shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the consideration of the member's own official conduct, or where such member has a substantial interest (as defined by law) in a business entity or in real property that is involved with a matter under consideration by a Board or Commission, or is related in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity to a person who has a substantial interest (as defined by law) in a business entity or in real property that is involved with a matter under consideration by a Board or Commission, in which case the interested Board or Commission member shall file an affidavit disclosing and stating the nature and extent of such interest as required by state law.  
Sec. 10.07. - City Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)  Purpose. The Planning and Zoning commission shall exercise all powers granted by the City Council and shall make recommendations to the City Council, and exercise the powers granted thereto on all matters affecting the physical development of the City, including the preparation, or amendment of a comprehensive plan or plans and their implementation; on all matters affecting land use, zoning, zoning regulations and modifications and changes thereto; on all matters regarding public improvements to be constructed, including civic improvements; on all matters regarding city planning, opening, widening and changing of streets; on all matters regarding location of public utilities, including extensions thereof; on all matters regarding controlling and regulating traffic upon the public streets and ways of the City; and such other matters as the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may deem beneficial to the City. 
(b)  Powers. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have any and all powers granted to planning and zoning commissions by the statutes of the State of Texas, this Charter, and such other duties and further powers as are delegated to it by Ordinance of the City Council of the City. 
(1)  Planning. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to review and pass upon all proposed plans which may ultimately be considered by the City Council in final form relating to public improvements, as well as land use and transportation matters. It shall be the duty of the city staff and City Council, as far as practicable, to submit such preliminary plans governing public improvements, as well as land use and transportation matters, involved under the terms of this Charter, to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and to obtain its advice with reference thereto. The City Council may thereafter adopt the means and methods which may be deemed most advisable by the City Council; provided, however, that any public improvement undertaken hereunder, or otherwise, or any decision made regarding land use or transportation matters, by the City Council shall never be deemed invalid because the Planning and Zoning Commission has not been first consulted, or because the City Council has failed to submit its preliminary plans thereof, for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall further have the power to review and render its recommendation to the City Council on the submission for approval of any subdivision plats within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, in accordance with the provisions of the City's subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Zoning. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, the City Council of Pearsall shall have the power to divide the City into zones or districts for the purpose of regulating and controlling (a) the size, number of stories, height and bulk of buildings and other structures, (b) the percentage of a lot that may be occupied; (c) the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; (d) population density; and (e) location and use of buildings, other structures and land for business, industrial, residential or other purposes within such zones or districts and may exercise any other powers necessary to fully effectuate and accomplish the purpose of the powers herein conferred, subject to the notice and hearing requirements of state law. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend boundaries for the original Zoning districts and appropriate zoning regulations for each district, in accordance with a comprehensive plan adopted by the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall further review and render its recommendation to the City Council on any changes to the districts, their boundaries or the regulations. 
(c)  Membership and terms. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. The members may be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 10.03. 
(d)  Procedures. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall itself appoint and designate from its members a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson to preside over commission actions. The Commissioners shall meet at least once monthly, or more as required. Guidelines, rules, regulations and other duties and powers shall be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 10.08. - Parks and Recreation Commission. 
(a)  Purpose. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to Parks and Recreation, and shall exercise such other duties and further powers as are delegated to it by ordinance. 
(b)  Membership and terms. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. The members may be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 10.03. 
(c)  Procedures. The Parks and Recreation Commission itself shall appoint and designate from its members a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson to preside over Commission actions. Meetings shall be held monthly or as required. Guidelines, regulations and responsibilities shall be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 10.09. - Board of Adjustment. 
(a)  Purpose. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance that are consistent with its general purpose and intent, and in accordance with any applicable rules contained in the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Creation of the Board of Adjustment. There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment consisting of five (5) members and four (4) alternate members to be appointed by the City Council. This Board shall have all powers and obligations vested in it by state law. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is not an advisory board. 
(1)  Terms, removal of members. All regular and alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and shall be removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after public hearing. The members may be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 10.03. 
(2)  Vacancies. Vacancies in the regular or alternate membership of the Board of Adjustment shall be filled by the City Council only for the unexpired term. 
(3)  Minimum of four members at hearings. The alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members, when requested by the Mayor or, in his absence or temporary inability to act, by the Mayor Pro Tem or by the City Manager, so that all cases heard by the Board of Adjustment will always be heard by a minimum of four (4) members. 
(4)  Minutes; records. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings indicating the vote of each member on each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official action, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment and shall be a public record. 
(5)  Meetings. The Board of Adjustment may have monthly meetings, or at the call of the chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All Board of Adjustment meetings shall be open to the public. 
(6)  Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with any ordinance adopted under this Charter and state law. 
(c)  Powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this section, or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance when the ordinance requires the Board of Adjustment to do so; 
(3)  To authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance, if the variance is not contrary to the public interest, and due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, and substantial justice done. 
(d)  Appeals. The decision of the Board of Adjustment may be appealed as provided by state law.  
Sec. 10.10. - Library Board. 
(a)  Purpose and powers. The Library Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to the Library, and shall exercise such other duties and further powers as are delegated to it by ordinance. 
(b)  Membership and terms. The Board shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. The members may be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 10.03. 
(c)  Procedures. The Board itself shall appoint and designate from its members a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson to preside over the Board actions. Meetings shall be held monthly or as required. Guidelines, regulations and responsibilities shall be prescribed by ordinance.  
Sec. 10.11. - Ethics Commission. 
(a)  Purpose. The Ethics Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to the ethical conduct of the City's officials and staff, and shall exercise such other duties and further powers as are delegated to it by ordinance. At minimum, the role of the Ethics Commission is to investigate, and make recommendations concerning any allegations or complaints concerning violation of any ethics law enacted by the City Council. 
(b)  Membership and terms. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed for two (2) year terms. The members may be removed in accordance with the provisions of section 10.03. 
(c)  Procedures. The Commission itself shall appoint and designate from its members a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson to preside over the Commission actions. Meetings shall be held monthly or as required. Guidelines, regulations and responsibilities shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  City Council action. The City Council shall, after adoption of this Charter, adopt an ordinance adopting standards of conduct for City officers and employees, stating the City's policy on ethical conduct, setting forth the Commission's duties and responsibilities, adopting a Code of Ethics, adopting any other requirements deemed necessary and adopting sanctions for violation of the ordinance.  
ARTICLE 11. - BUDGET AND FINANCIAL PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on October 1 of each calendar year and will end on September 30 of the following calendar year. The fiscal year will also be established as the accounting and budget year. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2000, § 1(prop. 10))  
Sec. 11.02. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
The City Manager, on or before May 15 of each year, shall prepare and submit the budget, covering the next fiscal year, to the City Council. In preparing this budget, each employee, officer, board and department shall assist the City Manager by furnishing all necessary information. 
The City Manager's budget message shall include: 
(a)  an outline of the proposed financial policies for the next fiscal year with explanations of any changes from previous years in expenditures, any major changes of policy, and a complete statement regarding the financial condition of the City; 
(b)  the outstanding obligations of the City; 
(c)  the cash on hand to the credit of each fund; 
(d)  the funds received from all sources during the preceding year; 
(e)  the funds available from all sources during the ensuing year; 
(f)  the estimated revenue available from taxes and other sources, including the present tax structure rates and property evaluations for the ensuing year to fund the proposed budget; 
(g)  a carefully itemized list of proposed expenditures by fund, service type, object of expenditure, and project for which expenditures are set up, and the estimated amount of money allocated in the budget for each project for the ensuing budget year, as compared to actual expenditures of the last ended fiscal year, and an estimate of final expenditures for the current fiscal year; 
(h)  a statement proposing any capital expenditures deemed necessary to undertake during the next budget year and recommended provision for financing; 
(i)  a projection of revenues and expenditures, together with a list of capital projects, which should be considered within the next five (5) succeeding years; and 
(j)  the estimated tax rate required to cover the proposed budget. 
Editor's note— The May 15 date appearing in section 11.02 has become obsolete, because it does not conform to the fiscal year calendar (Oct. 1 - Sept. 30) as changed by ordinance of the City Council adopted September 13, 2000. The City Manager will prepare and submit next year's budget within 45 days of the end of the current fiscal year.  
Sec. 11.03. - Budget as a public record. 
The budget, and all supporting schedules, shall be filed with the City Clerk when submitted to the City Council and shall be available for public inspection. The budget shall be filed with the City Clerk before the City Council makes its tax levy for the fiscal year in accordance with state law.  
Sec. 11.04. - Public hearing. 
At the Council meeting when the budget is submitted, the City Council shall name the date, time and location of a public hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date before the date the City Council makes its tax levy in accordance with state law. Public notice of the time, date and location of such hearing shall be published before the hearing in accordance with state law. At this hearing, citizens of the City may attend and participate by expressing their opinion concerning items of expenditure and revenue.  
Sec. 11.05. - Proceeding on adoption. 
After the public hearing, the Council shall analyze the budget, making any additions or deletions which they consider warranted by the law or by the best interest of the city's taxpayers, and shall, by ordinance, then adopt the budget by a majority vote of all members of the Council.  
Sec. 11.06. - Budget appropriation: tax levy. 
On final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. Final adoption of the budget by the City Council shall constitute the official appropriations for the current year, and shall constitute the basis of the official levy of the property tax as the amount of tax to be assessed and collected for the corresponding tax year, in accordance with the budget. Estimated expenditures for operating purposes will in no case exceed proposed revenues, plus reserved fund balance, and other financing sources. Unused appropriations may be transferred to any item required for the same general purpose.  
Sec. 11.07. - Transfer of appropriations. 
The City Council may at any time transfer an unencumbered balance of an appropriation of general funds made for the use of one department, division, or purpose. The City Council may authorize the transfer of any non-general fund monies to the general fund if allowed by state law.  
Sec. 11.08. - Unallocated reserve fund. 
When recommended by the City Manager and at the discretion of the City Council, the budget may contain a sum set aside as an unreserved fund balance to meet unexpected and unforeseen contingencies in current operating costs of any service or project.  
Sec. 11.09. - Amending the budget. 
In case of grave public necessity, emergency expenditures to meet unusual and unforeseen conditions, which could not, through the use of reasonable diligent thought and attention, have been included in the original budget, may be authorized by the City Council as amendments to the original budget. These amendments shall be by ordinance, and shall become an attachment to the original budget. If the City Council amends the original budget to meet an emergency, the governing body shall file a copy of its ordinance amending the budget with the City Clerk and the City Clerk shall attach the copy to the original budget.  
Sec. 11.10. - Certification: copies made available. 
After adoption of the budget or a budget amendment, the City Manager shall provide for the filing of a true copy of the approved budget or budget amendment with the City Clerk, the County Clerk of Frio County and the Pearsall Public Library. The final budget shall be printed, photocopied or otherwise reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations.  
Sec. 11.11. - Independent audit. 
The City Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all City records, accounts, and other evidences of the financial transactions of the City, and shall have an annual financial statement prepared based on the audit. The City Council may provide for more frequent audits, as it deems necessary. Such financial audits and statements shall be conducted and prepared by a certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City or of any of its officers. The City Council shall require competitive professional service proposals for selection in which cost, experience, years of practice, and other factors deemed necessary by the City Council shall be considered by the Council in selecting such accountant or firm. All competitive proposals shall comply with this Charter and any other state law. Such audit contract shall be awarded to the accountant or firm whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the City, considering the relative importance of fees, experience and other factors as determined by the City Council. The term of the contract may be annual or for a period not to exceed three (3) years. The annual financial statement including the auditor's opinion on the statement shall be submitted and reported to the City Council. A copy of the annual audit after acceptance by the City Council shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than 120 days after the last day of the City's fiscal year and shall be available for public inspection.  
Sec. 11.12. - Defect shall not invalidate tax levy. 
Errors or defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirements shall not nullify the tax levy or the tax rate.  
ARTICLE 12. - FRANCHISES 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Franchise power of the City. 
The ownership, right of control and use of the streets, highways, alleys, parks, public places and all other real property of the City is hereby declared to be inalienable by the City, except by ordinances passed by vote of the majority of the City Council of the City, as hereinafter provided. The City shall have the power by ordinance, subject to the terms and provisions hereof, to confer upon any person, firm or corporation the franchise, privilege or right to use the property of the City, as defined herein, for the purpose of furnishing to the public any general public service and utility service, including, but not limited to water, wastewater, refrigerated water, steam, natural gas, electricity, cable television, telegraph, telephone, street railway, interurban railway, steam railway, solid waste collection and the carrying of passengers for hire (whether over designated routes or not, within the City or its suburbs), over the streets, highways and property of the City, or for any other purpose, whereby a general service is to be furnished to the public for compensation or hire, to be paid to the franchise holder, whereby a right to, in part, appropriate or use the public streets, highways or other property of the City is necessary or proper. The provisions hereof with reference to public utilities shall not apply to any of those owned, or to be owned, by the City. No franchise, right or privilege shall ever be valid, unless expressly granted and exercised in compliance with the terms hereof, and as governed by the ordinances granting the same. No act or omission of the City, its City Council, officers or agents shall be construed to confer or extend by estoppel or indirection, any franchise, right or privilege not expressly granted by a lawfully passed and approved ordinance.  
Sec. 12.02. - Limitations on franchise power. 
No exclusive franchise, right or privilege shall ever be granted. A franchise, right or privilege shall commence at any time after the effective date of the ordinance granting same but shall lapse upon the expiration of six (6) months after the effective date of the ordinance granting the same if such franchise, right or privilege is not exercised prior to the expiration of the six (6) months. No franchise, right or privilege shall be directly or indirectly extended beyond the term originally fixed by the ordinance granting same unless by specific ordinance granting an extension for the purpose of renegotiating such franchise. An application for the renewal of a franchise, right or privilege or the granting of a new one, may be considered and acted upon prior to the expiration date of the current franchiser right or privilege so that the new franchise, right or privilege may take effect upon the expiration date of the other; provided, however, that the procedure prescribed herein for the original granting of such franchise, right or privilege is followed in all particulars. No ordinance granting a franchise, right or privilege shall pass except by a vote of the majority of the City Council and such ordinance shall take effect upon its adoption; provided, however, the ordinance shall be subject to referendum as provided by this Charter, or as hereafter may be provided, by the general laws of Texas.  
Sec. 12.03. - Ordinances granting franchise. 
Ordinances granting a franchise, right or privilege shall be subject to the terms hereof, and shall contain such terms and conditions, as the City Council shall see fit to impose. All franchises, rights or privileges shall be exercised in accordance with the terms of the ordinance granting the same as may be amended, and of this Charter, which may be amended. If such franchises, rights or privileges shall not be exercised in substantial accordance with the terms hereof, and of the ordinance granting the same, then after notice and reasonable hearing to the holders thereof, such franchise, right or privilege may be cancelled or annulled. The City Council shall, by ordinance, adopt reasonable rules and regulations for such notice and hearing.  
Sec. 12.04. - Conditions of franchises. 
Each franchise, right or privilege granted by the Council shall at minimum provide: 
(1)  For the compensation to be paid to the City for the use and occupancy of the public property, which said compensation may be a fixed fee, or may be measured by gross receipts, or some other method mutually agreeable to the parties. Such compensation may be changed from time to time by mutual consent and ordinance amendment. 
(2)  For the length of time that such franchise, right or privilege shall continue in effect; provided, however, that no franchise, right or privilege shall be granted for a period longer than (20) twenty years, except those franchises designated indeterminate franchises granted by the City pursuant to section 12.05 of this Charter. 
(3)  That no franchise, right or privilege shall be transferred or assigned without the written consent of the City Council, which consent shall be evidenced by an ordinance. Such consent when given shall not operate as the granting of a franchise, right or privilege or as a new franchise, right or privilege. 
(4)  That the procedure to be followed by the City in ordering the implementation of extensions, enhancements or permanent improvements of the service or considering applications by the holder of the franchise, right or privilege for permission to make extensions, enlargement or enhancements, be prescribed. 
(5)  That no rate of return shall exceed a fair return upon the fair value of the non-public property used in rendering the public service. 
(6)  Each franchise, right or privilege shall provide for a method of accounting applicable to the particular business conducted by the holder of the franchise, right or privilege. 
(7)  Shall be made in each franchise, right or privilege for the maintenance of sufficient depreciation reserves so that the integrity of the public and non-public property used and useful in rendering the public service may be maintained. Each franchise, right or privilege shall specify the purposes for which the depreciation reserves may be used. In determining the amount and character of reserves required, it shall be proper to resort to current common practices applicable to the particular utility concerned. 
(8)  Each franchise, right or privilege shall provide for a recapture provision whereby the City shall have the right to cancel the franchise, right or privilege and purchase the nonpublic property of the holder of the franchise, right or privilege at a price to be determined according to the formula or method agreed upon in the franchise, right or privilege when granted. 
(9)  That the holder of the franchise, right or privilege may be required by the City, at the franchise holder's expense, to timely conform and realign its installations in the streets, alleys, and public ways to any changes of grade elevation made by the City without claim back against the City for compensation.  
Sec. 12.05. - Indeterminate franchises. 
In addition to the powers conferred to grant franchises, rights or privileges for a fixed term not to exceed twenty (20) years, the City shall have power to grant indeterminate franchises. The term "indeterminate franchise," as used in this Charter, shall mean and embrace every franchise, right or privilege granted directly or indirectly by the City which shall have no fixed or determinate duration. An indeterminate franchise shall continue in force only until such time as the City shall exercise an option to terminate, to be provided for in the ordinance granting any such franchise. Such ordinance shall give the City in express terms the right to purchase the non-public property of the franchise holder or cause a purchaser to buy such non-public property. Such ordinance shall also fix the time or times when such right may be exercised or terminated.  
Sec. 12.06. - Compensation for franchises. 
All persons, firms, or corporations to whom a franchise, right or privilege may hereafter be granted, or their heirs, legal representatives, successors or assigns shall compensate the City for the use and occupancy of public property, which said compensation may be a fixed fee, or measured by the gross receipts of the business pursued by the holder of the franchise, right or privilege earned for service rendered inside the municipal corporation boundaries of the City or some other method mutually agreeable to the parties. Such compensation may be changed from time to time by mutual consent and ordinance amendment. 
All sums required to be paid by the holder of any franchise, right or privilege under the terms of this section shall be due and payable quarterly as shall be set out in the agreement or ordinance, and shall be exclusive of, and in addition to, all ad valorem taxes upon the value of the franchise, right or privilege and other property of the holder thereof and all lawful occupation taxes imposed upon the occupation or calling of the holder thereof; and the amount of such compensation may be changed from time to time as in the opinion of the City Council may be just and reasonable, to the extent and upon such terms and conditions as may be fixed in the ordinance granting such franchise.  
Sec. 12.07. - Annual reports and statements required of franchise holders. 
Every person, firm or corporation holding a franchise, right or privilege through, under or from the City shall be required to prepare and file annually with the City Council, within sixty (60) days after the close of a fiscal year, a true, full and correct statement based upon the financial condition of the franchisee at the close of such fiscal year and the transactions for the current year which shall exhibit: 
(a)  The amount of all stock issues of such corporation and the divisions thereof. 
(b)  An itemized statement of indebtedness, its nature and division, whether floating or bonded, and the interest payable on each item thereof. 
(c)  An itemized statement of income and the amounts derived from each source of income. 
(d)  An itemized and detailed statement of expenditures. 
(e)  An itemized statement of all non-public property of every kind owned and used in rendering the public service, wherever situated and the location and fair market value of each item thereof. 
The annual statement shall be verified by oath of the person, a member of the firm or a duly authorized officer or agent of the corporation, and upon its filing shall become a part of the permanent records of the City. 
If any person, firm or corporation required to file such report shall fail to do so as herein provided, such failure shall be grounds for forfeiture of the franchise, right or privilege and it shall be the duty of the City Attorney, or his designate, after due notice to the holder of the franchise, right or privilege of such intention, to bring suit within a reasonable time in the Frio County District Court (or other court of appropriate jurisdiction) to forfeit the franchise, right or privilege granted. If a state district court in Frio County (or other court of appropriate jurisdiction) determines that such person, firm or corporation has willfully failed to make such report, such determination shall operate to cause a forfeiture of such franchise, right or privilege and of all rights accruing thereunder.  
Sec. 12.08. - Right to fix rates and prescribe the kind and manner of service. 
The City, acting through its City Council, has the power to determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares or rates of any holder of a franchise, right or other public privilege in Pearsall, and to prescribe the kind of service to be furnished and the manner in which it shall be rendered. The City has the power to alter or change such rules, regulations, and compensation, from time to time by ordinance; provided that in adopting such regulations and in fixing or changing such compensation, or determining the reasonableness thereof, no stock or bonds authorized or issued by any corporation enjoying the franchise shall be considered unless proof that the same have been actually issued by the corporation for money paid and used for the development of the corporate property, labor done or property actually received in accordance with the laws and Constitution of Texas applicable thereto. In order to ascertain all facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is or should be a reasonable charge, fare, rate, rule or regulation, the City Council shall have full power to inspect the books and compel the attendance of witnesses for such purpose.  
Sec. 12.09. - Changes and extensions. 
The City Council shall have the power, by ordinance or resolution, and without reference to the other franchise, right or privilege provisions of this Charter, to grant the right and to require utility companies and all other companies or individuals enjoying a franchise, right or privilege from the City, now or hereafter, to make and furnish necessary changes in or to any portion of the City property subject to the franchise, right or privilege, and to make extensions of service provided by the holder of the franchise, right or privilege, as in the judgment of the City Council may be necessary. The changes to public property or extensions of service are subject to the terms and conditions of the franchise, right or privilege then enjoyed by such holder of the franchise, right or privilege in connection with which the change or extension is to be made, and under such further terms and conditions as the City Council may deem proper. The City Council shall have the power to prevent the making of unnecessary or unprofitable extensions by the franchise holder.  
Sec. 12.10. - Discrimination forbidden. 
Every Public Service Corporation shall furnish and provide equal and uniform service alike to all persons, firms and corporations in the City. It shall be unlawful, and a sufficient ground for the forfeiture of any franchise, right or privilege, for any such person, firm or corporation to grant free-service or to furnish service for a lower price or rate, (service delivery conditions or quantity of service to be considered), to any person, firm or corporation, than to any other person, firm or corporation or, to otherwise discriminate on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender, religion or physically challenged status in the matter of rates or service. Any such public service corporation may, however, from time to time, with the consent and approval of the City Council, adopt schedules governing rates, (service delivery conditions or quantities of service considered), and allow applicants to choose between alternative schedules. No such schedule shall be operative, nor shall service be furnished in accordance therewith, until timely filed and lawfully approved by the City Council of the City.  
Sec. 12.11. - Authorization of railway companies and transit systems. 
The City Council shall have the power to authorize railway companies and transit systems operating within the City and operating their lines from the City to other towns and cities beyond the City's corporate boundaries, to lawfully lay their tracks and establish their switches on and over the streets and other public property of the City, or such parts thereof as the City Council may see fit, subject to the terms of the Charter, applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and to such other conditions as my be imposed by ordinance of the City Council.  
Sec. 12.12. - Railway and transit operations. 
The City shall have the following powers by ordinance or otherwise: 
(a)  To regulate, if legally possible, the speed of trains, subways, monorails, or any other engines and locomotives within the limits of the City; 
(b)  To require railway companies and transit systems to keep the streets over which they run properly drained and to require railway companies and transit systems to pay all or any part of the paving, grading, drainage and repair along all of the streets so used by such railway companies or transit systems; 
(c)  To require railway companies and transit systems to safely and properly illuminate streets over which they run wherever deemed necessary by appropriate regulatory authority or deemed advisable by the City Council; 
(d)  To require railway companies and transit systems to construct and keep in repair from curb to curb, bridges and drainage crossings crossed by them, and to construct and maintain drains and culverts where crossed by any line of said railway companies or transit systems beneath streets over which they run; 
(e)  To direct and control the laying and construction of railway and transit system tracks, turnouts and switches, and to regulate the grade of same, and to require them to conform to the grade of the streets of the City as they may hereafter be, or are now, established; 
(f)  To require that any of said tracks, turnouts and switches be so constructed and laid out as to minimize interference with the ordinary pedestrian and vehicular travel using the streets; 
(g)  To require any or all railway companies and transit systems operating any track(s) upon or across any public streets of the City to lower such track(s) below, or elevate such track(s) above, the existing or proposed level of the streets intersected or occupied by such track(s), and to require the company or companies owning or operating such track or tracks to provide necessary and proper crossing for public travel and alignment of intersecting streets; all such work to be done in the manner required by the city; 
(i)  The portion of the street occupied by a railway company and transit system shall be deemed to be the space between the tracks and twenty-four inches on the outside of each of the rails and all the space between any double tracks, turnouts and switches. Should any railway company and transit system propose to lay a track on any street or portion of a street which shall have been improved under the provisions of this Charter, it shall become liable for such portion of the cost of such improvement as the City Council may direct, or as is fixed by this Charter.  
Sec. 12.13. - Abutting property. 
The City Council shall have the power and complete discretion by ordinance, to grant to any owner of property abutting upon the streets or other property of the City, the use thereof, or to go over or under the same in any manner which may be necessary or proper to the enjoyment of said abutting property by the owner; provided, however, that such use not be inconsistent with or does not unreasonably impair the public use to which said street or other public property may be dedicated and provided further that such use is not an attempt to circumvent the necessity for a franchise by a utility company as determined by the City Council in order to use the City's public streets, alleys or other public ways for its utility services. The City Council shall fix the terms and conditions of any such grant and the time for which the same shall exist. The right is expressly reserved to the City, acting through said City Council to terminate such grant to the abutting property owner when deemed inconsistent with the public use of the property of the City, or when the resulting private use of the public property by the abutting property owner may become a nuisance.  
Sec. 12.14. - Shared use. 
The City Council shall have the power to require any person, firm, corporation or transit system holding a franchise from the City to allow the use of-its tracks, poles and wires by any other person, firm, corporation or transit system to which the City may grant a franchise, right or privilege, upon payment of a reasonable rental therefore to both the City and the prior holder of the franchise, right or privilege, all to be finally approved by the City Council.  
Sec. 12.15. - Revocable permits. 
Permits unconditionally revocable at the will of the City Council for minor, temporary or emergency privileges or licenses to conduct work and activities in the streets, alleys, public ways and public places of the City may be granted and revoked by ordinance from time to time, and such permits shall not be deemed franchises, rights or privileges as those terms are typically used in this Charter.  
Sec. 12.16. - Public services; eminent domain. 
The City shall have the power to purchase, acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate a system of potable waterworks, sanitary wastewater works, stormwater runoff works, solid waste collection and disposal system, gas or electric plants, telephone, telegraph and cable television delivery systems and or any other public service, utility service or enterprise in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and any related ordinance; and may demand and receive compensation for such services furnished for private purposes, and shall have power to lawfully acquire through power of eminent domain, pursuant to the provisions of article 18 of this Charter, the property of every kind or class, whether real, personal, or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, movable or immovable, and whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property, of any person, firm, or corporation for the purpose of operating and maintaining any such utility, and for distributing such service throughout the City or any portion thereof, but in such eminent domain proceedings no compensation allowance shall be made to the holder of the franchise, right or privilege for the value of any franchise, right or privilege and only the actual physical, non-public assets of the holder of the franchise, right or privilege, shall be purchased by the City.  
ARTICLE 13. - ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Ordinances, rules and regulations validated. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City previously ordained, passed or enacted, that are in force at the time this Charter or any amendment thereto becomes effective, and which are not in conflict with such Charter, shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the City Council after such Charter or any amendment thereto takes effect.  
Sec. 13.02. - Actions requiring an ordinance. 
The following acts of the City Council shall be by ordinance: 
(a)  Adopt or amend an Administrative Code or establish, alter or abolish any City department, office or agency; 
(b)  Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed; 
(c)  Levy taxes, except as otherwise provided in article 11 with respect to the property tax levied by adoption of the budget; 
(d)  Grant, renew or extend a franchise; 
(e)  Authorize the borrowing of money; 
(f)  Establish, increase or decrease all rates, changes and fees for any City service; 
(g)  Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the City; 
(h)  Annexation and disannexation of territory. 
Any other acts of the City requiring an ordinance as mandated by this Charter or state law.  
Sec. 13.03. - Publication. 
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, imprisonment or forfeiture for a violation of its provision shall, after passage thereof, be published at least twice in a newspaper generally circulated in the City; in lieu of publishing the full text of the ordinance, the City Council may direct that a descriptive caption or title stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof may be published at least twice in a newspaper generally circulated in the City. All ordinances, except as herein otherwise provided, shall, after passage thereof, be published at least twice in a newspaper generally circulated in the City; in lieu of publishing the full text of the ordinance, the City Council may direct that a descriptive caption or title of the ordinance stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance may be published at least twice in a newspaper generally circulated in the City. All ordinances published in a newspaper generally circulated in the City shall contain a brief description of the results of the City Council vote on the ordinance, including the record of how each member of the Council (including the Mayor when applicable) voted by name, with the appropriate designation "For", "Against", or "Absent" for each Councilmember.  
Sec. 13.04. - Style. 
The style of every original ordinance document shall be, "Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City," but such caption may be administratively omitted when said ordinances are published in book form or are revised and digested under the order of the Council.  
Sec. 13.05. - Codification. 
The City Council shall have power to adopt by ordinance a codification of its ordinances containing civil and criminal penalty provisions. The City Council may print a copy of the Code authenticated and approved by the Mayor's signature and attested by the City Clerk. On adoption of the Code by the City Council, the City Clerk shall record the Code in the City's ordinance records and publish the ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances at least twice in a newspaper generally circulated in the City.  
Sec. 13.06. - Valid and effective. 
The passage of an ordinance by the City Council, and the publication of the same at least twice in a newspaper generally circulated in the City when so required, shall be all that is necessary to make such ordinances valid and effective. The signature of the Mayor and City Clerk shall be affixed to each ordinance.  
Sec. 13.07. - Enrollment. 
Each ordinance passed by the City Council shall be enrolled by the City Clerk within five (5) days after its passage, or as soon thereafter as is practicable. The enrolled ordinance document shall be carefully compared by the City Clerk with the original ordinance document and all amendments thereto passed by the City Council. If errors exist therein, they shall be corrected only by the City Clerk or returned to the City Council for review in open session. If found correct, or after the correction of errors by the City Clerk, if any exist, the City Secretary shall endorse on the margin thereof the words "Correctly Enrolled" and give the date thereof, and subscribe the City Clerk's name thereto.  
ARTICLE 14. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Initiative. 
The electors shall have the right to initiate any ordinance, including the right to adopt or reject the same at the polls, except for those ordinances appropriating money, levying a tax, granting a franchise, or fixing public utility rates. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the City Council by a petition signed by the qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the persons entitled to vote in the City, as appear oh the County Clerk's rolls.  
Sec. 14.02. - Referendum. 
The electors shall have the right to approve or reject at the polls, any ordinance passed by the City Council, except ordinances necessary to operate the City including, but limited to, those ordinances appropriating money, levying a tax, or fixing public utility rates. The electors shall also have the power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance submitted to a vote of the electors by the City Council on its own initiative, ordinances submitted to the City Council by initiative petition, and passed by the City Council, shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within thirty (30) days after the enactment by the City Council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by the qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the persons entitled to vote in the City, as appear on the County Clerk's rolls, may be filed with the City Clerk, requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors.  
Sec. 14.03. - Form of petition. 
All petition papers circulated for the purpose of an initiative or referendum shall be uniform in size and style. Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to the petition need not all be appended to one petition paper, and may be duplicated and assembled. For a petition to be valid, a petition must contain, in addition to the signature, the signer's printed name, signer's voter registration number, residential address, date of signing and otherwise comply with any other applicable requirements prescribed by law.  
Sec. 14.04. - Examination of petition. 
All petition papers comprising the petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Clerk as one petition instrument. Within ten (10) days from the date of filing such petition instrument, the City Clerk shall verify the signatures, and from the list of qualified voters, ascertain whether or not said petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified electors according to the method provided by the Texas Election Code. The City Clerk shall attach to said petition a certificate showing the result of such examination. The City Clerk shall certify the result of its examination to the City Council at its next regular meeting. If by the City Clerk's certificate the petition is shown to be insufficient, it may be amended by filing a supplementary petition instrument, upon presentation of additional petition papers to the City Clerk, within ten (10) days from date of said certificate. The City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after such supplementary petition instrument is filed, in the event one is filed, and make a similar examination of the amended petition. If the City Clerk's certificate shall show that the amended petition is still insufficient, it shall be returned to the person filing the same, and the City Clerk shall take no further action upon the insufficiently amended petition. The finding of an insufficient petition, or an insufficiently amended petition, shall not prevent the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. The City Attorney shall review the petition to determine whether or not it addresses a proper subject and is in proper form. If the petition, or amended petition, is found to be sufficient, the City Clerk shall, without delay, submit it, and the certificate declaring the petition to be sufficient, to the City Council.  
Sec. 14.05. - Effect of certification on referendum or initiative petition. 
When a referendum petition, or amended petition, has been certified as sufficient, further action under the existing ordinance shall not be suspended unless the ordinance is repealed by the City Council or, until and unless the referendum is approved by the electors, when an initiative petition, or amended petition, has been certified as sufficient, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect until and unless approved by the electors.  
Sec. 14.06. - Consideration by City Council. 
Whenever the City Council receives a petition from the City Clerk, it shall be immediately considered. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read, and provision shall be made for a public hearing. The City Council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty (60) days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to the City Council by the City Clerk. A referred ordinance shall be considered, and the City Council shall within thirty (30) days, vote upon the question, "Shall the ordinance be repealed?"  
Sec. 14.07. - Submission to electors. 
If the Council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor, or if the City Council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors at the next general election date after submission of the petition.  
Sec. 14.08. - Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances. 
Ordinances submitted to a vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by ballot title. The ballots developed shall contain a clear, concise statement, without argument, of the substance of such ordinance, and shall contain the words "For the ordinance" and "Against the ordinance." Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted at the same election, in accordance with the provisions of this section of the City Charter.  
Sec. 14.09. - Results of election. 
If a majority of the persons entitled to vote in the City and voting on said proposed initiative ordinance, shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the City. A referred ordinance, which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the electors at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail, to the extent of such conflict.  
Sec. 14.10. - Repeal provision; publication. 
Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the electors shall be published in a newspaper generally circulated in the City and may be amended or repealed by the City Council, as in the case of other ordinances; provided, however, that no ordinance adopted at the polls under the initiative or referendum procedures shall be amended or repealed by the City Council within six (6) months of adoption.  
ARTICLE 15. - PUBLICATIONS 
 
[Sec. 15.01. - Publishing requirements.] 
All formal actions voted on by the City Council shall be authenticated, recorded, and published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and as the Council may additionally provide from time to time by ordinance. However, any items regarding a public hearing relating to City fiscal budgets shall be published in such a newspaper not more than thirty (30) days nor less than ten (10) days, before the public hearing. All formal actions voted on by the City Council which are directed to be published by the City Council, or are required by law to be published, shall contain a brief description of the results of the City Council vote, including the record of the name of each City Councilmember (including the Mayor, when applicable) and how each member voted with the appropriate designation "For", "Against", or "Absent" for each Councilmember.  
ARTICLE 16. - COLLECTION OF TAXES 
 
Sec. 16.01. - Property taxes. 
All property, real, personal or mixed, lying and being within the corporate limits of the City on the first (1st) day of January of each year, including all "choses in action", franchise rights and privileges having a situs in the City, though the owners thereof be non-residents, and excepting such property as may be exempt from taxation under the United States Constitution, Constitution of the State of Texas, and laws of the United States and the State of Texas, shall be subject to taxation.  
Sec. 16.02. - Power to levy and collect taxes. 
The City Council shall have such power and authority as is granted by this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, to provide by ordinance such rules, regulations and procedures as are necessary for the value appraisals of real, personal or mixed property and the assessment, levy and prompt collection of all taxes assessed and imposed pursuant to and consistent with this Charter, and the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and/or allowable under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and United States.  
Sec. 16.03. - Taxes; method of payment; penalties. 
The taxes herein and hereby authorized to be levied shall become due and payable October 1 of the year assessed, and shall be payable in cash to the public officials and at the public place designated by the City Council. The City Council may by ordinance provide for split payments of taxes, and may authorize the payment of taxes in two (2) or more equal installments. 
Taxes are hereby deemed to become delinquent if not paid in full prior to February 1, the year following assessment, unless the City Council shall by ordinance provide for split payments, in such event such taxes shall become due and payable as provided in said ordinance. The City Council may by ordinance provide for penalty and interest to be assessed on all delinquent taxes in such amounts as may be authorized by law.  
Sec. 16.04. - Tax lien. 
A lien is hereby created on all property, personal, real and mixed, in favor of the City, to secure the payment of all City taxes, ad valorem or otherwise. Said lien shall exist from January 1st in each year, until such taxes are fully paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims, unless United States law gives the federal government lien priority; and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ shall defeat such lien except as may be provided by the laws of the United States and the State of Texas. The City may pursue, or cause to be pursued, such property, and whenever found, may seize and sell enough thereof to satisfy such taxes as are owed to the City as provided by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 16.05. - Power and authority by State law. 
In addition to the powers herein conferred with reference to the assessment and collection of taxes, the City shall have, and may exercise, all powers and authority now conferred, or that may hereafter be conferred, upon cities having a population of more than five thousand inhabitants, by the laws of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE 17. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS AND IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 17.01. - Powers. 
The City has exclusive dominion, control, and jurisdiction in, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys, highways and boulevards, and public grounds of the City and the right to provide for the improvement of any public street, alleys, highways, avenues or boulevards by paving, repaving, raising, grading, filling, draining, widening, narrowing, straightening or otherwise improving the same and to charge the cost of making such improvement against the abutting property, by fixing a lien against the same, and a personal charge against the owner thereof according to an assessment specially levied therefor in an amount not to exceed the special benefit any such property received in enhanced value by reason of making such improvement, and to provide for the issuance of assignable certificates covering the payments for said cost, provided that the cost to be paid by the property owners cumulatively shall not exceed two thirds (?) of the cost and the amount to be paid by the City shall not exceed one third (?) of the cost, and provided further, that all street railways, steam railways, or other railways, shall pay the cost of improving the said street between the rails and tracks of any such railway companies and for two feet on each side thereof. The City has the power to provide for the construction and building of sidewalks and charge the entire cost of constructing of said sidewalks, including the curb and gutter, against the owner of abutting property, and to make a special charge against the owner for such cost and to provide by special assessment a lien against such property for such cost; to have the power to provide for the improvement of any such sidewalk or the construction of any such curb and gutter by penal ordinance and to declare defective sidewalks to be a public nuisance. 
Pursuant to and incidental to these powers, the City shall also have the right to construct, maintain, repair, relocate, realign and remove sidewalks, curbs, culverts, gutters, drains, water lines and other related facilities, sanitary and storm sewers, conduits, lines, poles, wires and any other public appurtenances and incidentals to any of such improvements that are located in, over and under public streets, avenues, alleys, highways, boulevards and other public grounds of the City. 
The City shall also have the power to compel private property owners originally developing or redeveloping private properties adjacent to public streets, avenues, alleys, highways, and boulevards and public grounds to properly install and repair sidewalks, curbs, culverts, gutters, drains, water lines and other related facilities, sanitary and storm sewers and any public appurtenances and incidentals thereto in accordance with current state law, City ordinances, city building codes, City subdivision codes and City construction specifications. 
Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys, highways, and boulevards, and public grounds of the City shall also include, but not be limited to, the power through ordinance and/or contract to regulate, locate, relocate, repair, remove, or prohibit the location of, all utility facilities, including, but not limited to pipes, ducts, conduits, lines, poles, wires, conveyance systems or other personal property or fixture of any public or private utility. 
As one method for filling, grading, raising, paving or repaving in a permanent manner any highway, including any street, avenue, alley or public place or square or portion thereof, dedicated to public use, or for the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or for widening, narrowing or straightening the same, and to construct necessary appurtenances thereto, including sewers and drains and under certain conditions, sanitary sewers, the provisions of Articles 1086 et seq. of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes and other applicable state law relating to street improvements and levying assessments to defray the cost thereof, are hereby adopted, and the method therein prescribed may be followed by the City in its discretion.  
Sec. 17.02. - Alternate method for street improvements and levying assessments. 
As another method for filling, grading, raising, paving, repaving and repairing in a permanent manner any highway including any street, avenue, alley, boulevard, drive, public place, square or any portion or portions thereof, including any portion that may have or may be left wholly or partly unimproved in connection with other street improvements heretofore or hereafter made, and for constructing, reconstructing, repairing and realigning curbs, gutters and sidewalks and for widening, narrowing and straightening and by constructing appurtenances and incidentals to any such improvements including drains and culverts, the provisions in Article 1105b of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes [V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 313.001 et seq.] relative to street improvements and levying assessments to defray the cost thereof, are hereby adopted, and the method therein prescribed may be followed by the City in its discretion. 
Editor's note— Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1105b was repealed by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 165, § 24(a), effective Sept. 1, 1995, and the subject matter within it is now covered by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 313.001 et seq.  
Sec. 17.03. - Opening and widening of streets. 
The City has the right to open, extend, straighten, widen any public street, alley, avenue or boulevard and for such purpose to acquire the necessary lands and to appropriate the same under the power of eminent domain and to provide that the cost of improving any such street, alley, avenue or boulevard by opening, extending and widening the same shall be paid by the owners of property specially benefited whose property lies in the territory of such improvement and to provide' that the cost shall be charged by special assessment and that a personal charge shall be made against any owner for the amount due by him and to provide for the appointment by the county judge or other officer exercising like or similar powers, of three special commissioners for the purpose of condemning the said lands and for the purpose of apportioning the said cost, which apportionment of said cost shall be specially assessed by the City Council against the owners and the property of the owners lying in the territory so found to be specially benefited in enhanced value by said special commissioners. The City shall pay such portion of such cost as may be determined by the said special commissioners, provided the same shall never exceed one third (?) the cost, and the property owners and their property shall be liable for the balance of the same as may be apportioned by said commissioners and allowed under state law. The City has the right to issue assignable certificates for the payment of any such cost against such property owners and may provide for the payment of any such cost in deferred payments, to bear interest at such rate as may be determined by the City Council to be in the best interest of the City and not to exceed the percentage allowed by law.  
Sec. 17.04. - Condemnation for highways and levying assessments. 
As an alternative method to lay out, open, establish, widen, straighten, or extend any highway, including any street, avenue, boulevard, alley, public place or square, dedicated or to be dedicated to public use (cumulatively referred to as "highway") and that will involve some assessment, the provisions of Chapter 17 of Title 28 of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes, Articles 1201 et seq. [V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 314.001 et seq.], relative to condemnation for highways and the levying of special assessments to defray the cost thereof, are hereby adopted, and the method therein prescribed may be followed by the City in its discretion. 
Editor's note— V.A.Civ.St. Art. 1201 et seq. was repealed by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 165, § 24(a), effective Sept. 1, 1995, and the subject matter within it is now covered by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 314.001 et seq.  
Sec. 17.05. - Assessment period. 
In all proceedings providing for assessments against property and the owners thereof for special benefits received under the provisions of this Article and the laws of the State of Texas, the City Council is hereby authorized to provide, wherever the same is practicable, or wherever the same may be done under the law, for the payment of said assessments in annual installments not to exceed the maximum number allowable under state law, extending over a period not to exceed the maximum number of years allowable under state law and with interest not to exceed the maximum allowable by state law.  
Sec. 17.06. - Improvement districts. 
All of powers conferred by Section 372.041 of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 372.041], as it may be amended, and by any other general law of the State relating to improvement districts, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Charter, and the power is conferred upon the City, in connection therewith to issue assignable or negotiable certificates and to appoint special commissioners for the making or levying of special assessments on the property specially benefited in enhanced value by the improvements, and the City Council may make such rules and regulations concerning the same as may be deemed advisable, including requiring the property owners to make deferred payments to retire the certificates, with interest on such deferred interest not to exceed the maximum allowable by law.  
Sec. 17.07. - Control of obstructions on street; street closure. 
The City has the right to control, regulate and remove all obstructions or other encroachments or encumbrances on any public street, alley or ground, and to narrow, alter, widen or straighten any such streets, alleys, avenues or boulevards, and to vacate and abandon and close any such streets, alleys, avenues or boulevards, and to regulate and control the moving of buildings or other structures over and upon the streets or avenues of such city.  
Sec. 17.08. - Building lines. 
The City shall have the power, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, acting through its City Council by ordinance, establish building lines on the streets of the City. The ordinance must describe the street affected and location of the building line, and provide a period within 25 years after the line is established during which structures extending into the area between the street and the building line must be brought into conformance with the line.  
ARTICLE 18. - CONDEMNATION 
 
Sec. 18.01. - Purpose. 
The City shall have the power of eminent domain whenever deemed necessary or desirable by the City Council for public purposes, to execute any power conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution or laws of Texas to condemn and appropriate private or public property, whether in or out of the corporate limits of the City, upon payment of fair compensation for the property taken. The City may condemn the fee or any lesser interest in the property taken, including, but not limited to, water rights and may condemn for any public purpose whether specifically stated herein or not. The City shall follow the procedural requirements of Chapter 21 of the Texas Property Code in condemning property, except as otherwise allowed or required by state law.  
Sec. 18.02. - Proceedings by ordinance or resolution. 
When the City Council shall determine to proceed hereunder, it shall so declare by resolution or ordinance, in which it shall describe the parcel or parcels of land proposed to be taken or condemned by any description substantially identifying the same by lot and block number, or the number of front feet, or the name of the property owner, or if owned by an estate, the name thereof, or as otherwise required by law. Notice of such proposed resolution or ordinance shall be posted for public inspection in accordance with state law. No mistake or omission of said resolution or ordinance shall invalidate it, and its passage shall be conclusive of the public use and necessity of the proposed improvement.  
Sec. 18.03. - Condemnation of real property. 
To the extent that provisions of state law prescribing procedures for the taking of property by eminent domain are applicable, all such provisions, including but not limited to those provisions of the Texas Property Code concerning eminent domain set out therein in Chapter 21, TEX. PROP. CODE ANN. §§ 21.001 through 21.065 (Vernon 1984) [V.T.C.A., Property Code § 21.001 et seq.], as amended at the date of the adoption of this Charter or as they may be from time to time amended hereafter are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set out and reproduced at this point.  
Sec. 18.04. - Condemnation of personal property. 
To the extent procedures for the taking of personal property are not specified by the statutes cited above in Section 18.03 of this Charter, the following procedures shall apply: 
(a)  These procedures shall apply to the taking by eminent domain of personal property of every kind or class, whether personal or mixed with real property in such a way as might not be covered by the statutory procedures cited above, and whether corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, choate or inchoate, moveable or immovable, whether wholly or partially vested or contingent and, to the further extent not covered by the statutory procedures cited above, all fixtures, improvements and appurtenances connected with or related to said property, whether located inside or outside the municipality, so condemned, if the City Council expresses the intention to do so by ordinance. 
(b)  District Courts and County Courts at Law shall have concurrent jurisdiction in eminent domain cases involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter. 
(c)  In an eminent domain case involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter which is pending in a county Court at Law, if the court determines that the case involves any issue that cannot be fully adjudicated in said County Court at Law, the judge shall transfer that case to a District Court. 
(d)  A District Court may determine all issues, including the authority to condemn property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter and the assessment of damages in any case in which the City is a party and which involves a claim for property of said kind or for damages to property of said kind taken or used by the City under the City's power of eminent domain or for an injunction to prevent the City from taking or using the property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter. 
(e)  To the extent not otherwise governed by those provisions of the Texas Property Code concerning eminent domain set out therein in Chapter 21, TEX. PROP. CODE ANN. §§21.001 through 21.065 (Vernon 1984) [V.T.C.A., Property Code § 21.001 et seq.], as amended at the date of the adoption of this Charter or as they may be from time to time amended hereafter, the exercise of the eminent domain authority in all cases in connection with taking of property of the kind described above in section 18.04(a) of this Charter is governed by Section 18.04(f) through (ab) of this Charter. 
(f)  (1)  If the City is unable to agree with the owner of property of the kind described in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, on the amount of damages for the taking from the owner by the City of said property, the City may begin a condemnation proceeding by filing a petition in the proper court. 
(2)  If the property described in Section 18.04(f)(1) of this Charter above is owned by the same owner together with real property of that owner which is required by the City, it shall be permissible for the City to file a condemnation proceeding including both types of property in the same cause of action. 70 the extent Possible the condemnation procedures outlined in Chapter 21, TEX. PROP. CODE ANN. § 21.001 through 21.065 [V.T.C.A., Property Code § 21.001 et seq.], modified to the extent necessary for the taking of that Portion of the Property being condemned as may be of the kind described in Section 18-04(a) of this charter shall be followed. 
(g)  The Petition concerning property of the kind described in Section 18.04(a) must: 
(1)  describe the property to be condemned; 
(2)  state the purpose for which the City intends to use the property" 
(3)  state the name of the owner of the property if the owner is known; and 
(4)  state that the City and the property owner are unable to agree on the damages. 
In a condemnation proceeding-involving property of the kind described in Section 18-04(a) of this Charter: 
(1)  The venue of such a condemnation Proceeding is the county in which the owner of the property described in Section 18.04(a) being condemned resides if the owner resides in a county in which part of the property is located. Otherwise, the venue of a condemnation proceeding is any county in which at least part of the property is located. 
(2)  Except where otherwise provided by, law when the City initiates a condemnation proceeding in a county in which there is one county court at law with Jurisdiction, it must file the petition with the judge of that court or, if there is more than one county court at law with Jurisdiction, with the county clerk. 
(3)  When the City initiates a condemnation proceeding in a county in which there is not a county court at law with jurisdiction, it must file the condemnation petition with the district judge or, if there is more than one district court in the county, with the district clerk. 
(4)  If, in addition to the property described in Section 18.04(a) there is also real property owned by the same owner as that of the property described in Section 18.04(a) which is the subject of a condemnation Proceeding, the venue of the City's Proceeding combining the taking of both the real property and the property described in section 18.04(a) of this Charter owned by said owner shall be in the county where the real property therein described is situated. 
(5)  District and county clerks shall assign an equal number of eminent domain cases in rotation to each court with jurisdiction that the clerk services. 
(h)  (1)  The judge of a court in which a condemnation petition is filed or to which an eminent domain case is assigned shall appoint three disinterested freeholders who reside in the county as special commissioners to assess the damages of the owner of property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter being condemned. The judge appointing the special commissioners shall give preference to persons agreed on by the parties. If a person fails to serve as a commissioner, the judge may appoint a replacement. 
(2)  The special commissioners shall swear to assess damages fairly, impartially, and according to the law. 
(3)  Special commissioners may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of testimony, administer oaths, and punish for contempt in the same manner as a county judge. 
(i)  (1)  The special commissioners in an eminent domain proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter shall promptly schedule a hearing for the parties at the earliest practical time and at a place that is as near as practical to the property being condemned or at the county seat of the county in which the proceeding is being held. 
(2)  After notice of the hearing has been served, the special commissioners shall hear the parties at the scheduled time and place or at any other time or place to which they may adjourn the hearing. 
(j)  (1)  Each party in an eminent domain proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter is entitled to written notice issued by the special commissioners informing the party of the time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  Notice of the hearing must be served on a party not later than the 11th day before the day set for the hearing. A person competent to testify may serve the notice. 
(3)  A person who serves a notice shall return the original notice to the special commissioners on or before the day set for hearing. The person shall write a return of service on the notice that states how and when it was served. 
(4)  Notice may be served: 
(i)  By delivering a copy of the notice to the party or to the party's agent or Attorney; 
(ii)  if the property being condemned belongs to a deceased's estate or to a minor or other legally disabled person and the person or estate has a legal representative, by delivering a copy of the notice to the legal representative; or 
(iii)  if the property being condemned belongs to a nonresident of this state and there has been no personal service on the owner, if the identity or the residence of the property owner is unknown, or if the property owner avoids service of notice by hiding, by publication in the same manner as service of citation by publication in other civil cases in the district courts or county courts at law. 
(k)  (1)  The City, whenever it is a party to a suit covered by TEX. PROP. CODE ANN. §21.003 (1984) [V.T.C.A., Property Code § 21.003], as amended at the time of the adoption of this Charter or as such statute may subsequently be amended, may, by petition 'cross-bill, or plea of intervention assert a claim to property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, or, alternatively seek to condemn such property. 
(2)  A plea under this subsection is not an admission of an adverse party's title to the property in controversy. 
(l)  (1)  A party to a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter may object to the findings of the special commissioners by filing a written statement of the objections and their grounds with the court that has jurisdiction of the proceeding. The statement must be filed on or before the first Monday following the 20th day after the day the commissioners file their findings with the court. 
(2)  If a party in such a proceeding files an objection to the findings of the special commissioners, the court shall cite the adverse party and try the case in the same manner as other civil causes. 
(m)  (1)  Whenever the City files a condemnation petition involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, the City may move to dismiss the proceedings, and the court shall conduct a hearing on the motion. However, after the special commissioners has made an award, in an effort to obtain a lower award, the City as condemnor may not dismiss the condemnation proceedings merely to institute new proceedings that involve substantially the same condemnation against the same property owner. 
(2)  A court that hears and grants a motion to dismiss a condemnation proceeding made by the City as condemnor under Section 18.04(m)(1) of this Charter as set out above shall make an allowance to the property owner for reasonable and necessary fees for attorneys, appraisers, and photographers and for the other expenses incurred by the property owner to the date of the hearing. 
(3)  A court that hears and grants a motion to dismiss a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter made by a property owner seeking a judicial denial of the right to condemn or that otherwise renders a judgment denying the right to condemn may make an allowance to the property owner for reasonable and necessary fees for attorneys, appraisers, and photographers and for the other expenses incurred by the property owner to the date of the hearing or judgment. 
(n)  If the City moves to dismiss a condemnation proceeding concerning property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter and subsequently files a petition to condemn substantially the same property interest from the same property owner, the court may not appoint new special commissioners but shall enter the award of the special commissioners in the first proceeding as the award in the second. The court shall award the property owner triple the amount of the expenses that were allowed the property owner prior to the dismissal of the first proceeding. 
(o)  After the special commissioners have made an award in a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, the city may take possession of the condemned property pending the results of further litigation if the City pays to the property owner the amount of damages and costs awarded by the special commissioners or deposits that amount of money with the court subject to the order of the property owner. 
(p)  Laws that formerly governed the performance of functions by county clerks and judges in eminent domain proceedings are applicable to the clerks and judges of district courts and county courts at law. 
(q)  As the basis for assessing actual damages to a property owner from a condemnation involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, the special commissioners shall admit evidence on: 
(1)  the value of the property being condemned; 
(2)  the injury to the property owner; 
(3)  the benefit to the property owner's remaining property; and 
(4)  the use of the property for the purpose of the condemnation. 
(r)  (1)  The special commissioners shall assess damages in a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter according to the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(2)  If all of the property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter is condemned, the damage to the property owner is the market value of the property at the time of the special commissioners' hearing. 
(3)  If a portion of the property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter is condemned, the special commissioners shall determine the damage to the property owner after estimating the extent of the injury and benefit to the property owner, including the effect of the condemnation on the value of the property owner's remaining property. 
(4)  In estimating injury or benefit under Subsection (3) of Section 18.04(r) of this Charter, the special commissioners shall consider an injury or benefit that is peculiar to the property owner and that relates to the property owner's ownership, use, or enjoyment of the particular property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, but they may not consider an injury or benefit that the property owner experiences in common with the general community. 
(s)  (1)  If a court finally determines that the City, having taken possession of property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, pending litigation did not have the right to condemn the property, the court may award the property owner the damages that resulted from the temporary possession. 
(2)  The court in a case involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, may order the payment of damages awarded under this section from the award or other money deposited with the court. However, if the award paid to or appropriated by the property owner exceeds the court's final determination of the value of the property, the court shall order the property owner to return the excess to the City. 
(t)  An interest acquired by the City is not lost by the forfeiture or expiration of the City's charter and is subject to an extension of the charter or the grant of a new charter without a new condemnation. 
(u)  (1)  Special commissioners may adjudge the costs of an eminent domain in a proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter, against any party. If the commissioners award greater damages than the City offered to pay before the proceedings began, or if the decision of the commissioners is appealed and a court awards greater damages than the commissioners awarded, the City shall pay all costs. If the commissioners" award or the court's determination of the damages is less than or equal to the amount the City offered before proceedings began, the property owner shall pay the costs. 
(2)  The City shall pay the initial cost of serving a property owner with notice of a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter. If the property owner is ordered to pay the costs of the proceeding, the City may recover the expense of notice from the property owner as part of the costs. 
(3)  A court that has jurisdiction of an eminent domain proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter may tax $10.00 or more as a reasonable fee for each special commissioner as part of the court costs of the proceeding. 
(v)  After the special commissioners in an eminent domain proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter have assessed the damages, they shall: 
(1)  make a written statement of their decision stating the damages, date it, sign it, and file it and all other papers connected with the proceeding with the court on the day the decision is made or on the next working day after the day the decision is made; and 
(2)  make and sign a written statement of the accrued costs of the proceeding, naming the party against whom the costs are adjudged, and file the statement with the court. 
(w)  The judge of a court hearing a proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter shall inform the clerk of the court as to a decision by the special commissioners on the day the decision is filed or on the next working day after the day the decision is filed. Not later than the next working day after the day the decision is filed, the clerk shall send notice of the decision by certified or registered United States mail, return receipt requested, to the parties in the proceeding, or to their attorneys of record, at their addresses of record. 
(x)  If no party in a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter files timely objections to the findings of the special commissioners, the judge of the court that has jurisdiction of the proceeding shall adopt the commissioners' findings as the judgment of the court, record the judgment in the minutes of the court, and issue the process necessary to enforce the judgment. 
(y)  If the City in a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter has taken possession of the property pending litigation and the court finally decides that the City does not have the right to condemn the property, the court shall order the City to surrender possession of the property and issue a writ of possession to the property owner. 
(z)  (1)  the appeal of a judgment in a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter is as in other civil cases. 
(2)  A court hearing an appeal from the decision of a trial court in a condemnation proceeding involving property of the kind described above in Section 18.04(a) of this Charter may not suspend the judgment of the trial court pending the appeal. 
(aa)  (1)  A court hearing a suit covered by Subsection (11) of Section 18.04(a) of this Charter may grant injunctive relief under the rules of equity. 
(2)  Instead of granting an injunction under this subsection, a court may require the City to provide security adequate to compensate the property owner for damages that might result from the condemnation. 
(ab)  A judgment of a court under Section 18.04 of these Charter vests a right granted to the City.  
ARTICLE 19. - ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS, WARRANTS AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS 
 
Sec. 19.01. - Authority to issue bonds, warrants and other obligations. 
The City shall have power to borrow money on a short term and long term basis on the credit of the City and to issue bonds, warrants and other obligations, including, but not limited to, certificates of obligation and commercial paper (cumulatively referred to as "obligations") for any public purposes and in the manner and form now or hereafter authorized by law and to fund or refund any indebtedness created through the issuance of bonds, warrants and other obligations.  
Sec. 19.02. - Revenue bonds, warrants and other obligations. 
The City shall have power to issue revenue bonds, warrants and other obligations, including, but not limited to, certificates of obligation and commercial paper (cumulatively referred to as "obligations") for any public purposes and in the manner and form now or hereafter authorized by law and to fund or refund any indebtedness created through the issuance of revenue bonds, warrants and other obligations. The City shall also have power to issue revenue bonds, warrants and other obligations for the acquisition of any other utility or property for public use and to enlarge, improve, extend or equip the same, and to issue its revenue bonds, warrants and other obligations for any other lawful public purpose, provided such funding or refunding revenue bonds" warrants and other obligations shall never be a debt of the City and shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties or interest acquired and the income therefrom and shall never be considered in determining the power of the City to issue any bonds for any purpose.  
Sec. 19.03. - Use of bonds for payment of current expenses. 
No bonds, warrants and other obligations shall be issued to fund any overdraft or indebtedness incurred for current expenditures of the City Government or any subdivision thereof, except as otherwise provided by law.  
ARTICLE 20. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 20.01. - Notice of damage or injury. 
The City shall never be liable for any (a) property damage, personal injury, and death proximately caused by the wrongful act or omission or the negligence of an employee acting within his scope of employment; and (b) personal injury and death so caused by a condition or use of tangible personal or real property, except as provided by state law, and unless the City receives a notice of a claim against it not later than six (6) months after the day that the incident giving rise to the claim occurred. The written notice of a claim shall be filed with the City Manager or City Clerk stating specifically in such notice the damage or injury claimed, the times and place of the incident and the incident.  
Sec. 20.02. - No liens on public property. 
No lien of any kind, including, but not limited to a mechanic or materialman's lien, can ever exist against the real, personal or mixed property of the City.  
Sec. 20.03. - Execution and garnishment. 
No execution shall be issued or levied by virtue of any judgment that may be recovered against the City, but the City Council shall provide for the payments of judgments in the levying of taxes next after the final recovery of such judgments from the City. All assets of the City, including lands, houses, moneys, debts due the City, real, personal or mixed property, and assets of every description belonging to the City, shall be exempt from execution and sale, but the City shall make provisions, by taxation or otherwise, for the payment of any and all indebtedness incurred by the City. No writ of garnishment shall issue against the City to subject or seize any debt to any person or corporation, or any claim or demand upon any fund in the possession of said City or any of its officers; nor shall the City or any of its officers or agents, be required to answer any writ of garnishment.  
Sec. 20.04. - Assignments. 
The City shall not recognize transfers or assignments of salaries or wages, nor shall any officer of the City receive or honor any drafts or order drawn by any person against his salary or wages, but the warrant or money shall in every instance be delivered or paid to the person entitled thereto according to the City's accounts; nor shall any officer of the City issue any certificates of indebtedness. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the holder of a warrant from transferring it. If the Council so declares by ordinance, a warrant for the total amount of any pay roll may be drawn in favor of the person paying such pay roll, and such warrant shall have the same legal standing and effect as any other warrant.  
Sec. 20.05. - Oath of office. 
Every person elected or appointed to office in the City, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the official oath prescribed by the State Constitution and shall give such bond and security for the faithful discharge of his duties as may be required by ordinance.  
Sec. 20.06. - Qualification of elective officers. 
All elective officers of the City shall qualify within ten (10) days after election and failure to do so, except in case of sickness, shall vacate said office, and an election shall be immediately called to fill such vacancy.  
Sec. 20.07. - Prohibitions on candidates for office or employment. 
It shall be unlawful for any candidate or any person who may become a candidate for any office or employment under the government of the City, directly or indirectly, to offer or promise to any person or persons any office or employment under the City government or any benefit to be derived therefrom in the event of the election or appointment of such candidate to any such office or employment; or to promise or agree to use his or her influence to obtain for any person any office or employment under the government of the City. Any violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall be grounds for removal from office or employment.  
Sec. 20.08. - Personal financial interest. 
No officer or employee of the City, or Board or Commission of the City shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the City, or be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale by the City of any land, materials, supplies or services except on behalf of the City as an officer or employee. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit such person's office or position. Any violation of this section, with knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the City Council shall render the contract involved voidable by the City Manager or the City Council.  
Sec. 20.09. - City contracts; appropriations and specifications. 
No contract shall be entered into by the City Council until after an appropriation has been made therefor, nor in excess of the amount appropriated, and all contracts shall be in writing and made upon specifications. No contract shall be binding upon the City unless it has been signed by the City Manager and attested by the City Clerk, and the expense thereof charged to the proper appropriation; and whenever the contract charged to any appropriation equals the amount of said appropriation, no further contracts shall be executed. All contracts involving an expenditure of more than the amount authorized by Section 252.021 of the Texas Local Government Code [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.021] or other provisions of state law, shall be subject to the competitive sealed bidding or proposal requirements before they are awarded except those contracts which are exempt from the competitive seal bidding or proposal requirements under Texas law. Where such contract is for less than the amount authorized by Section 252.021 of the Texas Local Government Code [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.021] or other provisions of state law and is to be let on the basis of competitive seal bids or proposals and the item(s) is one provided for in the budget, the City Council, by ordinance, may authorize designated City officials to approve and execute the contract without Council approval after such public notice and competition as may be provided in the ordinance.  
Sec. 20.10. - Competitive sealed bids and proposals. 
If the competitive sealed bidding requirement applies to the contract, the City shall provide notice of the time and place at which the contract will be let as required by state law. If the competitive sealed proposal requirement applies to the contract, the City shall provide notice of the request for proposal as required by state law. The City shall also comply with any other notice requirements prior to awarding any contract as required by state law. 
If the competitive sealed bidding requirement applies to the contract, the contract must be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. The governing body may reject any and all bids. 
If the competitive sealed proposals requirement applies to the contract, the contract must be awarded to the responsible offer or whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the City considering the relative importance of price and the other evaluation factors included in the request for proposals. 
The City has the right to require performance and payment bonds when required by state law unless otherwise provided by state law.  
Sec. 20.11. - Acquisition of land for parks. 
The City shall establish and maintain a park or parks within the City free to the residents of the City and to cooperate with any person, firm or corporation under such terms the City Council may prescribe for the establishment of such park or parks, and to that end the City Council shall appropriate annually out of the general revenue of the City a fund for the support and maintenance of the park or parks.  
Sec. 20.12. - Public library. 
The City shall establish and maintain a public library or libraries within the City free to the residents of the City and to cooperate with any person, firm or corporation under such terms the City Council may prescribe for the establishment of such public library or libraries, and to that end the City Council shall appropriate annually out of the general revenue of the City a fund for the support and maintenance of the public library.  
Sec. 20.13. - Building and other related permits. 
The City shall have power to prohibit the erection or construction of any building or structure of any kind with the City without permits first having been issued by the City for the construction or erection of such building or structure, as well as the installation of plumbing, electrical, gas, air conditioning/heating and other related building or structural systems, and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permits, and in pursuance of said authority may authorize the inspection by the City of all buildings or structures, as well as plumbing, electrical, gas, air conditioning/heating and other related building or structural systems, during the progress of their construction and installation and may require that all buildings and related structural systems shall be constructed in conformity with the building regulations which exist in said City or which shall hereafter be passed.  
Sec. 20.14. - Bonds of any City official, employee or department director. 
In addition to any bonding provision herein provided, the City Council may require any City official, department director or City employee, before entering upon such person's duties, to execute a good and sufficient bond with a surety company doing business in the State of Texas, and approved by the City Council, as surety thereon, said bond to be in such amount as the Council may demand, payable to the City, and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office; the annual premium of such bond to be paid by the City.  
ARTICLE 21. - EFFECTIVE DATE AND EFFECTS OF ADOPTION 
 
Sec. 21.01. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Charter, and any amendments hereto, shall be in effect, from and after their approval by the electors of the City, and the entering of an official order upon the records of the City, by the City Council, declaring the same adopted.  
Sec. 21.02. - Effect on present City Council. 
The duly elected City Council serving at the time of the adoption of the Charter, or amendment here to, shall continue to be, serve as, and to constitute, the City Council of the City until the next regular election. Upon adoption of this Charter, the sections pertaining, affecting, or referring to City Councilmembers shall apply to all such members, either newly elected, continuing, or otherwise.  
Sec. 21.03. - Charter amendment. 
This Charter may be amended when necessary. Amendments to this Charter may be proposed: 
(a)  By action of the City Council submitting a proposed amendment to the voters for approval; or 
(b)  By report of a Charter Review Commission created by the Charter to be submitted to the voters for approval; or 
(c)  By the voters, consistent with state law. Proposal of an amendment by the voters of the City shall be by petition containing the full text of the proposed amendment and shall be governed by state law. 
All amendment proposals must be authorized by ordinance and shall be decided on the first authorized uniform election date prescribed by state law. Notice of the election must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city as provided by state law.  
Sec. 21.04. - Charter Review Commission. 
The City Council shall appoint at its first regular meeting in May of every fifth year after approval of this Charter, a Charter Review Commission of seven (7) citizens of the City. 
(a)  Duties of the Commission. 
(1)  Inquire into the operation of the City government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision. To this end, public hearings may be held; and the Commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the City and require the submission of any of the City records, which it may deem necessary to the conduct of such hearing. 
(2)  Propose any recommendations it may deem desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of the Charter by the several departments of the City government. 
(3)  Propose, if it deems desirable, amendments to this Charter to improve the effective application of the Charter to current conditions. 
(4)  Report its findings and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the Council. 
(b)  Action by the Council. The Council shall receive and have published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, the final report of the Charter Review Commission, shall consider any recommendations made, and if any amendments be presented as part of such report, may order such amendment or amendments to be submitted to the voters of the City in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(c)  Term of office. The term of office of such Charter Review Commission shall be six (6) months, and at the completion of such term, a report shall be presented to the Council and all records of the proceedings of such Commission shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall become a public record.  
Sec. 21.05. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charters or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. If any provision of this Charter is in conflict with existing federal and/or state law, the applicable existing federal and/or state law shall govern and shall be reconciled with the remaining applicable Charter provisions.  
Sec. 21.06. - Continuation. 
All rights, actions, penalties and forfeitures in suits or otherwise which have accrued prior to adoption of this Charter shall be vested in and possessed by the City and no suit pending shall be affected by the passage of this Charter, but the same shall be prosecuted or defended, as the case may be, by the City.  
Sec. 21.07. - Submission of Charter to electors. 
The Charter Commission, in preparing this Charter, finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function, it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the Charter Commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City at an election to be held for that purpose on the 7th day of May, A.D., 1994. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, it shall become the Charter of the City, and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted and the City Clerk shall file an official copy of the Charter with the records of the City. The Clerk shall furnish the Mayor a copy of said Charter, which copy of the Charter so adopted, authenticated and certified by his signature and the seal of the City, shall be forwarded by the Mayor to the Secretary of State of the State of Texas, and shall show the approval of such Charter by majority vote of the qualified voters voting at such election. 
In not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election, the Council shall cause the City Clerk to mail a copy of this Charter to each qualified voter of the City. 
RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED, 
SPECIAL HOME RULE CHARTER COMMISSION 
BY _____ 
Conrad Trevino 
Chairman 
BY _____ 
Jacinto Ortega 
Vice-Chairman 
BY _____ 
Juanita Trevino 
Secretary 
  
Members: 
Carlos Garcia 
Lupe Maldonado 
Noe Obregon 
Maria Yolanda Patino 
Ysabela Pena 
Humberto Robledo 
Modesto Rodriguez 
Carlos Segura 
Hector Silva 
Jim Sindon 
Christine Trevino 
Larry Urban 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF FRIO 	SS. 	CERTIFIED COPY 
CITY OF PEARSALL 
 
The undersigned, the City Secretary of the City of Pearsall in the State and County aforesaid, does by these presents certify that the attached and foregoing is a true and exemplified copy of a part of the records, papers and books in the Office of the City Secretary; and, that I am the custodian of such papers, books and records as an officer of the City of Pearsall. 
Given under any hand and the official seal of the City of Pearsall, this 6th day of January, A.D. 1994. 
(SEAL) 	_____
City Secretary, City of Pearsall 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Pearsall, Texas." This Code may also be cited as the "Pearsall City Code." 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council: 
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the Code or other law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Pearsall as printed in part I of this volume. 
City. The term "City" means the City of Pearsall, in the County of Frio and State of Texas. 
Code. The term "Code" means the "Code of Ordinances, City of Pearsall" or "The Pearsall Code." 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
Council, City Council, governing body. Whenever the terms "Council," "City Council," or "governing body" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Pearsall, Texas. 
County. The term "County" means Frio County, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a section of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the City to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the section specifically provide otherwise. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003. 
In the City. The term "in the City" means all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police, regulatory and other powers. 
Joint authority. Terms purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.004. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7). 
Number. Any term importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any term importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(b). 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(8). 
Officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions, employees. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code means officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions and employees of the City, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, as may be officially in current use in the State. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.016. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" will extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to persons, whether acting individually, in concert, or in any representative capacity. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(2). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(11). 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(13). 
Public place. The term "public place" means any public street, alley, square, highway, grounds, house or premises; or any hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, grocery, saloon, garden, workshop or other place, or part of the same, to which people usually resort, or have a right to resort, for business or pleasure. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a highway other than the berm or shoulder that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used in this definition shall refer to any such roadway separately. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.301(11). 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.016(1) and (2). 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of the roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(14). 
State. The term "State" means the State of Texas. 
Street or highway. The term "street" or "highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.301(5). 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(a). 
Tex. Admin. Code. The abbreviation "Tex. Admin. Code" refers to the Texas Administrative Code. 
Tex. (subject) Code. The abbreviation "Tex. (subject) Code" identifies a specific subject matter code of legislatively adopted statutes, as classified and numbered by the Texas Legislative Council under authority of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5429b-1, predecessor to Tex. Government Code, § 323.007. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." means and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
State Law reference— Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(17). 
Year. The term "year" means generally a calendar year, unless specifically referred to otherwise (e.g. fiscal year). 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(18).  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference— Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024.  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference— Construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances or resolutions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference— Repeal of statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007.  
Sec. 1-8. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.031 et seq.  
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeals. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the ordinance or portion of this Code repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance or portion of this Code repealed. 
(b)  This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new sections upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal of statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007.  
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted in a repeal shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the City Council. 
(c)  Amendments to any section of this Code shall be made by amending such section by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ___ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Pearsall, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full and shall be underscored and any provisions which are to be deleted shall be enclosed in brackets. 
(d)  If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Pearsall, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ___, which section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full and shall be underscored. 
(e)  Every subsection, section, division, article or chapter desired to be repealed must be set out in full and specifically repealed by subsection, section, division, article or chapter, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the term "this ordinance" or terms of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ through ___." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(b)  If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person, fact, situation or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provision to other persons, facts, situations or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
State Law reference— Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.032, 312.013.  
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for: 
(1)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense; and 
(2)  Violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the State. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the City for such purposes. If any violation of this Code is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this Code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the City in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500.00 shall require a culpable mental state of intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence. 
(e)  In any prosecution in the Municipal Court of the City or of any other court of competent jurisdiction, a complaint charging a violation of this Code need not negate the existence of any affirmative defense or exception, but the existence of such may be raised by the defendant in any such prosecution by way of defense as provided in the State Penal Code. When the defendant shall rely upon any such exemption or exception as a defense or justification, the burden of proving the exemption or exception shall be upon the defendant. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001.  
Sec. 1-14. - Violations of Code or ordinance; culpable mental state. 
(a)  In any prosecution filed under a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the City which expressly requires proof that the actor engaged in conduct intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence, then a person does not commit an offense unless he is shown to have engaged in such conduct as the definition of the offense requires. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act or a failure to act is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or a misdemeanor, and such provision does not expressly require proof of a culpable mental state, proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction of such offense, it being the intent of the City Council to dispense with the requirement of any culpable mental state in prosecutions filed under such provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the City; provided, however, that if such offense is punishable by a fine exceeding the amount authorized by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 12.23, a person does not commit such offense unless he is shown to have recklessly engaged in such conduct as the definition of the offense requires. 
(c)  Proof of a higher degree of culpability than that charged constitutes proof of the culpability charged.  
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or any evidence of the City's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the City; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary or benefits of any City officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing employment and personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the City to any person; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, widening, paving, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a Board of Zoning Appeals or Planning Commission, including joint commissions; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the City or annexing property to the City; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-16. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the City Council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2-19. - Meetings. 
The following rules are established for the conduct of formal and informal meetings of the City Council: 
(1)  Regular meetings. The Council shall hold its regular meeting on the second Tuesday of each month beginning at 7:00 p.m. unless otherwise officially established by the Council. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held at the new City Hall located at 215 S. Ash Street, Pearsall, Texas, except when public interest in particular subjects increases, then a public hearing of the City Council may be held at the public library or other alternate sites within the corporate City limits so as to provide greater accessibility of its open meeting to the citizens of the City. Any change of the meeting location shall be properly noticed to the public. 
(2)  Special meetings, emergency meetings and public hearings. Special and emergency meetings of the Council shall be called by the City Clerk upon the written request of the Mayor, the City Manager, or three members of the Council. In the event of a special or emergency meeting, the City Clerk shall notify each member of the Council. The special meeting, emergency meeting or public hearing will be held in compliance with State law. 
(3)  Call to order. The meetings of the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, by the Mayor Pro Tem; and in the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem the meeting shall be called to order by the City Clerk. In the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem and with a quorum being present, the members present may elect one of their members, upon nomination for that purpose, to serve as temporary presiding officer for the meeting. 
(4)  Preservation of order. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum, prevent personal references to Councilmembers or the impugning of the members' motives, and confine members' remarks to the question under discussion. No member shall address the Council from any other than his own seat nor until after being recognized by the Chair. 
(5)  Points of order. The person presiding shall determine all points of order, subject to the right of any member to appeal to the entire Council. If an appeal is taken the question shall be, "shall the decision of the Chair be sustained?" 
(6)  Question to be stated. The Chair shall state all questions submitted for a vote and announce the result. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. 
(7)  Substitution of Chair. The Chair may call on the Mayor Pro Tem, or if he is unavailable, then any other member to take his place in the Chair, for a portion of the meeting, such substitution not to continue beyond adjournment. 
(8)  Rules. Robert's Rules of Order, Ninth Edition, shall govern in all cases unless in conflict herewith. 
(Ord. of 1-31-1996, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-12-015, § 1, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 2014-01-04, § 1, 1-30-2014)  
Sec. 2-20. - Rules of courtesy. 
The following rules of courtesy are adopted for persons in attendance at all meetings of the Council: 
(1)  Time limits. For officially called public hearings, each speaker shall be limited to three minutes, unless otherwise set by the Chair, with a cumulative limit of 30 minutes for each side (those for a proposal and those against a proposal). Depending on time available, the urgency of an issue, the need for information before the Council, or for other relevant reasons, the presiding officer may limit or extend the time for individual presentations from groups, provided said groups are speaking to a specific issue. Citizens may attend the informal sessions (work sessions) of the Council, but will not be included in the discussion, nor allowed to address the Council unless not less than four members of the Council have agreed, in writing, or have voted to allot such. If citizens are to be allowed to address the Council under the circumstances cited in this subsection, each citizen will be limited to three minutes' speaking time, with no group being allowed a total of more than 15 minutes. 
(2)  Disturbances. No person attending any Council meeting shall delay, interrupt, or disrupt the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the Chair. Persons attending shall remain seated, except the person at the podium with permission of the Chair. 
(3)  General conduct. Persons in attendance shall refrain from smoking, eating or drinking while in the Council Chamber, however, Councilmembers and staff shall be allowed to drink beverages during Council meetings. Persons in attendance shall not carry signs, placards, or other items which block the view of those behind them. 
(4)  Fire safety. Citizens are welcome and invited to attend Council meetings, however, the number admitted shall be limited to the fire safety capacity of the Council Chamber. 
(Ord. of 1-31-1996, § 2)  
Sec. 2-21. - City Council rules and order of business. 
The following procedures are established for the rules and order of business of the City Council: 
(1)  Resolutions, ordinances, or other items from the Council shall be placed upon the agenda for regular/special Council meetings upon receipt by the City Clerk of a request in writing signed by three members of the Council not later than the Thursday at 12:00 noon, before the meeting. This deadline shall also apply to items requested by City administration. This deadline applies to all requests except those for emergencies and/or an urgent public necessity. 
(2)  Minutes shall be kept by the City Clerk of all meetings. 
(Ord. of 1-31-1996, § 3; Ord. No. 2011-07-117, § 1, 8-23-2011; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 8-7-2012)  
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule municipality has authority to create municipal offices, determine method of selecting officers, and prescribe qualifications, duties, and tenure of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.041. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-46. - Employee manual adopted. 
The City of Pearsall Employee Manual, as approved by Council on Jan. 13, 1996, and as may be periodically amended, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein, as if fully set out.  
Secs. 2-47—2-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Creation. 
There is hereby created an administrative department of the City under the general supervision of the City Manager, which shall be known as the Community Development Department, hereinafter referred to as the "Department". 
(Ord. of 8-13-1980, § 1)  
Sec. 2-67. - Department Director. 
(a)  Position established. There is hereby established the position of Department Director, hereinafter referred to as the "Director", an administrative officer, who shall be appointed by, and responsible to, the City Clerk and/or City Manager. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The Director, on behalf of the Department, shall: 
(1)  Supervise and direct all employees of the Department. 
(2)  Advise the City Clerk and/or City Manager and the City Council on all matters affecting the rehabilitation of substandard and deteriorating areas of the City when requested or required to do so. 
(3)  Initiate and implement programs to meet goals and objectives as directed to do so by the City Clerk and/or City Manager, and the City Council, with respect to rehabilitation of substandard and deteriorating areas of the City. 
(4)  Report to the City Clerk and/or City Manager and supervise the work of staff and clerks engaged in City planning programs. 
(5)  Evaluate and negotiate, subject to approval of the City Clerk and/or City Manager, and the City Council, contracts with various agencies within the City and the public and federal agencies concerned with the funding of community development activities. 
(6)  Evaluate the needs for municipal improvements to eliminate substandard housing conditions. 
(7)  Recommend housing standards and methods of enforcement to the City Manager. 
(8)  Identify municipal efforts requiring concentrated housing standard enforcement efforts. 
(9)  Advise municipal department heads and the City Manager of the need for specific actions to obtain housing improvements. 
(10)  Negotiate with federal agencies and financial institutions to obtain funding for municipal improvement projects. 
(11)  Meet with real estate agencies and citizens' groups to provide information and to answer questions. 
(12)  Hire, train, and supervise the work of clerical and professional staff. 
(Ord. of 8-13-1980, § 2)  
Sec. 2-68. - Qualifications. 
The person designated or appointed as Director shall meet the following minimum qualifications and/or standards and such other standards as set out by the City Council: 
(1)  Knowledge. Principles, practices and methods of community development; laws and regulations pertaining to community development. 
(2)  Skill. Plan, implement and evaluate community rehabilitation projects. 
(3)  Ability. 
a.  Read and interpret laws, regulations and policies. 
b.  Calculate costs involved in the rehabilitation of buildings. 
c.  Analyze the status of community housing standards. 
(Ord. of 8-13-1980, § 3)  
Secs. 2-69—2-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-95. - Purpose and policy. 
The following investment policy addresses the methods, procedures and practices which must be exercised to ensure effective and judicial fiscal management of the City funds. The investment policy applies to the investment and management of all funds under direct authority of the City. These funds include all governmental, proprietary and trust and agency funds which are accounted for in the City's comprehensive annual financial report. The Employees' Deferred Compensation Agency Fund is excluded from coverage under this policy. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1996, § 1)  
Sec. 2-96. - Procedure to accomplish policy. 
The statement of investment policy will be accomplished through the following guidelines: 
(1)  Objectives. Investment of funds will be governed by the following investment objectives, in order of priority: 
a.  Preservation and safety of principal. Preservation of capital is the foremost objective of the City. Each investment transaction shall seek first to ensure the capital losses are avoided, whether the loss occurs from default of a security or from erosion of market value. 
b.  Liquidity. The City's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the City to meet all operating requirements which can be reasonably anticipated. Liquidity will be achieved by matching investment maturities with forecasted cash flow requirements and by investing in securities with active secondary markets. 
c.  Yield. The investment portfolio shall be designed to attain a market-average rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account the City's investment risk constraints and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio. The Director of Finance will from time to time establish performance measures and goals for the portfolio rates of return. Efforts to seek returns higher than the established goals must be consistent with risk limitations identified in this policy and prudent investment principles. 
(2)  Investment authority. 
a.  Management responsibility for the investment program has been assigned to the Director of Finance by the City Council. Other qualified individuals may also be authorized as investment officials by the City Council. Investment authority of all investment officers will be limited by conformance with all federal regulations, State Statutes and other legal requirements, including the Charter and ordinances. The Director shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment policy and strategy, and the procedures established by the Financial Director. 
b.  Each investment officer shall attend annually at least one training session relating to his investment responsibilities. Training must include education in investment controls, security risks, strategy risks, market risks and compliance with chapter 2256, Government Code, Public Funds Investment Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.001 et seq.). 
(3)  Internal controls. The Finance Director shall establish a system of internal controls which shall be documented in writing. The controls shall be designated to prevent losses of public funds arising from fraud, employee error, misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated changes in financial markets, or imprudent actions by investment officials. Controls deemed most important would include control of collusion, separation of duties, separating transaction authority from accounting and recordkeeping, custodial safekeeping, avoidance of bearer-form securities, clear delegation of authority, specific limitations regarding securities losses and remedial action, written confirmation of telephone transactions, minimizing the number of authorized investment officials, and documentation of and rationale for transactions. In conjunction with the annual independent audit, a compliance audit of management controls on investments and adherence to the investment policy and strategy shall be performed by the independent auditor. The independent auditor shall report the results of the review directly to the City Council. 
(4)  Standard of care. 
a.  The standard of care to be used by investment officers shall be the prudent person rule which states, "Investments shall be made with the exercise of that degree of judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived." 
b.  In applying the prudent person rule, the investment officer shall exercise prudence with respect to the management and investment of all funds over which the officer has responsibility and control. The investment officer must determine whether investment decisions are consistent with this division. 
c.  All participants in the investment program will seek to act responsibly as custodians of the public trust. Investment officials will avoid any transaction that might impair public confidence in the City's ability to govern effectively. Investment officers shall recognize that the investment portfolio is subject to public review and evaluation. The overall program shall be designed and managed with a degree of professionalism which is worthy of the public trust. Nevertheless, the City recognizes that in a diversified context of the overall portfolio's investment return, provided that adequate diversification has been implemented. 
d.  Investment officers, acting in accordance with written procedures and exercising due diligence, shall not be held personally responsible for market price changes, provided that these changes are reported immediately and that appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments. 
(5)  Instruments. Investment instruments authorized for purchase by the City are limited to: 
a.  Direct obligations of the United States government with a stated final maturity of five years or less. 
b.  Debentures or discount notes with a stated final maturity of three years or less issued by, guaranteed by, or for which the credit of any of the following federal agencies and instrumentalities is pledged for payment: Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB), Federal Farm Credit Bank (FFCB), Student Loan Marketing Association (SLMA) and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC). 
c.  Bonds or other interest-bearing obligations having a stated final maturity of three years or less of which the principal and interest are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States government. 
d.  Repurchase agreements. 
1.  Repurchase agreements collateralized with U.S. Treasury securities at a minimum market value of 102 percent of the dollar value of the transaction, with any accrued interest accumulated on the collateral included in the calculation. Eligible collateral will have a maximum maturity of ten years. 
2.  Repurchase agreements will be entered into with primary government securities dealers who have executed a City-approved master repurchase agreement. Collateral shall be delivered to and held by the City's third-party safekeeping agent. 
3.  The term "repurchase agreement" includes direct security repurchase agreements and reverse security repurchase agreements. A written master repurchase agreement shall be established between the City and the seller prior to purchase. The maximum term for direct security repurchase agreements and reverse security repurchase agreements will be 90 days or less. Funds received under the terms of a reverse security repurchase agreement may not be used to purchase any investment whose final maturity date exceeds the expiration of the reverse. 
e.  FDIC-insured Certificates of Deposit issued by national banks domiciled in the State with a stated final maturity of two years or less. Certificate of Deposit balances exceeding FDIC insurance limits will be fully collateralized by securities listed in subsections (5)a and (5)b of this section, and the collateral will be held by the City's third-party custodian. 
f.  SEC-registered, no-load money market mutual finds with a dollar-weighted average portfolio maturity of 90 days or less. Assets will consist exclusively of those securities listed in subsections (5)a through (5)d of this section. The investment objective of the fund is to maintain a stable one dollar net asset value. The maximum stated maturity of the fund will be 13 months. 
g.  State or local investment pools organized under the Interlocal Cooperation Act. The investment pools must have a dollar-weighted average portfolio maturity of 60 days or less. Assets will consist exclusively of those securities listed in subsections (5)a through (5)d of this section. The investment objective of the pool is to maintain a stable $1.00 net asset value. All securities owned in the pool will have a stated remaining maturity of 13 months. 
h.  The City is expressly prohibited from entering into options trading or future contracts, hedging or purchasing any security which is not authorized by State law. 
(6)  Investment strategies. 
a.  Investments for operating funds and commingling pools shall be scheduled to match cash flow projections with their stated final maturities. A dollar-weighted average maturity of 365 days or less using the stated final maturity date of each security will be maintained. Purchased securities will have a stated final maturity date of each security maintained. Purchased securities will have a stated final maturity of three years or less. 
b.  The maturity of investments for debt service interest and sinking funds will be scheduled in order to retire the nearest previously unfunded bonds and coupons. Securities purchased shall not have a stated final maturity date which exceeds the unfunded debt service payment date. 
c.  Investments in debt service reserve funds shall have as the primary objective the ability to generate a dependable revenue stream with a low degree of volatility. Except as may be required by the bond ordinance specific to an individual issue, securities should be of high quality, with short to intermediate term maturities. Purchased securities will have a stated final maturity of five years or less. 
(7)  Safekeeping and custody. 
a.  Securities purchased for the City's portfolios will be delivered by book entry and will be held in third-party safekeeping by a Federal Reserve member financial institution designated as the City's safekeeping and custodian bank. 
b.  The City will execute safekeeping agreements prior to utilizing the custodian's safekeeping services. The safekeeping agreement must provide that the safekeeping agent will immediately record and promptly issue and deliver a safekeeping receipt showing the receipt and the identification of the security, as well as the City's interest. All securities owned by the City will be held in a customer account naming the City as the customer. 
c.  Collateralized securities such as term repurchase agreements shall be purchased using the delivery versus payment procedure. Custody and safekeeping procedures will be reviewed annually by the independent auditor. 
(8)  Other investment guidelines. 
a.  The City seeks active portfolio management to enhance total returns within the guidelines of this policy. Investment decisions should not incur unreasonable investment risk in order to obtain investment income. The City will not make investments for the purpose of trading or speculation. 
b.  Each investment transaction must be based on competitive quotations from at least three securities dealers. 
c.  All security transactions will be on a delivery versus payment basis to the third-party safekeeping through the Federal Reserve Bank wire system. In this manner, the City will always have possession of either the securities or moneys. 
d.  The City will comply with all federal, State and City regulations governing the investment of funds. 
e.  In managing its investment portfolio, the City will avoid any purchase of investments, or any investment practice or procedure which is not specifically authorized under this policy. 
(9)  Diversification. It is the policy of the City to avoid concentration of assets in a specific maturity, a specific issuer or a specific class of securities. The allocation of assets in the portfolios should be flexible depending upon the outlook for the economy and the securities markets. In establishing specific diversification strategies the following general policies and constraints shall apply: 
a.  Portfolio maturities shall be staggered in a way to provide for stability of income and reasonable liquidity while undue concentration of assets in a specific maturity sector shall be avoided. 
b.  To attain sufficient liquidity, the City shall schedule the maturity of its investments to coincide with known disbursements. 
c.  Risks of market price volatility shall be controlled through maturity diversification. 
(10)  Selection of depository. A qualified bank depository shall be selected through the City's banking services procurement process, which shall include a formal request for proposal issued every two years. In selecting a depository, the City shall consider various criteria as specified. 
(11)  Selection of security broker/dealer. Government security broker/dealers will be selected on the basis of their financial stability, expertise in cash management and their ability to service the City's account. The qualifications of prospective broker/dealers will be determined from a completed broker/dealer questionnaire. Before engaging in investment transactions with the City, a prospective securities broker/dealer must provide a written instrument certifying that the securities broker/dealer has received and has thoroughly reviewed the City's investment policy and has implemented reasonable procedures and controls in an effort to preclude imprudent investment activities arising from investment transactions. Qualified broker/dealers are required to regularly submit the most recent audited financial statements. 
(12)  Management reports. 
a.  The investment officer shall prepare and submit to the City Council and City Manager on a monthly basis an investment report. This report shall describe, in detail, the current investment positions, state the beginning market value, the additions and changes to market value, and ending market value for each pooled fund, state the book value and market value of each separately invested asset at the beginning and end of the reporting period, state the maturity date of each separately invested asset, state the fund for which individual investment was acquired and state compliance of the investment portfolio with the investment strategy and the Public Funds Investment Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.001 et seq.). The report shall also summarize and present, on a combined portfolio basis, total market valuation, total realized gains and losses, total unrealized gains and losses, distribution by maturity sector and distribution by security interest income earned. The report may comment on current investment approaches and other items significant to the investment program. The report shall be signed by the Finance Director and the investment officer. 
b.  The investment report presented at the end of the fiscal year may also include a review of the investment activities and earnings for the entire fiscal year for each pooled fund, discuss investment techniques and suggest improvements which will enhance the investment program and present an investment plan for the ensuing fiscal year. The report may discuss other significant issues related to the investment program. 
(13)  Ethics and conflicts of interest. Investment officers shall refrain from personal and business activities involving any of the City's custodians, depositories, brokers/dealers or investment advisors which may influence the officer's ability to conduct his duties in an unbiased manner. Investment officers will not utilize investment advice concerning specific securities or classes of securities obtained in the transaction of the City's business for personal investment decisions, will in all respects subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the City, particularly with regard to the timing of purchase and sales and will keep all investment advice obtained on behalf of the City and all transactions contemplated and completed by the City confidential, except when disclosure is required by law. 
(14)  Responsibility and authority. The statement of investment policy and the statement of investment strategy will be reviewed annually by the City Council. Revisions will be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1996, § 2)  
Secs. 2-97—2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - POLICE DEPARTMENT (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-121—2-138. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC WORKS 
 
Sec. 2-139. - Prevailing wage rates. 
(a)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2258.001 et seq., as amended, the City Council hereby adopts the most current United States Department of Labor wage determination decisions for the County (hourly wage determination decision in effect ten days prior to any bid opening) as periodically published in the Federal Register as the local methodology for computation of the City's general prevailing rate of per diem wages to be paid to various classifications of laborers, workmen, and mechanics employed in either building construction trades or heavy highway construction trades in constructing 100 percent locally funded, and competitively bid, City Public Works construction projects. It is the express intent of the City Council that these wage and hour provisions shall not apply to in-house construction of City projects by City employees that are governed by separate City employee wage and hour provisions. 
(b)  Furthermore, it is hereby the expressed intent of the City Council to clearly establish the methodology for computation of the general prevailing rate of per diem wages to be a sum certain, in dollars and cents, for each of two distinct categories of wage being minimum hourly base pay and minimum hourly fringe benefit contribution. The contractor/subcontractor is strictly prohibited from paying the various classifications of laborers, workmen, and mechanics any amount less than the minimum hourly base pay and then adding the reduction in minimum hourly base pay to any applicable minimum hourly fringe benefit contribution so as to net a combined total of the two intended distinct categories of the wages on 100 percent locally funded, and competitively bid, City Public Works construction contracts. 
(c)  It is recognized by the City Council that certain job classifications are not entitled to receive any minimum hourly fringe benefits by virtue of adopting the United States Department of Labor wage determination decisions for the County and that result is the express intent of the City Council. 
(d)  It is also the express intent of the City Council to allow the contractor/subcontractor to pay various classifications of laborers, workmen, and mechanics the minimum hourly cash equivalent of any applicable and appropriate minimum hourly fringe benefit contribution listed in a wage determination decision in lieu of benefits contributed to a permissible fringe benefit plan. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1991, § 1)  
Sec. 2-140. - General conditions. 
(a)  The City Manager is hereby directed to insert into all future 100 percent locally funded, and competitively bid, City Public Works construction contracts, new general conditions (which are on file in the City offices and is incorporated by reference herein for all purposes) governing wage and labor standards and practices employed in the performance of work on City competitively bid projects. 
(b)  The City Manager is hereby authorized by City Council to periodically amend such general conditions administratively to reflect needed improvements in the document as required, except that only the City Council shall be authorized to amend legislative matters specifically addressing the prevailing rate of minimum per diem wages, holiday pay, etc. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1991, § 2)  
Secs. 2-141—2-163. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-164—2-194. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - LIBRARY DEPARTMENT (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-195—2-211. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CITY RECORDS DEPARTMENT (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-212—2-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-231—2-253. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-254—2-284. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-285—2-301. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-302—2-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - LIBRARY BOARD (RESERVED) 
 
Secs. 2-321—2-343. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ETHICS COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of conflicts of interest of officers of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq.; requirements of state conflicts of interest statutes are cumulative of municipal charter provisions and municipal ordinances defining and prohibiting conflicts of interests, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.007; disclosure of certain relationships with local government officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 176.001 et seq.; requirements of state financial disclosure statutes are cumulative of any other disclosure required by law, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 176.010. 
 
Sec. 2-344. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person employed by the City, including those individuals on a parttime basis, but shall not mean any independent contractor hired by the City. 
Officer or official means any member of the City Council and any appointed member of a board, commission or committee set up by ordinance, Charter, State law or otherwise, on a temporary or permanent basis, excluding those boards, commissions or entities not operating under the direct authority of or subject to the direct control of the City Council. 
Relative means any person related to an officer or employee within the first degree by consanguinity or affinity and shall include a spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 2)  
Sec. 2-345. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the City; that no officer, employee or member of any standing committee or board shall permit any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any business transaction or professional activity, to conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest; that public office is not to be used for personal gain; and that the City Council at all times shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body. To implement such a policy, the City Council deems it advisable to enact a Code of Conduct for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the City's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms, the overriding interest being that officers and employees shall at all times strive to avoid the appearance of impropriety. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 1)  
Sec. 2-346. - Standards of conduct—Officers and employees. 
No officer or employee of the City or relative of a Councilmember shall: 
(1)  Have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the City, nor shall he be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale of the City of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies, or service. The financial interest contemplated under this subsection requires that the officer or employee receive an actual financial benefit from the transaction with the City. An actual financial benefit from the transaction shall not include: 
a.  An ownership in the entity transacting with the City where the ownership interest is less than one percent. 
b.  Compensation as an employee, officer or director of the entity transacting with the City where such compensation is not affected by the entity's transaction with the City. 
(2)  Participate in a vote or decision on any matter in which the officer or employee has a direct or indirect financial interest or in which a relative of the officer or employee has a direct or indirect financial interest. It is expressly provided herein that an investment or ownership in a publicly held company in an amount less than $10,000.00 does not constitute a prohibited financial interest under this section. 
(3)  No employee or Councilmember shall represent or appear on behalf of private interests of others before any agency of the City or any board, commission, or committee, nor shall he represent any private interest of others in any action or proceeding involving the City, nor voluntarily participate on behalf of others in any litigation to which the City might be party. 
(4)  No other officer shall represent or appear on behalf of the private interests of others before the board, commission, or committee of which he is a member, or before the City Council or other board on an appeal from such board, commission or committee concerning such matter. 
(5)  Accept any gift or favor from any person that might reasonably tend to influence him in the discharge of his official duties, or grant in the discharge of his official duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. 
(6)  Use his official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others. 
(7)  Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen, individual, business organization or group beyond that which is normally available to every other citizen, individual, business organization or group. This shall not prevent the granting of fringe benefits to employees as a part of their contract of employment or as an added incentive to the securing or retaining of employees. 
(8)  Disclose information that could adversely affect the property, government or affairs of the City; nor directly or indirectly use any information gained solely by reason of his official position or employment for his own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others. 
(9)  Disclose confidential information. 
(10)  Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with, or will be incompatible with, his position as an officer, the duties assigned to him in his employment, or in which his employment will give him an advantage over others engaged in a similar business, vocation or activity. 
(11)  Accept other employment incompatible with the full and proper discharge of his duties and responsibilities with the City, or which might impair his independent judgment in the performance of his duty. 
(12)  Receive any fees or compensation for his services as an officer or employee from any source other than the City, except as may otherwise be provided by law. This shall not prohibit his performing the same or other services for a private organization that he performs for the City if there is no conflict with his duties and responsibilities. 
(13)  While in uniform, or on active duty or in the course and scope of this employment, term or appointment, use the influence or prestige of his position or title as an officer or employee for or against any candidate for any elective office, but shall at all times maintain the nonpartisan policy of the City, provided that all officials and employees are encouraged to register and vote as they may choose in all local, State and national elections. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no officer or employee shall be prohibited from participating in any political process solely in his individual capacity as a private citizen. 
(14)  Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act to deliberately thwart the execution of the City ordinances, rules or regulations, or the achievement of official City programs. 
(15)  Use City supplies, equipment, or facilities for any purpose other than the conduct of official City business, unless otherwise provided for by law, ordinance, or City policy. 
(16)  Engage in any conduct prejudicial to the City government or that reflects discredit upon the City government. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 3)  
Sec. 2-347. - Same—Councilmembers. 
(a)  In any zoning matter which may appear before the City Council, any Councilmember who has a financial interest in any property within 200 feet of the zoning request shall disclose the existence of such interest to the other Councilmembers and thereafter abstain from voting in the matter and refrain from attempting to influence the vote of any other Councilmember. 
(b)  In the event that any matter comes before the City Council involving directly or indirectly the interest of a present business client/customer of any Councilmember or the interest of a person or entity who has been a business client/customer of any Councilmember within the prior 12 months and funds received by the Councilmember, or the entity for which he is employed, from the past/present business client/customer amount to the sum of $10,000.00 or more in gross income during such 12-month period and such fact is known to the Councilmember, then that Councilmember shall disclose the existence of such interest to the other Councilmembers and thereafter abstain from voting in the matter and refrain from attempting to influence the vote of any other Councilmember. 
(c)  No Councilmember who is on the board of a nonprofit organization may vote on any funding request by that nonprofit organization, unless the nonprofit organization has a board of directors or trustees appointed in whole or in part by the City Council. 
(d)  With the exception of those proceedings allowed under section 2-351, no Councilmember shall personally appear on his own behalf before the City Council or any board, commission, or committee, but may designate and be represented by a person of his choice in any such personal matter. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 4)  
Sec. 2-348. - Disclosure of financial interest. 
Any officer or employee, whether elected, appointed, or hired, who has a prohibited financial interest in any matter pending before the City, shall disclose such interest to other members of the City Council, committee, commission, or board, of which he is a member, or in the case of an employee, to his supervisor, and shall refrain from further discussion of the matter; shall not be physically present when the subject is discussed in executive session; and shall not vote on or participate further therein in any manner. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 5)  
Sec. 2-349. - Disclosure of real property interest. 
On or before January 1 of each calendar year every Councilmember shall file, in writing, with the City Clerk on a disclosure form prepared and approved by the City the existence and location of any real property in the City in which the Councilmember has any financial interest, including any interest of one percent or more in any entity which has a financial interest in any real property in the City. Said disclosure shall also include the identity and location of all real property within the City in which the Councilmember has acquired or conveyed any interest since the filing of the last similar report required by this section. If a Councilmember has an interest in an entity that will not disclose to the Councilmember whether or not the entity has a financial interest in real property in the City, the Councilmember may satisfy his disclosure requirement under this section by stating such fact, in writing, to the City Clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 6)  
Sec. 2-350. - City contracts; affidavit. 
All contracts in excess of $5,000.00 entered into by any person or entity seeking to do business with the City shall contain an affidavit executed by a legally authorized party to that effect that no person has or will have during the term of said contract any prohibited interest in the Code of Conduct. The affidavit shall include an acknowledgement and acceptance by the affiant that the existence of a prohibited interest at any time during the term of said contract will render the contract voidable. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 7)  
Sec. 2-351. - Complaints, alleged violations against Councilmembers. 
(a)  All complaints or allegations of a violation of this Code of Conduct against a Councilmember shall be made in writing, sworn to before a notary public, and filed of record with the City Clerk or the Chairperson of the Ethics Commission. Such complaint shall describe in detail the act complained of and the specific section of this Code of Conduct alleged to have been violated. If received by the City Clerk, then the City Clerk shall forward the complaint to the Chairperson of the Ethics Commission. As determined by the Chairperson, a general complaint lacking in detail shall not be sufficient to invoke the investigation procedures contained herein and anonymous complaints shall not be considered. 
(b)  Within 15 business days after receipt, the Ethics Commission shall convene to make the initial determination/evaluation of the complaint as to whether or not the facts alleged, if true, would at face value constitute a violation of this Code of Conduct. If it is determined by the Ethics Commission that the facts as alleged would not constitute a violation, then in accordance with the notice requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.), the Ethics Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council for consideration. A majority of those Councilmembers not implicated by the allegation may either invoke the investigatory procedure contained herein or reject the complaint. Any vote to reject the complaint shall be in a public hearing called for that purpose. 
(c)  The Mayor or any three members of the Council may cause a meeting of the Council to convene, whether regular or special, within three business days after being so notified by the City Clerk to further consider said complaint in Executive Session. At said meeting, the Chairperson of the Ethics Commission shall meet with the Mayor and City Council to discuss the complaint, including describing in detail the nature of the complaint and the findings and conclusions as to a possible violation of this Code of Conduct. The City Council may then, by majority vote, direct the City Attorney to perform any additional investigation requested regarding the issue. The City Attorney shall report back to the City Council, in writing, as soon as possible but in no event more than 30 calendar days from the Executive Session unless an extension is granted by a majority of the eligible Councilmembers. Said report shall be comprehensive and explain in detail all facts, findings and conclusions in support of the Attorney's opinion as to whether or not a violation of this Code of Conduct occurred. 
(d)  The Council shall consider the findings of said report at the meeting at which it is presented, at which time the person accused shall have the right to a full and complete hearing with the opportunity to call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. No final action, decision or vote with regard to any matter shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the public. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 8)  
Sec. 2-352. - Disciplinary action against Councilmembers. 
The failure of any Councilmember to comply with or who violated one or more of the standards of conduct in this division, which apply to him, shall constitute grounds for reprimand. Such reprimand shall require a two-thirds vote of the eligible Councilmembers. Offenses committed in violation of the Charter shall be punished in accordance with the terms of section 20.08 of the Charter. A second offense of the same Councilmember to violate one or more standards of conduct which apply to him shall constitute grounds for removal from office. Removal shall require a two-thirds vote of the eligible Councilmembers. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 9)  
Sec. 2-353. - Complaints, alleged violations against officers other than Councilmembers. 
(a)  All complaints or allegations of a violation of this Code of Conduct against an officer, other than a Councilmember, shall be made in writing, sworn to before a notary public, and filed of record with the City Clerk or the Chairperson of the Ethics Commission. Such complaint shall describe in detail the act complained of and the specific section of this Code of Conduct alleged to have been violated. A general complaint lacking in detail shall not be sufficient to invoke the investigation procedures contained herein and anonymous complaints shall not be considered. 
(b)  Within 15 business days after receipt, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk or the Chairperson of the Ethics Commission to call a meeting of the Ethics Commission to make an initial determination/evaluation of the complaint as to whether or not the facts alleged, if true, would at face value constitute a violation of this Code of Conduct. If it is determined by the Ethics Commission that the facts as alleged would not constitute a violation, then in accordance with the notice requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.), the Ethics Commission shall make a recommendation by majority vote to the City Council. The City Council will have the opportunity to discuss the complaint at the next regularly scheduled meeting. At that meeting the City Council may either refer the complaint back to the Ethics Commission for additional investigation or reject the complaint, but any vote to reject the complaint shall be in a public hearing called for that purpose. 
(c)  If it is determined by the Ethics Commission that the facts as alleged could constitute a violation of this Code of Conduct, then the Ethics Commission shall, within 30 days after receipt of the complaint, notify the Mayor and City Council of the existence and nature of the complaint. The Mayor or any three members of the City Council may cause a meeting of the Council to convene, whether regular or special, within three business days after being so notified by the City Clerk to further consider said complaint in Executive Session. In any event, the Ethics Commission shall immediately proceed to fully investigate the alleged improprieties. The Chairperson of the Ethics Commission shall report to the City Council in detail all facts, findings and conclusions in support of the opinion as to whether or not a violation of this Code of Conduct occurred. 
(d)  The Council shall consider the findings of said report at the meeting at which it is presented, at which time the person accused shall have the right to a full and complete hearing with the opportunity to call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. No final action, decision, or vote with regard to any matter shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the public. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 10)  
Sec. 2-354. - Disciplinary action—Officers and employees. 
(a)  The failure of an officer to comply with or who violates one or more of the standards of conduct in this Code of Conduct shall constitute grounds for expulsion, reprimand, or removal from office to the extent allowed by law. 
(b)  In the case of any employee, disciplinary action and appeals therefrom shall be in conformance with procedures established by the Charter and personnel rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 11)  
Sec. 2-355. - Appearance by past officer or employee. 
(a)  No past Councilmember shall appear before the City Council or any board or commission and represent any interest on any matter whatsoever for a period of 90 days after the date of termination of such relationship with the City. In addition to the 90-day restriction referenced in this subsection, no past Councilmember shall appear before the City Council or any board or commission and represent any interest on any matter which was pending in the City during his service for a period of one year after the date of termination of such relationship with the City. 
(b)  No past officer, other than a Councilmember, shall appear before any board or commission on which he has previously served, or shall represent any interest on any matter which was pending before that board or commission during his service, for a period of one year after the date of termination of such relationship with the City. 
(c)  No past employee shall appear before any board or commission or shall represent any interest or any matter which was considered or pending before said employee or the department in which he worked for a period of one year after the date of termination of such relationship with the City. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 12)  
Sec. 2-356. - Adoption of State Statute. 
Section 171.001 et seq. of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq.), as amended, being the statute which regulates conflicts of interest of officers of municipalities in the State, is hereby adopted and made a part of this Code of Conduct for all purposes with the proviso that in the case of a conflict between the provisions of this Code of Conduct and the State Statute, then in that event the more restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996, § 13)  
Secs. 2-357—2-385. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-386. - Definition of City records. 
(a)  Unless specifically identified by State law, the term "City records" or "local government records" means the following: all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the State and created or received by the City or any of its officers or employees, pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business, are hereby declared to be the records of the City and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(b)  The term "City records" or "local government records" does not include: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers or employees of the local government; 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the local government for the officer's or employee's personal convenience; 
(3)  Blank forms; 
(4)  Stocks of publications; 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purpose of reference or display; 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq., or other State law; or 
(7)  Any records, correspondence, notes, memoranda, or documents, other than a final written agreement described by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2009.054(c), associated with a matter conducted under an alternative dispute resolution procedure in which personnel of a State department or institution, local government, special district, or other political subdivision of the State participated as a party, facilitated as an impartial third party, or facilitated as the administrator of a dispute resolution system or organization. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 1)  
Sec. 2-387. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department head means the officer who, by ordinance, order, or administrative policy, is in charge of an office of the City that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the City necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the City in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the City, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the State. 
Permanent record means any record of the City for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the City, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 2-394. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records Management Committee means the committee established in section 2-390. 
Records Management Officer means the City Clerk, and the successive holders of said office. As provided by State law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the Director and Librarian of the State Library within 30 days of the date of designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-391. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 2)  
Sec. 2-388. - City records declared public property. 
All City records as defined in section 2-386 are hereby declared to be the property of the City. No City official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 3)  
Sec. 2-389. - Records management policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all City records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.) and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 4)  
Sec. 2-390. - Establishment and duties of Records Management Committee. 
A Records Management Committee consisting of the department heads of the City is hereby established. The Committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the Records Management Officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the Records Management Officer; 
(4)  Give final approval for the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the City. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 6)  
Sec. 2-391. - Records management plan; development; approval; authority. 
(a)  The Records Management Officer and the Records Management Committee shall develop a records management plan for the City for submission to the City Council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the City, and to properly preserve those records of the City that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his duties prescribed by State law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the City Council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the City and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the City. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 7)  
Sec. 2-392. - Duties of Records Management Officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the Records Management Officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each City office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the City; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and forms design and control system for the City; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all City departments by preparation of a manual of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the City's records control schedules are in compliance with State regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the City and department heads information concerning State laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by State law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the City is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of State law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the City on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the City, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) of this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the City noncompliance by department heads or other City personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 8)  
Sec. 2-393. - Duties of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the City for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the City and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 9)  
Sec. 2-394. - Records liaison officer—Designation. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for implementation of the records management program in the department. If the Records Management Officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the Records Management Officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the City maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 10)  
Sec. 2-395. - Same—Duties. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the Records Management Officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 11)  
Sec. 2-396. - Records control schedules development and approval; filing with State. 
(a)  The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of the City records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the State, and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the City. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for the department must be approved by the department head, and the Records Management Officer. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian of the State Library as provided by State law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall resubmit the records control schedules to the Director and librarian. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 12)  
Sec. 2-397. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule, for a department, that has been approved and adopted under section 2-396 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests, in writing, to the Records Management Committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records Management Officer from the Records Management Committee. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 13)  
Sec. 2-398. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and Librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 14)  
Sec. 2-399. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-391, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Records Management Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-391. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 15)  
Sec. 2-400. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the City Council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the Records Management Officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of the City records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the Records Management Officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with Commission rules. 
(Ord. of 12-12-1990, § 16)  
Secs. 2-401—2-434. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2-435. - Notice. 
The City shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone on his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, must give notice, in writing, within 60 days from the date the damage or injury was received to the City Clerk of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1985, § 1) 
State Law reference— Notice of claim, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101.  
Sec. 2-436. - Burden of proof. 
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the City unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the City Council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was, by vote of the City Council, refused. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1985, § 2)  
Sec. 2-437. - Service. 
All notices required by this article shall be effectuated by serving them upon the City Clerk at the following location, 
City Hall 
213 South Oak Street 
Pearsall, Texas, 
and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1985, § 3)  
Sec. 2-438. - Waiver. 
Neither the Mayor, a City Councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the City shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1985, § 4)  
Sec. 2-439. - Notice to be sworn. 
The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the City Council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1985, § 5)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.; local alcoholic beverage permit and license fees authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36; location restrictions for sale of beer and wine authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol in any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
Liquor means any alcoholic beverage containing alcohol in excess of four percent by weight, unless otherwise indicated. Proof that an alcoholic beverage is alcohol, spirits of wine, whiskey, liquor, wine, brandy, gin, rum, ale, malt liquor, tequila, mescal, habanero, or barreteago, shall be prima facie evidence that the same is liquor as herein defined. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 4)  
Sec. 4-2. - Penalty for alcohol-related offense by minor. 
An offense under sections 4-3, 4-4, or 4-5 is punishable as provided by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.071 ("Punishment for alcohol-related offense by minor").  
Sec. 4-3. - Purchase of alcohol by a minor. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase any alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits of the City. It shall further be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess an alcoholic beverage unless such person under the age of 21 years possesses the alcoholic beverage while: 
(1)  In the course and scope of the minor's employment, if the minor is an employee of a licensee or permittee and the employment is not prohibited by this Code; 
(2)  In the visible presence of his adult parent, guardian, or spouse, or other adult to whom the minor has been committed by a court; or 
(3)  Under the immediate supervision of a commissioned peace officer engaged in enforcing the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4. - Purchasing for or furnishing alcohol to a minor. 
It shall be unlawful to purchase an alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits of the City for, or give, or with criminal negligence make available, an alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of 21 years, unless the purchaser, person making available, or giver is the parent, legal guardian, adult husband or wife of the person for whom the alcoholic beverage is purchased, made available, or to whom it is given. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 2)  
Sec. 4-5. - Purchaser liability. 
It shall be further unlawful for any parent, legal guardian, adult husband, or adult wife of the person under 21 years of age, within the corporate limits of the City, to purchase for, or knowingly make available to, or give to, any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverage except for consumption in the actual, visible and personal presence of said parent, legal guardian, adult husband or adult wife. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 3)  
Sec. 4-6. - Local license fee. 
(a)  All holders of retail beer dealers on-premises license and retail beer dealers off premises license, or any other holder of any license issued by the State Alcoholic Beverage Commission, on premises located within the City limits, shall pay to said City, except in the case of temporary licenses, to levy and collect a license fee not to exceed one-half of the State fee for said license. 
(b)  In the event said annual license fee is not paid to the City, the City Clerk or his designee shall notify the State Alcoholic Beverage Commission of such failure to pay said license fee on the part of the said licensee. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 5)  
Sec. 4-7. - Hours of sale for mixed beverages. 
A mixed beverage permittee may sell and offer for sale mixed beverages between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day except Sunday. On Sunday he may sell mixed beverages between 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, except that an alcoholic beverage served to a customer between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday must be provided during the service of food to the customer.  
Sec. 4-8. - Hours of sale for beer. 
A person may sell, offer for sale, or deliver beer between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day except Sunday. On Sunday he may sell beer between 12:00 midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight, except that permittees or licensees authorized to sell for on-premises consumption may sell beer between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon if the beer is served to a customer during the service of food to the customer.  
Sec. 4-9. - Hours of consumption. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he consumes or possesses with intent to consume an alcoholic beverage in a public place at any time on Sunday between 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon or on any other day between 12:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. For the purposes of this subsection, a licensed or permitted premises is a public place. 
(b)  In an extended hours area, a person commits an offense if he consumes or possesses with intent to consume an alcoholic beverage in a public place at any time on Sunday between 2:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon and on any other day between 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.  
Sec. 4-10. - Extended hours. 
Sections 4-7, 4-8, and 4-9 shall not apply to any person who shall possess a valid late hours permit or extended hours permit as issued by the State Alcoholic Beverage Commission, authorizing the sale of beer, wine, liquor, mixed beverages or any alcoholic beverage in areas and on premises permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 7)  
Sec. 4-11. - Manufacturing, distilling, or producing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew or in any manner produce or cause to be produced, brewed, distilled or manufactured, any beer, liquor, or alcoholic beverage within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 8)  
Sec. 4-12. - Sales near school, church, or hospital. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or dealer to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage within: 
(1)  300 feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital; 
(2)  1,000 feet of a public school, if the Commissioner's court or the City Council receives a request from the Board of Trustees of a school district under V.T.C.A., Education Code § 38.007; or 
(3)  1,000 feet of a private school if the Commissioner's court or the City Council receives a request from the governing body of the private school. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
(1)  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
(2)  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1978, § 9)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule municipalities to define and prohibit any nuisance within municipal boundaries and 5,000 feet outside of boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.042; Local Public Health Reorganization Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.001 et seq.; treatment of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; dangerous dogs generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq.; Rabies Control Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any living vertebrae or invertebrate warm-blooded animal, domestic or wild, not including man. 
Animal Control Officer (ACO) means a person designated by the State or the City, who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of the State and the ordinances of the City. The Animal Control Officer (ACO) must be certified by the State as an animal control officer or be a licensed veterinarian. 
Animal nuisance means a public nuisance created within the corporate limits of the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) by the following acts or omissions of an animal owner: 
(1)  The keeping of an animal in such a manner whereby the animal is free of restraint to roam or run at large and at will, while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
(2)  The keeping of an animal which barks, howls or whines in such duration, so as to annoy, distress or disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons of normal nervous sensibilities within the vicinity of hearing thereof. 
(3)  The refusal or failure of an animal owner or keeper to prevent his animal from biting or injuring, without provocation, any animal or person. 
(4)  The keeping of an animal which has a propensity to damage or destroy public property or the private property of a person other than its owner's private property. 
(5)  The keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats in any premises. 
(6)  The refusal or failure of an animal owner or keeper to take corrective action which allows the accumulation of animal waste on any premises in a quantity sufficient to create an odor offensive to a person of normal sensibilities standing on any adjacent property not owned or controlled by the subject animal's owner, or which creates a condition conducive to the breeding of flies or other pests. 
Board means the State Board of Health. 
Breeder means any person who maintains an unaltered (unsterilized) dog or cat and breeds such animal for any consideration of profit, fee or compensation. 
Cat means any member of the feline or cat family and other feline species, including animals of all ages, both male and female. 
Confined means a situation by which an animal is effectively prevented from being free to roam or run at large and at will. 
Dangerous animal means any animal that meets any or all of the following criteria: 
(1)  An animal which by species or nature is vicious or dangerous to man. 
(2)  An animal that has bitten two or more people or one person on two or more occasions. 
(3)  An animal that has killed a person or another pet or livestock animal. 
(4)  An animal that has attacked a human being and the nature of the attack or the resulting injury was such as might endanger the life or permanent health of the human. 
Department means the State Department of Health. 
Dog means any member of the canine or dog family and other canine species, including animals of all ages, both male and female. 
Dog kennels and cattery mean any place other than a veterinary hospital where the property owner, tenant, or occupant keeps or is allowed to keep or board domestic dogs or cats for longer than 12 hours, for breeding, for a fee, donation or nonmonetary reward. 
Domestic fowl means birds of a breed developed or kept for the purpose of meat production, egg laying or purely for ornament or show including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, turkeys, partridges, pigeons, parrots, parakeets. 
Exotic animal means any animal that is not indigenous to the State. 
Impound means the placing of an animal in the City's animal control facility or the taking into custody of an animal for the purpose of transportation to the City's animal control facility. 
Licensed veterinarian means a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in one or more of the 50 states. 
Livestock means any horse, stallion, mare gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinney, jennet, hog, sheep, goat, llama, or head of any species of cattle. 
Muzzle means a muzzle of appropriate material with sufficient strength to restrain the animal from biting and no such muzzle employed shall be made from any material or maintained on the animal in any manner so as to cut or injure the animal. Muzzles will be required by this chapter for certain dogs or canine and other canine species, including animals of all ages, both male and female, when not confined or restrained within the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
Nuisance animal means an animal which infringes upon the rights of another animal or person; or 
(1)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
(2)  Attacks other animals while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
(3)  Trespasses on school grounds. 
(4)  Trespasses on private or public property outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
(5)  A dog or animal that is repeatedly at large. 
(6)  A dog or animal that does damage or destroys private or public property. 
(7)  Dogs that bark, howl or whine in a continuous or untimely fashion. 
Owner means any person who feeds or harbors the subject animal for three days or more. Persons caring for an animal at the specific request of an owner are not included in the definition of the term "owner," but are required to keep the animal in compliance of this chapter. 
Rabies vaccination means a protective inoculation by a licensed veterinarian with an antirabies vaccine recognized and approved by the United States Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Animal Industry, given in an amount sufficient to provide an immunity for a period of one year. 
Restraint means a situation whereby an animal is secured by a leash or a lead, or is under the effective control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands or is confined within the real property of its owner. 
Run at large means to be free of restraint while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
Stray animal means any animal not under restraint. 
Vicious animal means any animal that exhibits fierce or vicious behavior or that has attacked a person or animal with such severity as to cause physical injury or property damage, however, the fact that the animal has attempted to bite a person when that person has provoked or teased it shall not constitute the animal being a vicious animal. 
Wild animal means any nonhuman primate, racoon, skunk, fox, wolf, coyote, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bobcat, or other warm-blooded animal, or any poisonous or dangerous snake which can be found in the wild state, or any animal incapable of being completely domesticated. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 2)  
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and the inhabitants of the City by adopting the established uniform rules and regulations to set local standards for the enforcement control that are compatible with and equal to or more stringent than the rules and regulations established and adopted by the State Board of Health for the local enforcement control of dogs and cats and all other animals within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 1)  
Secs. 6-3—6-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Extent of extraterritorial jurisdiction is within one mile of the boundaries of a municipality with a population of 5,000 to 24,999 inhabitants, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021(a)(2). 
 
Sec. 6-23. - Vaccination. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep, harbor, or have control over any dog or cat in the City limits over the age of four months, unless said animal shall have been vaccinated with an antirabies vaccine. 
(b)  All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies annually in accordance with the State law. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall in no way be construed to limit the Director of Animal Control from establishing clinics for the purpose of vaccinating dogs and cats. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 3)  
Sec. 6-24. - Enforcement. 
(a)  For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter and enforcing its provisions, the Animal Control Officer, any police officer designated by the City Council, and State Health Department Officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which a dog, cat or animal is kept or harbored, and to demand and secure the owner's exhibition of such animal. 
(b)  Those officials named herein are further empowered to enter into the premises where any animal is reportedly kept in a cruel or inhumane manner to examine such animal and to take possession thereof when it reasonably appears that such animal requires humane treatment. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of these officials to enforce the animal cruelty laws of the State. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 4)  
Sec. 6-25. - Interference with enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with the Animal Control Officer while he is discharging his duties or has in his custody any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the animal control facility any animal unless the Animal Control Officer or other person in charge of the facility has authorized the release of said animal. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to do any damage or destroy any portion of the animal control facility. 
(d)  Any person violating any portion of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished upon conviction by assessment of a fine according to the schedule of fines in Chapter 28, Municipal Fees, Rates, and Deposits. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 5)  
Sec. 6-26. - Citations. 
(a)  The Animal Control Officer, the Police Department and Health Department are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(b)  Persons in violation of this chapter shall have a period of not less than ten days nor more than 30 days to comply with citations at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 6)  
Sec. 6-27. - Animal Control Officer identification. 
It shall be required by this article that because the Animal Control Officer's job has a high level of public visibility and public contact and because he is an officer of the City and the State, the Officer be issued a vehicle with visible identification. It shall be required that the Officer wear neat, clean street clothes, or a uniform if he prefers, and he shall be required to wear an ID badge while performing his duties. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 7)  
Sec. 6-28. - Number of animals permitted. 
(a)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor more than three dogs and/or cats on his premises, within the corporate limits of the City and its ETJ. 
(b)  This provision shall not apply to proprietors of animal hospitals or veterinarians, where and when such animals are kept on premises used by such business. 
(c)  This provision shall also apply to owners of animals who are animal breeders and/or kennel operators. Such businesses are required to be registered with the Animal Control Department in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Animal breeders and/or kennel operators keeping on the premises more than three dogs or cats shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section, with the following exception: the limit on the number of dogs and cats permitted shall not include pups and kittens of a litter until they are four to six months old first, and this shall be at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer. After the pups and kittens of a litter are four to six months old the owner or keeper shall have a period of not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days to reduce the number to the number required by this article through legal channels. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 8)  
Sec. 6-29. - Confinement of animals. 
(a)  From and after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived any person owning animals, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, shall confine such animal within an adequate fence or enclosure, or within a house, garage or other building on his own premises so the animal will be in compliance with this article. 
(b)  Any such animal not confined within the animal owner's real property or within the boundaries of the owner's real property will be considered to be running at large and in violation of this article and shall be impounded by the Animal Control Department. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 9)  
Sec. 6-30. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the corporate limits of the City and its ETJ any of the dogs substantially conforming to the standards of the American Kennel Club for American Staffordshire Terrier or Staffordshire Bull Terrier or the United Kennel Club for American Pit Bull Terrier. These dogs may be permitted if the owner registers the animal with the Animal Control Department and local veterinarian and the owner will be required by this section to meet all the requirements of dangerous animal owners, as provided herein by this article. 
(b)  Other prohibited animals are: 
(1)  Any ape or other nonhuman primates; 
(2)  Any member of the genus canis, including, wolf, hybird wolf, coyote, jackal, or fox, and similar species except canis familiaris; 
(3)  Any member of the genus fells, including, leopard, lion, tiger, lynx, bobcat, cheetah, acelot margay, jaguarundi and any similar species except felis domesticus; 
(4)  A skunk, opossum, raccoon, armadillo and squirrel. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 10)  
Sec. 6-31. - Nuisance animals. 
Owners of nuisance animals shall be subject to fines. Nuisance animals are any animals which infringe upon the rights of another animal or person or: 
(1)  Molest passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Attack other animals; 
(3)  Trespass on school grounds; or 
(4)  Damage private or public property by the following acts or omissions of an animal owner: 
a.  Dig in lawns and gardens; 
b.  Polluting, with animal waste, public sidewalks, public rights-of-way, and public and private property; 
c.  Injure or kill pets, livestock, birds or other wild animals; or 
d.  Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 11)  
Sec. 6-32. - Animals creating public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City and its ETJ to allow an animal to create a public nuisance within the City and its ETJ by the following acts or omissions of an animal owner: 
(1)  The keeping of an animal in such a manner whereby the animal is free of restraint to roam or run at large and at will, while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
(2)  The keeping of an animal which barks, whines, or howls in such excessive duration, so as to annoy, distress or disturb the quiet comfort or repose of persons of normal nervous sensibilities within the vicinity of hearing thereof. 
(3)  The refusal or failure of an animal owner or keeper to prevent his animal from biting or injuring without provocation, any animal or person. 
(4)  The keeping of an animal which has a propensity to damage or destroy public property or private property or a person other than his owner's private property. 
(5)  The keeping of more than a total of three dogs or cats in any lot or premises within the City. 
(6)  The refusal or failure of an animal owner or keeper to take corrective action which allows the accumulation of animal waste on any premises in a quantity sufficient to create an odor offensive to a person of normal sensibilities standing on any adjacent property not owned or controlled by the subject animal's owner. 
(7)  The refusal or failure of an animal owner to take corrective action which allows any quantity of animal waste to create a condition conducive to the breeding of flies or other pests. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 12)  
Sec. 6-33. - Animals running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an animal owner or keeper to allow his animal to run at large and at will, free of restraint while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner. 
(b)  Any animal found running at large will be impounded by the Animal Control Department whether the dog is wearing tags or is untagged. 
(c)  The Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement officers shall have the power to impound or have impounded an unrestrained animal for the purpose of abating the following nuisance circumstances: 
(1)  When an unrestrained animal is on public property, in all cases; 
(2)  When an unrestrained animal is on private property, if the consent of the resident or property owner is obtained; 
(3)  When an unrestrained animal is on private property, in all cases except the rear yard of residences, if the Officer reasonably believes that the animal will run at large if not impounded; 
(d)  Owners and keepers of animals running at large will be cited and fined; 
(e)  Owners and keepers of animals running at large shall incur the cost of impoundment. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 13)  
Secs. 6-34—6-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 6-55. - Impounding nuisance animals. 
The Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement officers shall have the power to impound animals which create an animal nuisance, per se, for the purpose of abating the nuisance as follows: 
(1)  When the animal creating the nuisance is on public property, in all cases; 
(2)  When the animal creating the nuisance is on private property if the consent of the resident or property owner is obtained; 
(3)  When the Officer reasonably believes there is immediate and imminent danger or peril to the public if the animal in question is not impounded; 
(4)  If directed and authorized by appropriate courts of law. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 14)  
Sec. 6-56. - Notifying owner of impounded animal. 
If the known owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately, upon impoundment, notify the owner at the address where the owner resides or by mail. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 15)  
Sec. 6-57. - Maximum impoundment time; release or euthanasia authorized. 
(a)  Impounded dogs and cats, owned or unowned, shall be kept for not less than 72 hours or three working days. 
(b)  In the case of impounded, tagged, identified animals, where the owner can be notified by certified mail, with return receipt requested, the owner after having received verified notification of impoundment will have a period of 72 hours or three working days to get the animal. 
(c)  If after reasonable effort to locate the owner of an animal, which has the owner's identification, has failed, or if the owner of such animal fails or refuses to claim and repossess such animal, the Animal Control Officer may deliver custody and possession of such animal to a suitable person for adoption, or after ten days of impoundment the animal may be euthanized; this will be at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 16)  
Sec. 6-58. - Return of captured animal to owner. 
(a)  In addition to the issuance of a citation, the Animal Control Officer may return an animal found at large to the known owner in lieu of impounding the animal. 
(b)  The owner may redeem the impounded animal during normal business hours by paying the impoundment fee, boarding fees and the prerelease rabies vaccination fee, if required by law for the subject species and proof of valid vaccination cannot be produced. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 17)  
Sec. 6-59. - Unclaimed animals. 
Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within the period of 72 hours or three working days shall become the property of the City. The City may offer said animal for adoption, sale, or humanely euthanize the animal at the discretion of the City veterinarian. The selection of an animal for adoption during the reclamation period or the following adoption period shall not confer any ownership right or right of possession to the animal. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 18)  
Sec. 6-60. - Adopting impounded animals; liability of claimant. 
(a)  Any citizen claiming or adopting any animal under the provisions of this section shall be liable only for the payment of fees for vaccination and spay or neuter surgery, if necessary. 
(b)  All animals adopted from the animal control facility shall be spayed or neutered within 30 days: 
(1)  Unless the procedure has already been accomplished; or 
(2)  The animal is less than six months of age. 
(c)  Persons adopting an animal from the animal control facility shall put up a spay/neuter deposit which will be collected and deposited with the City for each animal adopted that has not yet been spayed or neutered. This deposit will be returned by the City upon application and presentment of a valid spay/neuter certificate. The Animal Control Department is authorized to collect a fee for each animal spayed or neutered. 
(d)  Any animal which becomes the property of the Animal Control Department may not be sold or given to persons or medical laboratories for experimental purposes. 
(e)  The Animal Control Department or the City are not liable nor do they guarantee the health of any animal adopted from the facility. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 19)  
Secs. 6-61—6-82. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-83. - Abandoning animals. 
It is unlawful for any person to abandon an animal anywhere within the City limits or its ETJ. Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished upon conviction by assessment of a fine at the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 20)  
Sec. 6-84. - Killing or wounding animals and fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wound or kill any animal, bird or fowl of any description within the City limits, its ETJ or any public parks of the City, and this will be punishable by a fine. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 21)  
Sec. 6-85. - Reports of motor vehicles striking domestic animals. 
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall at once report the accident to the Animal Control Officer or the Police Department. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 23)  
Sec. 6-86. - Safety of animals in motor vehicles; seizure of cruelly treated animals. 
(a)  Animals in moving vehicles. No person shall transport or carry on any public roadway or street any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle; and if traveling in an unenclosed vehicle including, but not limited to, convertibles, pickup trucks, jeeps, and flatbed trucks, the animals shall be confined by a vented container or cage, or by chain, rope or other device cross-tied to prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle or from strangling on a single leash. 
(b)  Animals in parked vehicles; removal if endangered. No person shall leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health or safety. Any Animal Control Officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable force, including the breaking of a side window, to remove an animal from a vehicle whenever it appears the animal's health or safety is, or soon will be, endangered and said neglected or endangered animal shall be impounded. 
(c)  Seizure powers utilized liberally in cruelty cases. The Animal Control Officer shall liberally utilize the authority granted by section 821.022 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.022) to seize and impound any animal if the investigating Animal Control Officer has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, pending a hearing before any Justice of the Peace of the County or any Municipal Court Judge on the issues of cruelty and disposition of the animal. Seizure of the subject animal prior to receiving a warrant is hereby authorized if such a delay endangers the life of the animal, or if it would unreasonably prolong the suffering of the animal needing immediate attention. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 24)  
Secs. 6-87—6-108. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DANGEROUS/VICIOUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-109. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous/vicious animal means any animal who meets any or all of the following criteria: 
(1)  An animal which by species or nature is dangerous or vicious to man. 
(2)  Any animal that has killed a domestic animal or fowl without provocation while off the owner's property. 
(3)  Any animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts severe, injury or death to a person or bites a person on public or private property. 
(4)  Any animal which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the street, sidewalks, or any public or private property in lawful possession of a person other than the animal owner, in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack such that the person reasonably believes that the animal will cause physical injury to that person. 
(5)  Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or threaten the safety of persons or domestic animals. 
(6)  Any animal that has bitten two or more people or one person on two or more occasions. 
(7)  Any animal that has killed a person or another pet or livestock animal. 
(8)  Any animal that has attacked a human being and the nature of the attack or the resulting injury was such as might endanger the life or permanent health of the human. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 25)  
Sec. 6-110. - Penalties for dangerous animal violations. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of an animal which, when unprovoked, inflicts severe injury or death to a person or bites a person on public or private property, or which kills a domestic pet or animal without provocation while off the owner's property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not less than $200.00, but not more than $2,000.00. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner or keeper to fail to prevent a dangerous animal from killing or wounding, or assisting in the killing or wounding, of any pet or domestic animal belonging to or in possession of another person, or for an owner or keeper to fail to prevent a dangerous animal from attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any person, or assisting in the attack, assault, biting or other injury of any person: 
(1)  Whether out of or within the enclosure of the owner or keeper. 
(2)  Whether or not such dangerous animal was on a leash or securely muzzled. 
(3)  Whether or not the dangerous animal escaped without the knowledge or consent of the owner or keeper. The Animal Control Officer shall seize and destroy such dangerous animal in an expeditious and humane manner. 
In addition the owner or keeper shall be cited for the offense, which shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $2,000.00. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 30)  
Sec. 6-111. - Animal declared to be dangerous. 
(a)  An animal shall be automatically declared to be a dangerous animal by an Animal Control Officer under section 6-109(2), (3), (4) and (7). 
(b)  Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals, made under oath before an individual authorized by law to make sworn statements, or made at the Office of the Animal Control Officer, setting forth the nature of the event: 
(1)  The owners of the animals; 
(2)  The address of the owners; 
(3)  The description of the animals doing such act. 
The Animal Control Officer shall investigate the complaint, including discussing the matter with the owner if that person can be located, and may determine if a dog is a dangerous animal under section 6-109(3) or (4). 
(c)  The owner of an animal shall have the right to provide such an affidavit or statement concerning his own animal. 
(d)  If the investigator concludes that seizure is a reasonable precaution to ensure the health and safety of people and animals nearby, pending a hearing by the Municipal Court, the Municipal Court may order the immediate seizure of the animal. 
(e)  An administrative search warrant shall be obtained from any Municipal Court Magistrate to enter onto private property to search for the previously declared or allegedly dangerous animal if permission to enter the subject premises is denied by a person in lawful possession. 
(f)  If the animal cannot be safely approached, a tranquilizer gun may be used by the Animal Control Designee Veterinarian. The costs of securing said animal pending the determination hearing shall be borne by the owner. 
(g)  Upon receipt of a completed affidavit of complaint the animal will be confined at a facility or other location designated by the Animal Control Officer until the dangerous animal determination hearing has been conducted, and the appeal if any is conducted, resulting in a final determination. 
(h)  If the animal under consideration is determined to be dangerous, it will remain in confinement at the facility directed by the Animal Control Officer until the animal owner is able to demonstrate the ability to comply with all requirements of the dangerous animal provisions as outlined in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 26)  
Sec. 6-112. - Notification of dangerous animal declaration. 
(a)  Within five working days after declaring an animal dangerous, the Animal Control Officer shall notify the owner, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the reason for the declaration, and of all requirements for the owner of a dangerous animal as set out in this article. 
(b)  If the animal is declared to be dangerous under section 6-109(3) and (4) the notice shall inform the owner of the animal that a determination hearing must be requested to contest the declaration. 
(c)  The request for a determination hearing must be in writing and must be received by the Animal Control Officer no later than five working days from receipt by the owner of the dangerous animal declaration. 
(d)  Failure to appeal the declaration of a dangerous animal within five days shall result in the Animal Control Officer's declaration being final with no appeal. 
(e)  The cost of securing said animal, boarding and final disposal shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 27)  
Sec. 6-113. - Defense of dangerous animal declaration. 
It is a defense to the determination of an animal as dangerous and the prosecution of the owner of an animal if: 
(1)  Threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal. 
(2)  The person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has in the past been observed as reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal. 
(3)  The person was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(4)  The domestic animal killed was at the time teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal. 
(5)  The animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an attack or assault. 
(6)  The animal was protecting her offspring, itself or its kennelmate. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 28)  
Sec. 6-114. - Requirements of dangerous animal owners. 
(a)  An owner of an animal that is dangerous or vicious, whether by species or nature, or if declared dangerous by an administrative appeal hearing official, must comply with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Before the owner can keep a dangerous animal, the owner must arrange to have the residence inspected where the animal is to be kept, and the Animal Control Officer must be satisfied that the requirements, which could have already been complied with, have been complied with by the owner. 
(2)  The animal has to be registered with the Animal Control Department as a dangerous animal. 
(3)  The dangerous animal shall at all times wear a collar, approved by the Animal Control Department and local veterinarian, visible at 50 feet so that the animal can be identified as a dangerous animal. 
(4)  The dangerous animal must be kept in a proper enclosure, such as a fence or a structure/pen, and the: 
a.  Fence or structure/pen must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet; 
b.  Fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of small or young children; 
c.  Enclosure must be locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape on its own volition; 
d.  Enclosure shall be securely locked at all times; 
e.  Structure/pen must have secured sides to prevent the dangerous animal from escaping from the enclosure; 
f.  Structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements for the dangerous animal; 
g.  Fence around the structure/pen must be no less than six feet in height unless the Animal Control Officer requires that the fence be higher than six feet or requires a secure top and/or bottom be added to the structure/pen if the need is demonstrated. 
(b)  These additional requirements shall be based upon the type of animal to be kept in the enclosure and its anticipated ability to escape: 
(1)  The owner shall post a sign on his premises warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property. The sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. In addition the sign shall have a design or uniform dangerous animal symbol or decal understandable by small children which must be displayed on or about the sign. 
(2)  The owner must present to the Animal Control Department a certificate of public liability insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 to cover any injuries caused by the dangerous animal. The insurance shall be kept in effect continuously and shall not be canceled unless the animal is no longer kept by the insured owner. 
(3)  The dangerous animal, when taken outside the enclosure, must be securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal; and the dangerous animal must be restrained by a chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of 1,000 pounds and not to exceed six feet in length. 
(4)  If the owner of an animal declared to be dangerous is unable or unwilling to comply with the ownership requirements listed above at any time, the animal must be euthanized by an animal shelter, animal control agency, or licensed veterinarian. An animal declared to be vicious under this article shall not be offered for adoption or sale. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 29)  
Secs. 6-115—6-138. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LIVESTOCK, HORSE, FOWL AND SWINE 
 
Sec. 6-139. - Livestock. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any livestock within the City limits. In conformity with "The City of Pearsall, Texas Zoning Ordinance," no private stable, swine, cattle, horses, goats or other livestock, fowl or animal of any kind shall be permitted to be kept inside the City limits, with the exception of: 
(1)  Domestic pets, dogs and cats, and only with the permitted number per section 6-28. 
(2)  Temporary school livestock, fowl or agricultural projects and then only with the approval of the Zoning Administrator and the Animal Control Department. 
(3)  Animals kept in a veterinarian hospital or clinic. 
(4)  Property which falls under the grandfather clause. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 31)  
Sec. 6-140. - Horses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a horse or any member of the horse family within the City limits. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to ride any horse or any member of the horse family within any street, park, downtown, school or anywhere within the City limits for the safety, health and general welfare of the community and the inhabitants of the City, except when a permit has been requested and issued by the City and the requirements and conditions of such permit are met. 
(c)  Permits may be obtained at City Hall for parades; festivals; special events or occasions. Any person or organization requesting such permit within the City limits is required to: 
(1)  Have liability insurance and proof of such insurance in case of any accident or damage that might occur. 
(2)  Have poop scoopers to remove and clean any area where the animal deposits any kind of waste matter anywhere within the City. 
(3)  Remove horses or any other livestock within the City limits as soon as possible after the event is over. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 32)  
Sec. 6-141. - Domestic fowl. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any domestic fowl or poultry on any premises within the City, provided that: 
(1)  Parakeets. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain more than ten parakeets on any premises within the City, provided that the parakeets are kept within a building at least 25 feet from any dwelling or business building owned or occupied by any person other than the owner. 
(2)  Parrots. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain more than two parrots on any premises within the City, provided that the parrots are kept within 25 feet from any dwelling or business building owned or occupied by any person other than the owner. 
(3)  Poultry. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any poultry on any premises within the City, provided that the poultry is a school project of a FFA member under the supervision of a high school vocational agricultural teacher or of a 4-H member under the supervision of the County Agricultural Agent, other than for the purposes and at the location indicated herein: 
a.  When kept at the home of a FFA member and/or 4-H member with the supervision of the persons referenced in subsection (3) of this section. 
b.  They will only be allowed a limited period of time, not yearround. 
c.  The poultry must be registered with the Animal Control Department and Zoning Administration for periodic inspections by such City officials. 
d.  No more than four poultry may be kept on a single lot and they must be confined within a pen. 
e.  The pen or enclosure shall not be less than 20 feet from any dwelling or business building owned or occupied by any person other than the owner. 
f.  All poultry owners or keepers shall maintain sanitary standards for collecting and disposing of waste by placing it in a disposable container, sealing the container, and disposing of it as household garbage. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 33)  
Sec. 6-142. - Swine. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain swine within the City limits other than for the purpose and at the location indicated: 
(1)  When located at and on the property of any vocational high school, with facilities properly constructed as determined by the Animal Control Officer. 
(2)  When kept at the home of a FFA member under the supervision of a high school vocational agricultural teacher or 4-H member under the supervision of the County Agricultural Agent, and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The property upon which the FFA or 4-H member resides and maintains the swine must be a minimum of one acre in area with a maximum of five swine. 
b.  The minimum pen size shall be 625 square feet per swine, for those over 50 pounds, and the pen must be covered with a roof having a minimum of 100 square feet per hog with a minimum pen width of 15 feet. 
c.  All swine must be grain fed. 
d.  Hog wallows are prohibited. 
e.  Swine must be on self-watered or similar equipment approved by the Animal Control Officer. There shall be a slap or other solid type construction under the tank covering the area of four feet in each direction. 
f.  The open and adjacent areas must be kept clean. 
g.  The student or member must be under close supervision of a vocational teacher or the County Agricultural Agent. If the student or member does not conform to the City's regulations, such advisor will report the violations to the Animal Control Officer, or if the City, through periodic inspections, finds violations, it shall terminate immediately the keeping and maintaining of the swine at such location. 
h.  All pens or enclosures shall be a minimum of 150 feet from any residential dwelling or business building owned or occupied by any person other than the owner of the swine or person keeping and maintaining same. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 34)  
Sec. 6-143. - Removal of animal waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful not to clean, or remove any animal waste or manure of animals, fowl and livestock from, pens, cages, enclosures, corrals or standings at least once each day. All animal waste and fowl waste shall be disposed of by placing it in a disposable container, sealing the container, and disposing of it as household garbage. 
(b)  Livestock waste or manure shall be deposited in a manure storage bin of concrete or metal construction and shall be provided with a fly-tight lid. Such manure and other livestock animal waste shall be removed from this bin at least once each week to a disposal site approved by the Director of Public Health. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 35)  
Sec. 6-144. - Breeding and harboring of flies. 
It shall be unlawful to permit or allow fly breeding on premises on which animals, fowl or livestock are kept. Punishable by fine, and any permitting or allowing of such use shall be authorized denial, suspension or revocation of such use and the location shall be terminated immediately. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, § 36)  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General enforcement authority of municipalities for preservation of health, property and good government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq.; municipal regulation of structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board means the Board of Adjustment of the City. 
Building means an enclosed structural unit, anchored to a permanent foundation, and having exterior or party walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of persons, animals or property. 
Commercial means occupied with business and commerce, designed mainly for profit. 
Conditional use means a use which may be permitted in a district subject to meeting certain conditions or procedures, as set forth in the Zoning chapter. 
Homestead means the fixed residence of the head of the family, with the land and buildings surrounding the main house. 
Planning and Zoning Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
Residential means used as a residence or by residents. 
Special exception means permission given by the Board of Adjustment, properly authorized by ordinance, in specific cases for an applicant to use his property in a manner contrary to the provisions of the Zoning chapter, provided such use subserves the general welfare and preserves the community interest. 
Structure means any construction, or any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner; that which is built or constructed; an edifice or building of any kind. 
Variance means relief from or variation of the provisions of regulations, other than use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning. It is an authorization given by the Board of Adjustment granting relief and doing substantial justice in the use of the applicant's property by the owner where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning chapter, will result in unnecessary hardship. 
Zoning Administrator means a member of the City, appointed by the City Manager, who has the duty of administering the Zoning chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 2)  
Sec. 8-2. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall have committed an offense under this chapter punishable as a class C misdemeanor as defined in the Texas Penal Code, which imposes a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  Each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  If the Zoning Administrator shall find, or if any person files with him a complaint in writing alleging that, any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall immediately investigate and, when necessary, give written notice to the person responsible to cease such violations forthwith. Said notice may be delivered in person or by certified mail to the violator or to any person of the property or by certified mail to any person of the property where a violation is occurring. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 7; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 7)  
Sec. 8-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform system of fees, charges and expenses for building, occupancy and other related permits issued by the City. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 1)  
Sec. 8-4. - City powers. 
Pursuant to section 20.13 of the Home Rule Charter, the City shall have the power to prohibit the erection or construction of any building or structure of any kind within the City and its ETJ without permits having been issued by the City for the construction or erection of such building or structure, as well as the installation of plumbing, electrical, gas, air conditioning/heating and other related building or structural systems, and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permits, and in pursuance of said authority may authorize the inspection by the City of all buildings or structures. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 3)  
Sec. 8-5. - Building permits required. 
(a)  No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit, therefore, issued by the Building Official. 
(b)  A building permit shall not be issued except in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning chapter, unless otherwise authorized in a written order from the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review of variance and/or special exception. 
(c)  The Building Official shall be empowered to act within the provisions of this chapter upon all applications for building permits, and the same shall be approved or denied not later than the fifth business day succeeding the day of filing. In the event of refusal to issue a permit upon application, as herein provided, the applicant may perfect an appeal to the Board of Adjustment as provided for hereafter: 
(1)  Building permit becomes invalid. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within six months from the date of the issuance thereof, said permit shall be cancelled by the Building Official and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
(2)  Conformity of construction and use. A building permit may be revoked by the Building Official at any time prior to the completion of the building or structure for which the same was issued, when it shall appear that there is departure from the plans, specifications or conditions as required under the terms of the permit; that the same was procured by false representation or was issued by mistakes, or that any of the provisions of this chapter, are being violated. Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of any owner, his agent, contractor or duly authorized representative to secure such permit and pay the prescribed fee therefor, as herein provided, the Building Official may issue a stop order; provided, however, 24 hours' written notice of such revocation or order to stop shall be served upon the owner, his agent or contractor, or upon any persons employed upon the building or structure for which such permit was issued, and thereafter no such construction shall proceed. 
(3)  A conditional use permit is required for all conditional uses. A conditional use permit may have a specified time limitation attached and may impose conditions other than those which are specifically set forth in this chapter. Granting a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with other applicable ordinances. 
(4)  Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(5)  Appeals from action of the Board of Adjustment. Any person, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City, may present to a Court of Record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the Court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the Office of the Board. 
(6)  Special exceptions. In conformity with the provisions of the Zoning chapter, a special exception may be granted on an application when the Board finds that the granting of such special exception: 
a.  Will not be injurious or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the general public; 
b.  Will not be detrimental or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or neighborhood in which the property is located; and 
c.  Will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning chapter. 
(7)  Variances. In conformity with the provisions of the Zoning chapter, a variance may be granted on an application when the Board finds that: 
a.  There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or buildings and do not apply generally to lands or buildings in the same zone or neighborhood and, that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of the Zoning chapter, would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building; 
b.  The granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or neighborhood in which the property is located; 
c.  The granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance, as granted by the Board, is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose; 
d.  That the literal enforcement and strict application of the provisions of the Zoning chapter, will result in unnecessary hardship and be inconsistent with the general provisions and intent of the chapter and, that in granting such variance, the spirit of the Zoning chapter, will be preserved and substantial justice done; and 
e.  In addition to considering the character and use of adjoining buildings and those in the vicinity the Board, in determining its findings, shall take into account the number of persons residing or working in such buildings or upon such land and traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 4)  
Sec. 8-6. - Certificates of Zoning Compliance and Occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, nor will permanent utility connections to serve the premises be made, until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance/Occupancy shall have been issued therefore by the Zoning Administrator stating that the proposed use of the land conforms to the requirements of the Zoning chapter. 
(b)  A temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance/Occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period not to exceed six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all Certificates of Zoning Compliance/Occupancy, which shall be open to public inspection. 
(d)  Failure of the owner/landlord to obtain a Certificate of Zoning Compliance/Occupancy shall be a violation of this section and punishable under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 5)  
Sec. 8-7. - Liability of Building Inspector. 
Where action is taken by the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter, such action shall be in the name of and on behalf of the City, and the Inspector in so acting shall not render himself personally liable for any damage which may accrue to persons or property as a result of an action committed in good faith in the discharge of his duties, and any suit brought against any inspector by reason thereof shall be defended by the City Attorney until final determination of the proceedings contained therein. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 8)  
Sec. 8-8. - Responsibility for defects unchanged. 
This chapter does not relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating, or controlling any electrical workmanship, for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be regarded as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or certificate of approval issued as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 9)  
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing authority's power to deny, suspend, or revoke business license due to criminal background, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.; municipal regulation of miscellaneous businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.001 et seq.; home rule municipal authority to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to its police powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; uniformity required in the issuance of local permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 245.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pool or billiard table means any table surrounded by a ledge or a cushion with or without pockets, upon which balls are propelled by a stick or cue, and where the player thereon does not or is not required to make a coin deposit causing an electrical connection of any nature or kind before such game may actually commence. 
(Ord. of 8-11-1966, § 1)  
Sec. 10-2. - Hours of operation. 
No person may engage in the operation for profit of any pool or billiard table within the City on weekdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. following; provided, further, that such table may be operated on Sundays only between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 8-11-1966, § 2)  
Secs. 10-3—10-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS 
 
Sec. 10-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Designated, established business location within Frio County, Texas, means the ownership and occupancy of a lot or other tract of land, and building thereon, within Frio County, Texas, used by the person, or the person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other form of business entity he represents, in direct selling of the product or service within the City, or the leasing or renting of a building within Frio County, Texas, by such a person, or the person, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other form of business entity he represents, such building being used in the direct selling of the product or service within the City, provided that the leasing or renting of such building is for a continuous period of time, or not less than 90 days. 
Designated, established residence within Frio County, Texas, means the ownership and legal and continuous occupancy of a lot or other tract of land and residence located thereon within Frio County, Texas, by such person, or by the person he represents, or the prior continuous occupancy, for a period of not less than 90 days, of rented or leased quarters within Frio County, Texas, by such person, or the person he represents, as the only residence or place of abode of either such person. 
Itinerant or transient vendor means any person representing himself, or representing another person, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other form of business entity, selling any product or service within the City, when neither such person, or the person, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other business entity he represents, has a designated, established residence or business location within Frio County, Texas. 
Product or service means any physical or material object or item, or any service of whatsoever nature, or any property right of any value represented by an oral or written promise or contract. 
Selling means selling, leasing or renting direct to the ultimate owner or user of such product or service, or to the agent or other representative of the ultimate owner or user of such product or service, whether such selling involves the delivery of the product or service at the time of the sale, or the taking of orders for future delivery, and whether such selling involves payment in advance, payment on delivery, by whatever means of delivery, or deferred payment after the delivery of the product or service sold. 
Ultimate owner or user means any member of any family for any other member of such family. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 2)  
Sec. 10-26. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $200.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 14)  
Sec. 10-27. - Purpose. 
This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the State and of the City, for the purpose of establishing a reasonable method and system of inquiring into the history and background of transient and itinerant persons engaged in selling any product or service in the City, for the purpose of determining the honesty and integrity of such persons, and whether or not they are engaged in fraudulently representing the product or service they sell, and whether or not they are engaged in the selling and receiving of valuable consideration for a product or service which does not exist or is not intended to ever exist, all for the safety, protection, and best interest of the citizens of the City, and all of the provisions of this article shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 1)  
Sec. 10-28. - Entering premises without invitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any solicitors of orders for goods, wares, or merchandise; peddlers; itinerant merchants; or transient vendors of goods, wares, or merchandise, to go in or upon any private premises situated within the corporate limits of the City for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the purpose of selling or disposing of or peddling the same, without having first been requested or invited to go in or upon such premises by the owner or occupant thereof for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 3)  
Sec. 10-29. - Selling on City-owned property. 
No selling activities described in section 10-28 shall be allowed upon or within any municipally owned and operated premises within the City, regardless of the status of the person so selling, whether itinerant, transient, permanent, locally domiciled, or otherwise, unless such person obtains a written permit from the City Manager or designee under the terms, conditions and consideration to be determined by the City. This section shall not apply to streets, sidewalks, and alleys, and no permit shall be issued which would authorize the violation of section 10-28. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 4)  
Sec. 10-30. - Selling on streets, sidewalks and alleys. 
No person, regardless of nature, itinerant, transient, permanent, locally domiciled or otherwise, shall engage in any kind of selling activity described in section 10-28 on the public streets, sidewalks and alleys of the City unless such person shall first register with the City Manager or designee and obtain a permit therefor. Such permit shall only be issued by the City Manager or designee if the applicable provisions of sections 10-27, 10-32, 10-33, and 28-4 are met and applicants shall have filed proof with the City Manager or designee of compliance with City health codes, if applicable. If the selling activity involves the use or operation of a motor vehicle, the applicant shall also file with the City Manager or designee proof that such business entity has, in force, a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, with minimum policy limits as follows: $100,000.00 per person; $300,000.00 for any single occurrence for bodily injury or death; and $10,000.00 for any single occurrence for injury to or destruction of property. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 5)  
Sec. 10-31. - Registration required. 
Each itinerant or transient vendor, prior to engaging in the selling of any product or service within the City, shall first register with the City Manager or designee at the office of such Manager or designee in the City Hall, on registration forms provided for that purpose. No such person shall sell any product or service until the registration card provided for in this section has been issued to him and he is carrying it on his person at the time of his activities. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 6)  
Sec. 10-32. - Registration information. 
The form for registration shall require, and each person registering shall furnish, the following information: 
(1)  The full name of the person registering. 
(2)  Whether or not he has a permanent home and/or business address, and if so, setting out such address. 
(3)  Whether or not the registrant represents himself or another person or other business entity, and if so, the name and permanent home or business address, if any, of such other person or other business entity. 
(4)  The names, including state and county, of the last preceding cities or towns in which the person registering conducted selling operations, up to but not exceeding the last five such towns or cities immediately preceding his arrival in the City. 
(5)  A detailed description of the product or service to be offered for sale and sold by such person within the City, including display of samples, if any, at the time of registering. 
(6)  The names and address of references, if any, including banks and inspection and approval agencies. 
(7)  A statement by the registrant, under oath, as to whether he has ever been sued in a civil or criminal proceeding in a duly constituted court of law for any form of fraud, theft, or embezzlement; and whether or not the person or other business entity he may represent, has ever been, to the registrant's knowledge, convicted in a duly constituted court of law for any form of fraud, theft or embezzlement. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 7)  
Sec. 10-33. - Bond. 
No license shall be issued prior to the posting of a cash bond or surety bond with the City Manager or designee in an amount of not less than $1,000.00, which bond shall be payable to the City for the use and benefit of any person entitled thereto, and conditioned that the principal and surety will pay all damages to any person caused by or arising from or growing out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of the itinerant merchant while conducting the sale or exhibit in the City. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the license as provided herein and one year thereafter. Any surety bond shall provide for ten days' written notice to the City Manager or designee prior to cancellation or material change. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 8)  
Sec. 10-34. - Investigation of registrant and his principal. 
The City Manager or designee shall, upon each registration, forthwith deliver a copy thereof to the Police Department, which shall thereupon conduct an inquiry of the reputation and background of the person registering and the person or other business entity, if any, that such registrant represents. Such investigation shall not exceed seven days in time. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 10)  
Sec. 10-35. - Issuance, denial of registration card. 
(a)  Upon completion of the investigation provided for in section 10-34, if no evidence of fraud, theft or embezzlement in the selling operations of the registrant, person or other business entity, if any, that the registrant represents, is discovered or determined, the Police Department shall issue to such a registration card bearing the name of such registrant, person, or other business entity, if any, that the registrant represents, a statement to the effect that such registrant has been registered and approved by the City for selling within the City the product or service he is selling, and bearing the signature of the Chief of Police. 
(b)  In the event evidence of fraud, theft or embezzlement, in the entity he represents, is developed and discovered in such investigation, the registrant shall be denied permission to operate in the City and no registration card shall be issued to him. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 11)  
Sec. 10-36. - Term and renewal of registration card. 
A registration shall be effective for a one-year period from the date issued. In the event the registrant desires to continue selling activities in the City in the state of an itinerant or transient vendor, he shall again register, pay the prescribed fee, and qualify for a new card, as provided for in this article, continuing such reregistration each year for so long as he shall continue his selling operations within the City; provided that, in the event the registrant, or the person or business entity, if any, that he represents, should establish a County residence or business site, as defined in section 10-25, the requirement of registering and licensing shall terminate for so long as such established residence or business site is maintained in the County. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 12)  
Sec. 10-37. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect or control the following: 
(1)  The selling of products or services wholesale to retail dealers within the City. 
(2)  The selling of products or services within the City by use of the United States mail exclusively, and where no personal contact by the seller, or agents of the seller or purchaser, is had. 
(3)  The selling of insurance contracts by registered agents. 
(4)  The selling of products to be delivered to the purchaser direct from an out-of-state source in the original package. 
(5)  Solicitations for charitable purposes. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 13)  
Secs. 10-38—10-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUSINESS LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business shall be as defined by the Texas State Comptroller. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 1, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-55. - Registration requirements. 
Every business operating in the City of Pearsall is required to apply for and display a business license issued by the City of Pearsall and annually complete an application that shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the business and the business owner; 
(2)  The address of the business and the address of the owner; 
(3)  The business telephone number and the cell phone number of the owner or manager; 
(4)  Type of business and/or primary business operation; 
(5)  Legal description of the business site; 
(6)  Signature of applicant indicating all information submitted is correct. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-56. - Certificate of occupancy. 
In order to operate a business in the City of Pearsall, every business must have a valid certificate of occupancy in addition to a valid business license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 3, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-57. - Application fee. 
The first application will be due by July 1, 2017. The application fee for those timely filed by July 1, 2017 shall be waived. Thereafter, every business operating in the City shall pay an annual business license fee that expires on December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 4, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-58. - Issuance of license. 
The building development services director or his designee will issue an applicant a business license after complying with all the requirements in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 5, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-59. - Enforcement. 
The duly constituted authorities of the City, including the building development services department and others having the duty of enforcing the ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 6, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-60. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine or not more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 7, 2-21-2017)  
Secs. 10-61—10-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GAME ROOMS AND AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES 
 
Sec. 10-80. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement redemption machine means any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance that for a consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance, including but not limited to, gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, roulette, video poker, tic-tac-toe eight-liner or similar electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so. 
City official means a code enforcement officer or building official of the City of Pearsall or any peace officer of the State of Texas. 
Game room means a building, facility or other place that is open to the public and that contains one or more operational amusement redemption machines. 
Game room owner means a person who has any ownership interest in a game room or an owner, director, or officer of a business entity that has any ownership interest in a game room. 
Operational machine means a machine that is ready to be played and accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(1.01), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-81. - Licensing. 
(a)  Payment of fee and issuance of license. An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license by paying to the City an annual inspection and amusement redemption machine game room license fee. 
(b)  Application. Application shall not be approved until a completed application has been submitted and found to meet all application requirements. An applicant for a license or permit shall file with the Department of Community Development a written application on a form provided for that purpose, which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner, operator, or lessee of the amusement redemption machine game room. Should an applicant maintain an amusement redemption machine game room at more than one location, a separate application must be filed for each location. The following information is required in the application: 
(1)  Location, by address, of the proposed operation; 
(2)  A copy of the certificate of formation if the business is registered with the secretary of state, or the applicant's d/b/a, if applicable; 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of the following persons, if applicable: 
a.  Applicant, if a natural person; 
b.  All persons who own 25 percent or more interest in the amusement redemption machine game room; 
c.  All corporate officers, if any, of such business; 
d.  If a partnership, each of the general and limited partners; 
e.  The property owner; and 
f.  The manager of the property and/or business. 
(4)  The previous occupation(s) of the applicant and, if applicable, all corporate officers and partners of the applicant within the preceding five years; 
(5)  Whether a previous license or permit of applicant, or, if applicable, corporate or partner of applicant, has been revoked within two years of filing of the application; 
(6)  Number of amusement redemption machines in the amusement redemption machine game room. 
(7)  An authorization to conduct a background check for all individuals included in subsection (b)(3) of this section. The license will be denied if any individual has any convictions, guilty pleas, or deferred adjudications related to gambling or organized crime or any felony within the prior five years. 
(8)  A sworn statement that: 
a.  That all the facts contained in the application are true and correct; 
b.  The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine game room will not violate any applicable deed restrictions; 
c.  The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in accordance with all laws and City Ordinances, including V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 47; 
d.  Acknowledgment that the Application and Permit Processes of this article do not in any way legalize anything prohibited under V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 47; and 
e.  Acknowledgment that V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 47.01(4)(b)'s exclusion includes only those machines that are in good faith intended, produced, and made fit only for the single, limited purpose of entertainment. 
(9)  Name, address, and telephone number of any emergency contact person who can be reached after hours. 
(c)  Expiration and renewal. 
(1)  Expiration. An annual amusement redemption machine game room license issued by the City shall automatically expire on December 31 following its issuance, except as otherwise stated herein. Such license shall automatically expire if the licensee sells the property or the business, transfers equity to accomplish same, or otherwise disposes of such devices. An amusement redemption machine game room license is not assignable or transferable. The City shall not refund any portion of a license after the license is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the City. 
(2)  Late penalty. Upon the expiration of a license, the licensee shall obtain a renewal if the licensee wishes to continue operating an amusement redemption machine game room. Failure to obtain the renewal within 30 days after expiration will require such person to pay an additional late fee in an amount equal to 20 percent of the fee actually due or 20 percent of the previous year's fee, whichever is greater, in order to obtain reinstatement of his license. Nothing herein authorizes the licensee to operate after the expiration of a license and before a renewal is effective. 
(d)  Posting of license. The license shall be conspicuously posted inside the building. 
(e)  Restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations. The following restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations shall apply to all amusement redemption machine game rooms: 
(1)  Condition of premises. All building and fire code standards must be met. A certificate of occupancy shall be requested before license is issued. Game room must be located in an area zoned for that activity. 
(2)  Methods of conduction of business. Amusement redemption machines are not allowed outdoors. 
(3)  Hours of operation. May only be operated between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. 
(4)  Parking requirements. One space for each two machines, plus one space per employee per shift. 
(5)  Location requirements. Premises shall not operate within 500 feet radius of an established church, school, day care or hospital. Premises shall not operate within 1,500 feet radius of another amusement redemption machine game room. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages. No amusement redemption machine game room may be located on premises where alcoholic beverages are sold or served, with the exception of any Congressionally chartered, non-profit organization. 
(7)  The owner, operator, or manager of the premises must be present to supervise the operation of the machines. The machines shall not be left unattended. 
(8)  Machines must be situated within the premises as to be in full and open public view, which entails being visible to all patrons of the establishment. 
(9)  A game room operator must be a person who is at least 18 years of age. 
(10)  Total number of machines in one establishment shall be limited to 51. 
(11)  All machines must be permitted according to the permitting requirements of section 10-82. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.02), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-82. - Amusement redemption machine permitting. 
(a)  Permit application. An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to obtain a permit for each amusement redemption machine. As part of the application, the owner, operator, or lessee must submit, at their own expense, each amusement redemption machine, including hardware and software source code, to an independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory approved in advance by the City to ensure that the machine does not generate the resultant outcome independent of the skillful actions of the player. Any game that is determined to be beyond the ability of a player to predict or control the outcome will not be permitted or allowed to operate within the incorporated limits of the City. 
(b)  Permit. Following approval by the independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory, the City shall issue a permit that will be permanently affixed to the approved machine. The permit shall include the name of the machine and the machine's serial number. 
(c)  Sealing or seizure. A person commits an offense if he owns an operational machine without a permit or with a tampered permit. In addition to other criminal or civil remedies outlined in this article, the City shall have the authority to seal or seize any coin-operated machine located in any amusement redemption machine game room for which a permit is not displayed. If any amusement redemption machine is found with evidence of permit tampering of any kind, including a permit issued to a different machine or a change in the game's hardware or software after the date of the permit issuance, the City shall have the authority to seal or seize all amusement redemption machines in the game room for retesting at the owner's expense and/or to revoke the owner's license to operate a game room. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.03), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-83. - Unrestricted access by City official. 
An owner, manager, or employee of a game room or other person exercising control over a game room, a portion of a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine, shall provide a City official with immediate unrestricted access during business hours to all areas of the game room and to all operational amusement redemption machines located in the game room. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.04), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-84. - Inspection by City officials. 
(a)  Any City official may inspect a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine located within the incorporated City limits to determine whether the game room or the operational amusement redemption machine complies with this Code and state law. 
(b)  An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person who does not allow a City official to inspect a game room or operational amusement redemption machine commits an offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.05), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-85. - Transparent, uncovered windows required. 
(a)  Every game room shall have transparent unobstructed windows or open space on at least one side so that the area is open to view by the general public passing by on a public street or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public has access and is admitted without charge. The owner, manager or employee of a game room shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, partitions, tinting or other structures or obstructions. 
(b)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be waived or modified by the Building Official if the game room owner can demonstrate: 
(1)  The game room is located in a structure deemed a historic landmark, or the structure is within a historic district, and deemed to have architectural or historic significance; and 
(2)  Compliance with the unobstructed view requirement shall require alterations to the structure that will have a substantially detrimental effect on its historic or architectural features. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.06), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-86. - Hours of operation, ingress and egress. 
(a)  All game rooms shall have their hours of operation clearly marked on every entrance. 
(b)  All game room shall have all doors providing ingress and egress from the game room unlocked during the hours of operation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or operate any game room for profit or to allow or permit any game room to remain open for business or open to the public before the hour of 10:00 a.m. or after the hour of 12:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.07), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-87. - Offense; penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not to exceed the maximum amount allowable by law. This offense is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 6.02 is hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.08), 12-18-2012)  
Secs. 10-88—10-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 10-107. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative material, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. I, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-108. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult motel means hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for under a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or " specified anatomical area". 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities". 
Department means the Frio County Regulatory Office, the Frio County Sheriff's Office, any Frio County Constable, any Frio County employee, Frio County Volunteer Fire Chief, the City of Pearsall Fire Chief, the City of Pearsall Police Department, City of Pearsall Code Compliance Officer, any law enforcement agency or division responsible for the issuance of any permit(s); enforcement of the sexually oriented businesses or enforcement of any laws of the State of Texas. 
Exempt business means (1) a bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business is an adult bookstore, adult movie theater, or adult video store, as defined in § 2.01(c) of this Order; (2) a business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under the license held; or (3) a business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
Nudity, semi-nudity or a state of nudity means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or a state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely covers a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or any part of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of areola. 
Residential use means of single family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family, or "mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, and campground" or "RV Park" used for residential purposes. 
Sexually oriented business means a sex parlor, topless dancing, nude dancing, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult theater, adult video store, adult motel, escort agency, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification on the customer. 
Sign means any display, design, pictorial, or other representation that is constructed, placed, attached, painted, created, fastened, or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business; and used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services, or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following, or any combination of the following, when less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)  Any human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair; 
(2)  Any buttock; or 
(3)  Any portion of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual, stimulated or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual, stimulated or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in paragraphs of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. II, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-109. - Administration. 
(a)  Pursuant to the above authority, the City Council hereby designates and authorizes the Department to inspect sexually oriented businesses to determine compliance with these regulations and to issue licenses in accordance with these regulations. 
(b)  Pursuant to the above authority, the City Council hereby designates and authorizes the Code Compliance Department or any law enforcement agency of the State of Texas to inspect sexually oriented businesses to determine compliance with these regulations and to issue citations for violating these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. III, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-110. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued therefore by Code Compliance Department in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  A license issued under these regulations shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place in the sexually oriented business for which it was issued. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to these regulations shall be valid for one year from date of issue. Applicant must apply for renewal of their license at least 30 days before the anniversary date on which the license was issued. The sexually oriented business will not be permitted to operate if the license has expired and a new license has not been issued. 
(d)  Any license issued pursuant to these regulations may be revoked at any time for failure to comply with the regulations contained in this Order. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. IV, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-111. - Conditions issuance, renewal, and maintenance of license. 
(a)  A sexually oriented business and any owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall comply with all the regulations promulgated herein and all laws of the State. Any failure to comply with the laws of the State shall be sufficient grounds for denial or revocation of any license required by these regulations. 
(b)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be denied if the location of such business does not comply with these regulations. 
(c)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be denied if an applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form or request for additional information from the agency issuing the license. 
(d)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall not be renewed if an applicant or applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the City for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(e)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be denied if an applicant or applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime involving: 
(1)  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
a.  Prostitution; 
b.  Promotion of prostitution; 
c.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
d.  Compelling prostitution; 
e.  Obscenity; 
f.  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor; 
g.  Sexual performance by a child; 
h.  Possession of child pornography; 
(2)  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
a.  Public lewdness; 
b.  Indecent exposure; 
c.  Indecency with a child; 
(3)  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
(4)  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; 
(5)  Any gambling offense described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 47; 
(6)  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the forgoing offenses. 
(f)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be denied if an applicant or applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime for which: 
(1)  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the convictions, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
(2)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of last conviction or the release from confinement for the convictions, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period; 
(3)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the convictions, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
(4)  The fact that the conviction is being appealed has no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(5)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed above may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (f)(2) of this section has elapsed. 
(g)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be denied if an applicant, applicant's spouse, a licensee, agent, or any employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.02. 
(h)  The location of any sexually oriented business is hereby prohibited within 2,000 linear feet from a preexisting sexually oriented business, measured in a straight line from the nearest property line to the nearest property line. 
(i)  The location of any sexually oriented business is hereby prohibited within 2,000 linear feet from the following preexisting land uses which have been determined by the City Council to be inconsistent with the operation of a sexually oriented business, measured in a straight line from the nearest property line to the nearest property line: 
(1)  A residential neighborhood, trailer park, trailer park mobile home subdivision, campground or RV park; 
(2)  A commercial enterprise; 
(3)  A regular place of religious worship; 
(4)  A public or private school; 
(5)  A public university or college; 
(6)  A hospital or nursing home; 
(7)  A licensed daycare for children; 
(8)  A public park; 
(9)  A public building, including but not limited to the City Hall; 
(10)  A hotel or motel; 
(11)  A tourist information center; 
(12)  A convention center; 
(13)  A cultural institution such as a museum; and 
(14)  A historic district or landmark. 
(j)  The sexually oriented business must comply with all State fire code regulations. 
(k)  The sexually oriented business must comply with all State building and electrical code regulations. 
(l)  The sexually oriented business must post the maximum occupancy at all entrances and exits. 
(m)  The sexually oriented business cannot serve any alcoholic beverages without the appropriate licenses required by the State Alcoholic Commission. 
(n)  The sexually oriented business must have two licensed security guards inside their building. 
(o)  The sexually oriented business must post at least one licensed security guard outside its building and parking lot to prevent theft and other criminal activity. 
(p)  The sexually oriented business must have all entrances and roads to its business paved to assist law enforcement or the fire department to respond to any emergency situations in a timely manner. 
(q)  The sexually oriented business shall have installed a fire hydrant connected to their water source for the use of the fire department for any fires at the license premises or any surrounding premises, unless waived by the City Council. 
(r)  The sexually oriented business cannot use pyrotechnics inside or outside its sexually oriented business. 
(s)  The sexually oriented business cannot permit guests to smoke inside the building. 
(t)  If smoking is permitted outside, the sexually oriented business must take all precautions to insure that all matches or cigarettes do not cause a fire. 
(u)  The sexually oriented business will not be permitted to burn any garbage. 
(v)  The sexually oriented business will only be allowed to sell beverages in plastic container or cans. 
(w)  The sexually oriented business will only be allowed to serve mixed drinks in plastic containers or other non-glass cups. 
(x)  The sexually oriented business must have its business and parking lot fenced in with a six-foot privacy fence. 
(y)  The sexually oriented business must keep its business free of any garbage. 
(z)  The sexually oriented business cannot post a sign with flashing or neon lights and the sign cannot be larger than four feet wide and eight feet long. 
(aa)  The sign cannot have any nudity and cannot be posted in any areas designated in subsection (i) of this section. 
(bb)  The sexually oriented business must pay any additional fee for fire code inspections or for any other required inspections by law. 
(cc)  The sexually oriented business must operate all business activities within the four walls of its business. 
(dd)  All water wells must comply with TCEQ standards. 
(ee)  The septic system must also comply with all City, County and State standards. 
(ff)  The sexually oriented businesses are required to conduct background checks of their employees and operators, including medical documentation from a licensed physician relative to legitimate health concerns of the City, including but not limited to, sexually transmitted diseases. 
(gg)  The employees of any sexually oriented business must wear identification badges at all times. The operator of any sexually oriented business shall not permit any entertainer, server or other employee to appear nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity, or semi-nudity on the premises and shall have no contact with the customer or clothing of the customer. 
(hh)  Customers of a sexually oriented business shall have no contact with any employee or the clothing of the employee at any time. 
(ii)  The sexually oriented businesses are not to have any eight-liners or other prohibited gambling devices prohibited by V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 47. 
(jj)  A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated to the application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. V, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-112. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application for a license under these regulations may be made by submitting to the Code Compliance Department a completed application form and a check or money order made payable to the City to cover the cost of processing the application and, in the case of a license, investigating the applicant. Application forms may be obtained from the Code Compliance Department. 
(b)  A deed and plat must be attached to each application. If a deed and plat are not submitted, the application will be considered incomplete and will be rejected. 
(c)  The application must be accompanied by the building plans, a sketch or diagram showing the configurations of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The building plans, sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(d)  As part of the licensing process, notification of the application to the public and interested parties is required. The applicant must provide proof of notification of his intent to file an application to open or operate a sexually oriented business to the public by providing a publisher's affidavit from the local newspaper in which the notification was published for no less than two consecutive weeks. 
(e)  The Code Compliance Department shall notify any applicant for a license within 30 days of receiving the completed application whether the license shall be issued or denied. 
(f)  Prior to the expiration of the 30-day application process, any interested parties may request a public hearing on health and safety matters. If no public hearing is requested, depending on the approval of the application, the license may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. VI, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-113. - Appeal from denial or revocation of license. 
(a)  An applicant may appeal a denial or revocation of a license to own or operate a sexually oriented business, by submitting to the City Manager a written request for a hearing on a the denial or revocation within ten working days of the denial or revocation. 
(b)  The City Council shall hear any appeal. An applicant shall be notified of a hearing date within 30 days of receipt by the City Manager of a hearing request. 
(c)  At the hearing, the City Council shall determine whether a license to own or operate a sexually oriented business shall be issued or reinstated or denied. The applicant has the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the enterprise meets all the requirements of this article such that the business is not or would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  If the City Council determines that a license to own or operate a sexually oriented business shall be issued or reinstated, the City Council shall direct the Code Compliance Department to issue or reinstate the applicant's license. 
(e)  If the City Council determines that no license to own or operate a sexually oriented business shall be issued or reinstated, the applicant may pursue further remedies in the County District Court pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.007(c). 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. VII, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-114. - Inspection. 
The Code Compliance Department may inspect any sexually oriented business within the City's authority to determine compliance with any of the regulations contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. VIII, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 10-115. - Enforcement 
(a)  The City may sue in the County District Court for an injunction to prohibit the violation of any of the regulations contained in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the City. 
(c)  A violation of any the regulations contained in this article constitutes a criminal offense. Such an offense is a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $4,000.00; 
(2)  Confinement in jail for a term not to exceed one year; or 
(3)  Both such fine and confinement. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. IX, 8-14-2012)  
Secs. 10-116—10-134. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TOWING AND WRECKER SERVICES 
 
Sec. 10-135. - Findings of fact. 
The findings and recitations set out in the preamble of this article are found to be true and correct, and that they are hereby adopted by the City Council and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 1, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Pearsall, Texas. 
Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term "consent tow" does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a police officer investigation a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle, or who arrests the operator of the vehicle for an alleged offense and is required by law to take the person into custody. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle that is self-propelled. 
Non-consent tow means any tow of a vehicle that is not initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody or control of the vehicle. The term "non-consent tow" includes a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a police officer. 
Owner means any person who holds the legal title of a motor vehicle or who has the legal right of possession thereof, or the legal rights of said vehicle. 
Permit holder means any person who holds a current, valid permit to provide non-consent towing services within the City meeting the requirements of section 10-142. 
Permitted wrecker list means the list of permitted companies prepared and used as provided in this article. 
Primary impound lot means any impound towing and storage facility located in the City limits, which is designated by the City as the primary impound towing and storage facility. 
Street means any public street, alley, public place, square or highway within the corporate limits of the City. 
Tow truck/wrecker means a motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing disable or wrecked vehicles. 
Towing/wrecker company means the business of towing or removing disable or wrecked vehicles off the streets of the City an engaging in providing towing services to the general public. 
Vehicle means every device in or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall include trailers and semi-trailers. 
Wrecker selection form means the form for selection of wrecker companies, prepared and used as provided in section 10-141. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-137. - Permitted wrecker list. 
The City Police Department shall establish and maintain a permitted wrecker list for each wrecker service permitted to provide non-consent towing or collision response towing, in response to a request for services from a police officer pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. Said permitted wrecker list shall be provided to the County's Sheriff's Office for dispatch purposes. The permitted wrecker list shall consist solely of permit holders holding a valid, current permit required by this article and who are in compliance with the terms of holding such permit at the time of the request for towing services. Said list shall contain names, in alphabetical order, of all permit holders qualified to be on said list. No towing or wrecker company may be listed more than once on the permitted wrecker list. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 3, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-138. - Procedure for contacting wrecker service. 
(a)  When a police officer investigating an accident determines that any vehicle which has been involved in a collision or accident upon a public street is unable to proceed safely under its own power or when the owner thereof is physically unable to drive such vehicle, such officer shall: 
(1)  If the owner of the vehicle is capable of requesting a specific wrecker service, the police officer or dispatcher shall contact that service for consent tows. 
(2)  If the requested towing or wrecker company does not have a wrecker available to move the vehicle, or the police officer/dispatcher is unable to contact the requested company, the owner shall be notified. 
(3)  In the event the owner is unable or unwilling to designate another towing or wrecker company, the requested company is unable to be contacted, or the company cannot respond in a timely manner and it is necessary to remove the vehicle for public safety reasons or to protect said vehicle in the event the owner is incapacitated, the next permit holder in line on the permitted wrecker list will be called to tow the vehicle to the location designated by the owner, provided that if the owner does not specify a designation to which the vehicle will be removed, the vehicle may be removed to the primary impound lot designated by the City. 
(b)  In the event the owner of a vehicle involved in an accident or collision is physically unable to designate the towing or wrecker company desired, or refuses to designate a towing or wrecker company or if a person is arrested for an alleged offense and the officer is required by law to take the person into custody, the police officer shall call the next permit holder in line on the permitted wrecker rotation list to tow the disabled vehicle and remove same from City streets. 
(c)  If a vehicle is operated by a person a police officer arrests for an alleged offense and the officer is required by law to take the person into custody, the officer may proceed under subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Failure of any permit holder selected from the permitted wrecker list to deliver a licensed wrecker from the permit holder's wrecker company, or a company who contracts with the company on the permitted wrecker list, of the type required to the scene within 20 minutes of notification without justification acceptable to the police officer shall cause the permit holder to forfeit that call. If selection of the entity occurred under subsection (a)(3) of this section, the police officer may proceed as he would under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 4, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-139. - Authority of police officer at scene of disabled vehicle. 
The officer in charge at the collision scene or at the location of a disabled vehicle on a public roadway may, if the safety of the public requires it or if otherwise authorized under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.30, as amended, take steps as needed to ensure public safety, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Directing that any vehicle be taken to the primary impound lot owned or used by the City; 
(2)  Directing that any vehicle be delivered to a specific location authorized by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.305, as amended; or 
(3)  Excluding any person from the investigation area who in the opinion of the officer may hinder an investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 5, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-140. - Police officer, City employees or volunteer firefighters not permitted to recommend wrecker. 
No police officer, City employee or volunteer firefighter investigating or present at the scene of any accident on a public street shall recommend to any person the name of any particular person or business engaged in the towing or wrecker service or repair business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 6, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-141. - Application for permit and fees. 
Every company approved by the City Council to provide non-consent towing services within the City and desiring to be placed on the permitted wrecker list shall make application in writing, on a form provided for that purpose, to the Chief of Police. Such application shall contain the name, address, telephone number, the number and types of wrecker equipment operated and the owner of the business. Every application when filed shall be sworn to by the applicant and accompanied by a fee. Said fees are non-refundable. The applicant shall file as an attachment to the application the following: 
(1)  A certificate or policy of public liability and property damage insurance meeting the requirements of section 10-142(6)a and b. 
(2)  A certificate or policy of public liability and property damage insurance meeting the requirements of section 10-142(6)a and b. 
(3)  Cargo insurance or a surety bond to cover damage to a towed vehicle during a hookup or towing, in an amount satisfying the requirements of section 10-142(6)c. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 7, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-142. - Permit requirements. 
The Chief of Police shall issue permits for towing or wrecker companies approved by the City Council eligible to provide towing at the request of the City, to be placed on the permitted wrecker list, and to provide non-consent towing within the City. The number of said towing or wrecker companies shall be unlimited complying with the provisions of this article. Said applications shall be submitted to the City Council for review and approval on an annual basis. No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant meets each of the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant maintains at least two wreckers flat-bed/roll back tow trucks with wheel-lift capability to tow two vehicles at one time. Said vehicles shall be domiciled on location of the City-approved storage facility. 
(2)  The applicant maintains 24-hour wrecker service and has a telephone number that is answered 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The use of an independent answering service shall not be permitted. 
(3)  The applicant owns, leases or otherwise lawfully possesses and operates a garage or storage facility within three miles of the City limits and obtains a storage facility license according to the Vehicle Storage Act, provided, however, for all non-consent tows, all vehicles shall be impounded in the City-approved primary storage facility. 
(4)  A permanent six-foot fence, the gate to which shall be locked at all times when the permit holder, an agent or an employee, is not at the storage facility. The storage area shall be maintained in such a manner that it does not constitute a health hazard and is screened from the ordinary public view. The wrecker company shall have capabilities for auxiliary storage inside a locked building that is at least 1,800 square feet in size for day-to-day business and to be able to preserve property for evidence. A storage lot with a minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be located at the same location. A six-foot fence with barbed wire shall enclose said storage lot. The City shall approve appropriate fencing for the location, whether it should be a six-foot chain-link/barbed wire fence, a six-foot chain-link/barbed wire with slats, or a six-foot steel privacy fence with barbed wire. Any impounded vehicle with leaking fluid, or that is incapable of being totally secured, shall be stored in the building on concrete at no extra cost, to avoid any environmental damage or exposure, or to avoid any theft from the vehicle. 
(5)  The applicant must be capable of responding to any location in the City within 20 minutes of receiving notification. Weather conditions will be considered regarding the response time. 
(6)  The applicant procures and keeps in full force and effect, a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the State and in the standard form approved by the Board of Insurance Commissioners of the State with the insured provision of said policies including the City as an insured, and the coverage provision insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a wrecker of such company and providing that the amount of recovery on each wrecker shall be in limits of no less that the following sums: 
a.  For Category A wrecker, together with the towed vehicle, having a gross vehicle weight, registered weight or actual weight of 26,000 pounds or less, $300,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injuries to or death of all persons injured or killed in any accident, and loss or damage in any one accident to the property of others; 
b.  For Category B wrecker, together with the towed vehicle, having a gross vehicle weight, registered weight or actual weight of exceeding 26,000, $500,000.00 combined single limit for bodily injuries to or death of all persons injured or killed in any accident, and loss or damage in any one accident to the property of others; 
c.  For injury to or destruction of property in any one accident, $50,000.00. 
(7)  The applicant procures and keeps in full force and effect a policy of cargo insurance to cover damage to on-hook cargo or a towed vehicle during hookup and/or towing, in the minimum amount of $50,000.00. 
(8)  The applicant complies with the provisions of Federal and State laws and rules applicable to tow vehicles and towing or wrecker company operations, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 8, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-143. - Inspection of storage facilities. 
The Chief of Police shall inspect any storage facilities and enclosures and his approval thereof must be first obtained before it can be used for storing consent tow vehicles therein. The Chief of Police shall also inspect the primary impound facility within the City used for all non-consent tows prior to said designation as the primary impound facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 9, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-144. - Issuance of permit. 
Upon determining compliance with the provisions and requirements of this article, and with City Council approval, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit as follows: 
(1)  A permit for the towing or wrecker company to be eligible to provide towing at the request of the City, to be placed on the permitted wrecker list, and to provide non-consent towing within the City. The permit shall include its date of issuance and date of expiration. A permit holder may operate more than two wreckers under the permit. 
(2)  A license is required for a wrecker to be eligible to provide towing at the request of the City, to be placed on the permitted wrecker list and to provide non-consent towing within the City. The license shall include, on its face, the date of its issuance and its expiration date and shall be in a form that can be easily stored in the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 10, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-145. - Display of permit. 
(a)  A permit issued pursuant to this article shall be prominently displayed at the permit holder's place of business. 
(b)  A permit shall be available in each vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 11, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-146. - Obligations of permit holder. 
A permit holder shall comply with each of the following obligations: 
(1)  A permit holder shall remove all wreckage and debris from a collision scene, except for vehicle cargo or hazardous waste as part of the services rendered in response to a call from the City or a call resulting from being on the permitted wrecker list. 
(2)  A permit holder shall exercise reasonable care and caution to avoid destruction or contamination of any item of which the permit holder has been informed by the police officer may be of evidentiary value. 
(3)  A permit holder shall perform services pursuant to this article in a professional manner and in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(4)  A permit holder shall be available to release the vehicles on which there are no investigative holds seven days a week, 24 hours a day, with one-hour notice, provided, however, that the primary impound yard is authorized to require proof of insurance prior to the release of any vehicle when the vehicle was a non-consent tow authorized by the City Police Department. When a vehicle is under investigative hold by the Police Department, the police officer in charge of the investigation shall inform the permit holder or its agent that the vehicle is under investigative hold, however, under no circumstances shall any vehicle be placed on investigative hold without approval of the Police Chief or the Department Head Investigator. The permit holder shall obtain the name of the officer charged with authorizing the release of any vehicle that has been impounded under the direction of the Police Department and shall hold such vehicle until its release is authorized by said officer, the Police Chief or the Department Head Investigator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 12, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-147. - Revocation of permits. 
Any of the permits as defined herein may be revoked and the wrecker may be removed from the permitted wrecker list for violation of any provision of this article with seven days' written notice and opportunity to appeal to the City Administrator. The City Administrator's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 13, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-148. - Renewal of permit; annual fees. 
All permits shall be renewed during the month of December each year. A newly issued permit shall be valid until December 31 of each year of its issuance and may be renewed at any time during the month of December. A permit may be renewed upon payment of the annual fee and the execution of a verified statement that the information on the original application form continues to be valid. If any of said information is no longer valid, the permit holder must present the corrected information at the time of renewal of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 14, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-149. - Operation without permit prohibited. 
No person shall tow a vehicle without the consent of the owner or operate a wrecker on the public streets of the City in response to a request for wrecker services from the City, or in response to a notice resulting from being on the permitted wrecker list, unless a valid permit for such wrecker company has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 15, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-150. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Wrecker permits shall not be required by any person, wrecker business, wrecker company or motor vehicles used: 
(1)  To tow a vehicle at the request of any owner that is not the City; 
(2)  To tow a vehicle at owner's direction from any place in the City to a shop for repairs or services; or 
(3)  To tow any vehicle upon the request of the owner of the vehicle or person lawfully in control of such vehicle, provided the owner is not the City and the person is not exercising control over such vehicle in the course of duties and employment with the City. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall require a towing or wrecker company to secure a permit to perform consent tows in the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 16, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-151. - Response to collision only upon request. 
No person shall drive or cause to be driven a wrecker to or near the scene of a collision on a street in the City unless such person has been called by the Police Department (or the on-the-scene officer in charge) or by a party involved in the collision; unless it is necessary to prevent bodily injury or death to any person involved in a collision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 17, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-152. - Notification of impoundment. 
Each towing or wrecker company shall notify the operator or owner of any disabled or wrecked vehicle of the location of the facility to be used by the permitted wrecker service, or the location of the primary impound facility for non-consent tows. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 18, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-153. - Location of traffic accidents. 
No person shall drive a wrecker or other motor vehicle used in the business of towing motor vehicles to the scene of a traffic accident on the streets of the City unless such person has been called to the scene by the Police Department or the owner of a motor vehicle involved in the accident, unless it is necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in the accident. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 19, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-154. - Solicitation at accident scene. 
No person shall solicit business at the scene of any traffic accident or collision on a public street. Proof of the presence of any person engaged in the towing for hire or wrecker business, or the presence of any wrecker or motor vehicle owned or operated by any person engaged in the towing for hire or wrecker business at or near the scene of an accident on any public street in the City, within one hour after the happening of such accident shall, absent such person or wrecker being called to the scene of such accident by the Police Department or owner of a vehicle involved in the accident, shall be evidence of a solicitation in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 20, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-155. - Interpretation and construction. 
This article does not require any person, repair or towing company to obtain any permit or to limit any fees charged, save and except such persons, businesses and companies that voluntarily obtain a permit and meet the standards herein provided in order to receive requests from the City for towing vehicles and/or placement on the permitted wrecker list. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 23, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-156. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense; and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 24, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 10-157. - Ordinance cumulative. 
This article shall be cumulative of all laws of the State and the United States governing the subject matter of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, § 22, 2-21-2017)  
Chapter 12 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Creation. 
There is hereby created and established a court known as the Municipal Court of the City of Pearsall, Texas. 
(Ord. of 7-12-1974, § 1)  
Sec. 12-2. - Location; officers. 
(a)  Municipal Courts. The Municipal Court shall hold regular Court sessions in the City Hall, or at such other location as the Municipal Judge may desire within the corporate limits of the City. 
(b)  Municipal Judge. The Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve the same term of office as the Mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. He shall have such powers and duties as provided by the laws of the State. He shall receive a salary as may be fixed by the City Council from time to time. 
(c)  Court Clerk. The City Manager shall appoint the Clerk of the Municipal Court, and the deputy clerks. The Clerk and his deputy clerks shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the City thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by Clerks of Municipal Courts in issuing process of said Courts and conducting the business thereof. 
(d)  Absence of Municipal Judge. In the case of disability or absence of the Judge of the Municipal Court, the City Council shall appoint a Municipal Judge to sit in his place. 
(Ord. of 7-12-1974, § 3)  
Sec. 12-3. - Municipal Court practice and procedure. 
(a)  Sessions of Court. Sessions of Court shall be held on any day except Saturday or Sunday, on a weekly, bimonthly or monthly basis depending on the cases filed in the Court and other matters requiring the attention of the Court. Court sessions may be held either in the morning or in the afternoon, or at such times and places as desired by the Municipal Judge. 
(b)  Clerk of the Court. The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall keep all records, attend all Court sessions, administer oaths, take affidavits, prepare complaints, issue warrants, subpoenas, and any other process required by the Municipal Judge, however, the Municipal Judge may also administer oaths, take affidavits, prepare complaints, issue warrants, subpoenas, and any other process of the Courts. 
(c)  Procedure in Court on traffic offense. The Municipal Judge shall be the only authorized person to dismiss a case. When a person charged with an offense (an actor) is, for any reason, unable to attend court in person and applies to the arresting officer or some employee of the City to have his case dismissed, such officer or other person shall be required to submit the question of dismissal to the Court for determination. 
(d)  Payment of fine; procedure. Any person charged with an offense may pay his fine at the City Hall prior to the date of trial by presenting his ticket and the amount in cash to the City Hall cashier. The cashier shall so notify the Clerk of the Court of such payment so that proper notations can be made in the docket book of the Court. The Texas Code of Criminal Procedure shall be followed in all matters and in the event of any conflict between this chapter and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(e)  Issuance of process. All process issued by the Municipal Court shall be executed by the police officers of the City. All process issued by the Court to be executed beyond the corporate limits of the City shall be served by the Police Officer in conjunction with some other law enforcement officer, and mileage fees may be allowed for such officers in executing said process, similar to the fees paid in Justice courts, and provisions of law governing taxable costs in misdemeanor cases in Justice courts shall, in all instances, govern in Municipal Court. 
(f)  Actor required to sign bond or cash receipt. An actor will be required to sign the cash bond prescribed by the Court when posting cash for his appearance, and the cash bond receipt shall be also signed in the amount stated in the cash bond. 
(g)  Forfeiture of bond. When an actor has made a cash bond and fails to appear at the time the case is set for trial, his name shall be called, and if he or his representative fails to appear, the cash bond shall be forfeited by the Municipal Judge by making a notation on the docket after hearing the evidence and satisfying himself that the forfeiture of the cash bond is sufficient punishment for the offense for which the bond was given and the fact that there is no need for a capias warrant to be issued for said actor's rearrest. 
(h)  Plea on failure to appear. The cash bond receipts shall be prepared in such a manner so that the actor may enter a plea of nolo contendere on failure to appear at the time set in the bond. 
(i)  Issuance of capias warrants. Forfeiture of cash bonds shall be considered as a fine except in instances where it appears to the Municipal Judge, after hearing evidence, that forfeiture of the bond is insufficient punishment, and then the Judge shall order a capias warrant for the actor's rearrest and trial. 
(j)  Writs, issuance of. All writs issued out of the Municipal Court shall be in the name of the Municipal Court. 
(k)  Jurors. All jurors shall be residents of the City and shall possess the same qualifications as jurors in the State courts. Jurors shall be selected from the voter registration lists of the precincts located within the City and shall be paid the statutory jury fee only in the event that they serve on a jury. 
(l)  Fines; failure to pay. Any person who, upon conviction, shall fail or neglect to pay any fine or costs imposed under any law or ordinance for any breach or violation of the same, shall be committed to County jail until such fines and costs have been fully paid or satisfied at the rate of $50.00 per day. The Municipal Judge may allow persons to pay their fine in installments, in lieu of being sent to jail, if such installment agreements are in writing and filed with the Clerk of the Court. 
(m)  Schedule of fines . There shall be a schedule of fines, approved by the City Council, for certain offenses, which may be printed on the reverse side of the copy of the traffic summons that is given to the actor. The actor shall pay the fine listed on said schedule, which includes the appropriate Court costs and fees as per the legislative laws and allotted by the Comptroller of Public Accounts. No fine shall be accepted that is not listed on the schedule, unless set by the Municipal Judge in open Court. The following schedule of fines is hereby adopted by the City Council. Fines are classified as class C misdemeanors, which carry a maximum fine not to exceed $500.00. All fines are subject to State court costs as periodically amended. 
Schedule of Fines 
Speeding 
Miles Over the Limit 
4 	$79.00 	11 	$107.00 	18 	$140.00 	25 	$175.00 
5 	$83.00 	12 	$111.00 	19 	$145.00 	26 	$180.00 
6 	$87.00 	13 	$115.00 	20 	$150.00 	27 	$185.00 
7 	$91.00 	14 	$119.00 	21 	$155.00 	28 	$190.00 
8 	$95.00 	15 	$123.00 	22 	$160.00 	29 	$195.00 
9 	$99.00 	16 	$127.00 	23 	$165.00 	30+ 	Please contact Judge 
10 	$103.00 	17 	$135.00 	24 	$170.00 		
 
Other Violations 	Court Costs 
1. Deferred Adjudication will be assessed an administrative fee up to $50.00 plus the fine amount assessed in the event of failure to comply with deferral terms. 
2. Exhibition of acceleration 	$125.00 + $40.00 
3. Racing or contest of speed 	$175.00 + $40.00 
4. Unsafe or failure to control speed (accident) 	$125.00 + $40.00 
5. No driver's license, failure to display D.L., expired D.L. 	$90.00 + $40.00 
6. Violate D.L. restriction codes 	$90.00 + $40.00 
7. Permit unlicensed driver to drive 	$90.00 + $40.00 
8. Failure to report address change on D.L. 	$90.00 + $40.00 
9. No registration or failure to display registration. 	$90.00 + $40.00 
10. Fictitious registration/inspection, license plate 	$200.00 + $40.00 
11. No valid M.V.I. sticker or inspection sticker, expired license plate 	$90.00 + $40.00 
12. Running stop sign or stop light 	$105.00 + $40.00 
13. Failure to yield right-of-way 	$100.00 + $40.00 
14. Passing in a No Passing Zone, illegal passing 	$125.00 + $40.00 
15. Driving on wrong side of road (not passing) 	$125.00 + $40.00 
16. Failure to drive in a single lane 	$125.00 + $40.00 
17. Illegal, unsafe or improper turn 	$90.00 + $40.00 
18. Failure to signal lane change 	$85.00 + $40.00 
19. Driving wrong way on a one-way road 	$125.00 + $40.00 
20. Following too closely 	$100.00 + $40.00 
21. No headlight or taillight 	$90.00 + $40.00 
22. Failure to dim headlight, meeting or following 	$95.00 + $40.00 
23. Unrestrained child under 4 years of age 	$160.00 + $40.00 
24. Unrestrained child (4-16 years of age) 	$140.00 + $40.00 
25. Unrestrained driver or unrestrained passenger 	$110.00 + $40.00 
26. Failure to install or display warning devices 	$90.00 + $40.00 
27. No fire extinguishers on bus or school bus 	$100.00 + $40.00 
28. No motorcycle-approved headgear 	$75.00 + $40.00 
29. Passenger without approved headgear 	$75.00 + $40.00 
30. Muffler violation 	$90.00 + $40.00 
31. Failure to remain stopped for school bus (loading and unloading) 	$200.00 + $40.00 
32. No liability insurance: 	
1 st offense 	$290.00 + $40.00 
2 nd offense 	$400.00 + $40.00 
33. Failure to appear (FTA); violate promise to appear 	$200.00 + $40.00 
34. Parked in Handicapped Parking 	$200.00 + $40.00 
35. Parked in School Crossing Zone 	$50.00 + $40.00 
36. Parked in No Parking Zone 	$35.00 + $40.00 
37. Blocking roadway: driveway or alley 	$35.00 + $40.00 
38. Curfew violations: 
1 st offense 	$50.00 + $40.00 
2 nd offense 	$100.00 + $40.00 
39. Purchase, consumption, possession of alcohol or tobacco by minor: >(Under 21 years of age) 
1 st Offense 	$70.00 + $40.00 
2 nd Offense 	$120.00 + $40.00 
Driving under influence of alcohol by minor: 	
1 st Offense 	$100.00 + $40.00 
2 nd Offense 	$150.00 + $40.00 
Plus attendance of an alcohol awareness class, community service hours and driver's license suspension or denial 
40. Violation of ordinance 	$200.00 + $40.00 
41. Soliciting/peddling without permit 	$80.00 + $40.00 
42. Failure to identify 	$100.00 + $40.00 
43. Theft under $50.00 	$200.00 + $40.00 
44. Disorderly conduct (verbal) 	$100.00 + $40.00 
45. Disorderly conduct (fighting) 	$180.00 + $40.00 
46. Public intoxication 	$200.00 + $40.00 
47. Assault (threat) 	$100.00 + $40.00 
48. Assault (contact) 	$200.00 + $40.00 
49. Other violations in transportation code are Class C misdemeanors with a fine not to exceed: $500.00 	
Open container 	$150.00 + $40.00 
Improper glass coating tinting 	$100.00 + $40.00 
50. City ordinance violations are class C misdemeanors with a fine not to exceed $500.00 	
51. Defective equipment 	$90.00 + $40.00 
52. Failure to report an accident 	$100.00 + $40.00 
 
(1)  Speeding violations of 20 mph or more over the limit in any zone is a compulsory appearance in Court. 
(2)  For a second moving violation in Court in the past two years, add $5.00 to the regular fine. 
(3)  For a third moving violation in Court in the past two years, add $10.00 to the regular fine. 
(4)  If the case is heard by the Judge and the defendant is found guilty, the fine may be any amount within the minimum and maximum limits provided by law without regard to the schedule of fines in this section. 
(5)  A fine may be paid by mail. In doing so, a copy of the ticket must be returned with the remittance. The remittance must be made by check or money order only, payable to the City of Pearsall; mailed to the City of Pearsall, Municipal Court, 200E. Trinity Street, Pearsall, Texas, 78061. 
(6)  Appearance in open Court. If the offense does not appear on the schedule, the actor must make an appearance in open Court prior to the disposition of his case. No case shall be disposed of, except as provided in subsection (m)(5) of this section, after an appearance has been made in open Court. 
(Ord. of 7-12-1974, § 4; Ord. of 4-10-1996, §§ 2—6; Ord. of 3-11-2004, § 1)  
Sec. 12-4. - Information. 
The form of the information shall be as established by the City Council, from time to time. 
(Ord. of 4-10-1996, § 7)  
Sec. 12-5. - Court Technology Fund. 
(a)  Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Technology Fund, hereinafter known as the Fund, pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The Fund may be maintained in a City interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the City's General Revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be assessed against and collected from the Defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court as a cost of court. A Defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on deferred disposition, including deferred adjudication and community supervision; or 
c.  The Court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(2)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(3)  The Clerk of the Court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the Financial Director of the City, who shall deposit the fee into the Municipal Court Technology Fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the Fund and administration. 
(1)  The Fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of or to maintain technology enhancements for the Municipal Court. Technology enhancements shall include any and all items described in article 102.0172 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The Fund shall be administered by the City's Finance Director under the direction of the City Manager and the City Council. 
(d)  Administration of Fund. The purpose for the use of any monies remaining in the Fund shall continue to be used and administered as required by this section and for that purpose this section remains in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09-043, §§ 1—3, 7, 9-9-2008)  
Sec. 12-6. - Municipal Court Building Security Fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building Security Fund (the "Fund") pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
(b)  The Municipal Court of the City (the "Municipal Court") is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the Municipal Court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if: 
(1)  Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person is placed on deferred disposition; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(d)  The fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on or after the ordinance from which this section is derived is adopted. 
(e)  The Municipal Court Clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the City. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the City shall be segregated in the Fund. 
(f)  The Fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or buildings housing the Municipal Court. The term "security devices and/or services" shall include any and all items described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017(d-1). 
(g)  The Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(h)  Fee may only be assessed and collected on offenses occurring on or after August 28, 1995. The fee may not be assessed or collected retroactively if the Fund is established at a later date than August 28, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 2015-10-02, § 1, 10-27-2015)  
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; local emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 
 
Sec. 14-19. - Organization. 
There exists the Office of Emergency Management Director of the City which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with State law. 
(1)  An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Director. 
(2)  The Director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the City and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the Director. 
(3)  The operational Emergency Management Organization of the City shall consist of the officers and employees of the Emergency Management Plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this Organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the Emergency Management Plan. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 1)  
Sec. 14-20. - Emergency Management Director; powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the City and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency Management Plan for the City, and shall recommend for adoption by the City Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such Plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City Manager. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the City Manager. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the Emergency Management Organization as well as the training of Emergency Management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the Emergency Management Organization. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal Emergency Management Organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the City to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the Emergency Management Plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the State and of other local political subdivisions of the State, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the County in which said City is located and with other municipalities within the County, for the County, for the Countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the City. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 2)  
Sec. 14-21. - Emergency Management Plan. 
A comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate division and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by State law, the Plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the Plan and to maintain their portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency Management Plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 3)  
Sec. 14-22. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the mayors of the other cities in said County in the formation of an Emergency Management Council for the County and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a Joint Emergency Management Plan and in the appointment of a Joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a Countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 4)  
Sec. 14-23. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 5)  
Sec. 14-24. - Liability. 
This article is an exercise by the City of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the City, the agents and representatives of said City, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the City to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 6)  
Sec. 14-25. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the City in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the City by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the City when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 7)  
Sec. 14-26. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency Management Organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the Emergency Management Organization of the City, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by the general provisions in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1990, § 8)  
Secs. 14-27—14-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SHELTER MANAGERS 
 
Sec. 14-56. - Duties and responsibilities. 
In case of a national emergency, public shelter managers duly appointed by the Emergency Management Director shall open public shelters, take charge of all stocks of food, water, and other supplies stored in said shelter, admit the public according to the City's shelter use plan and take whatever control measures are necessary for the protection and safety of the occupants. 
(Ord. of 1-14-1981, § 1)  
Sec. 14-57. - Use of reasonable restraint. 
Shelter managers are authorized to use reasonable restraint against those who refuse to cooperate with the routine of shelter living under emergency conditions. Refusal to carry out the order of the shelter manager and his appointed staff shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable according to the general penalties described in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 1-14-1981, § 2)  
Secs. 14-58—14-87. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMBULANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency Health Care Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-88. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advanced life support means emergency prehospital care provided by a certified, emergency medical technician-intermediate or an emergency medical technician-paramedic using invasive medical acts under the medical supervision and control of a licensed physician. 
Ambulance means any motor vehicle used, designed, redesigned or constructed, and equipped for the transportation of sick or injured persons. 
Basic emergency medical technician means an individual who has successfully completed the State Department of Health's Basic Emergency Medical Technician course and is currently certified. 
Basic life support means emergency prehospital care provided by a certified prehospital care provider using noninvasive medical acts. The provision of basic life support may be under the medical supervision and control of a licensed physician. 
Basic life support emergency medical services vehicle means a vehicle that is designed for transporting the sick or injured and that has sufficient equipment and supplies for providing basic life support, and is certified by the State Department of Health as such. 
Credentialed personnel means an individual who holds a valid certification from the State that allows them to practice at any of the following levels: Medical Responder, Emergency Care Attendant (ECA); Emergency Medical Technician Basic (EMT-B); EMT-Intermediate (EMT-I); EMT-Paramedic (EMT-P); Licensed Paramedic (LP) as defined in the State General Statutes and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto by the State Department of State Health Services. 
Emergency means any circumstance that calls for an immediate action and which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of any person. Such circumstances include, but are not limited to, general accidents, traffic accidents and acts of violence resulting in personal injury, and sudden illness. 
Emergency ambulance means any ambulance responding to an emergency call using warning lights or horn or sirens. 
Emergency call means any request for an ambulance that is made by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances which are or have been represented to be an emergency requiring emergency prehospital care or transport to a medical facility. 
Emergency care attendant means an individual who has successfully completed the State Department of Health's emergency care attendant course and is currently certified. 
Emergency medical service personnel means an emergency care attendant, basic emergency medical technician, specially skilled emergency medical technician, or a paramedic emergency medical technician. 
Emergency prehospital care means care provided to the sick or injured either on the scene or during emergency transport to a medical facility, or both. 
Emergency transfer means the immediate transportation of a patient in an ambulance requiring any or all of the following: 
(1)  Monitoring of EKG; 
(2)  Administration of intravenous fluids or medications; and 
(3)  Airway maintenance. 
Emergency transfer request means a request made by a physician directly or through a registered nurse for an emergency transfer. 
EMS means the Emergency Medical Service Division of Frio County, Texas and other providers serving in an emergency capacity. 
Medical facility means any building or place of business established for the purpose of examination or treatment by a licensed physician of individuals who are sick or injured. 
Nonemergency transportation services means the operation of an ambulance for any purpose other than transporting emergency patients. 
Nurse/paramedic means an individual who is a paramedic and, in addition, holds a State license as a registered nurse. 
Paramedic emergency medical technician means an individual who has successfully completed the basic emergency medical technician requirements and an additional minimum of 400 hours of training approved by the State Department of Health and who is certified by the State Department of Health as minimally proficient to provide emergency prehospital care by providing advanced life support that includes initiation under medical supervision of intravenous therapy, endotracheal or esophageal intubation or both, electrical cardiac defibrillation or cardioversion, drag therapy and other invasive procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-1(art. I), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-89. - Use of emergency and transfer service. 
(a)  All calls for emergency ambulance service within the City limits shall be directed to and responded to solely by the County Emergency Medical Service unless directed otherwise in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. This article shall not apply to emergency or transfer services operated by other political subdivisions or governmental agencies. 
(b)  When there exists in the City a licensed and franchised private ambulance service then, in that event, nonemergency transfer calls and related nonemergency services shall be responded to by said City franchise holder under the rules and regulations of this article and of the local franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-2(art. I), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-90. - Standards of service. 
(a)  Standards for credentialed personnel shall be as developed by the State Department of State Health Services and the County Emergency Medical Services System, and shall be applied to the same as if incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Standards for vehicles and equipment shall be as developed by the State Department of State Health Services and the County Emergency Medical Services System, and shall be applied to the same as if incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-3(art. I), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-91. - Communications and dispatch requirements. 
(a)  Each ambulance shall be equipped with UHF and VHF two-way communications compatible with those used by County Emergency Services. The County shall assign frequencies and record movements of the applicant's ambulances. 
(b)  Each ambulance shall be required to render assistance to the County Emergency Medical Services (EMS) in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency or when County EMS units are unavailable to respond to emergency calls. 
(c)  Assigned emergency calls will have priority over scheduled nonemergency calls. 
(d)  When County EMS units are dispatched to an emergency scene and the franchisee's ambulance is available, closer to the scene, that ambulance is authorized to respond to the scene and provide assistance prior to County EMS if: 
(1)  The County Dispatch Center is notified; and 
(2)  The franchisee's ambulance is dispatched. 
(e)  If on arrival, it is found that the situation is not an emergency, the patient may be transported by the franchisee's ambulance. The County EMS will continue to the scene if there is any question of the patient's actual condition. The patient's medical needs will be given priority. When necessary, the patient will be released to the County EMS for treatment and transport. 
(f)  Any emergency call received at a base or office of the franchisee will be immediately referred to County Dispatch and the appropriate response will be determined. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-3(art. I), 4-10-2007)  
Secs. 14-92—14-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE 
 
Sec. 14-111. - Private service regulation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, operate, advertise or otherwise engage or profess to be engaged in the operation of an emergency ambulance upon the streets of the City unless said person is: 
(1)  A member of the County EMS unit officially on duty; 
(2)  An authorized and properly certified employee of another political subdivision or agency of the State licensed/certified to provide EMS; 
(3)  A person providing service to or from a hospital located in the City going to or from a hospital located outside of the City limits; or 
(4)  Any person meeting the requirements of the State for credentialed personnel, vehicles and equipment who responds to a request from either the City Fire Department or the County EMS unit, or any area Director of Emergency Management, to lend assistance when a major disaster or other occurrence results in emergency calls exceeding the capacity of the County. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-15(art. II), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-112. - Emergency medical service by the County. 
It is hereby recognized and authorized by the City that the primary EMS provider to the citizenry of Pearsall is the County Emergency Medical Service (EMS). 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-16(art. II), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-113. - Persons to whom available. 
Emergency medical service shall be available to all persons within the City limits. The service shall also be available to persons in other portions of the County, within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction as governed by the County. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-17(art. II), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-114. - Rates. 
Any person who uses the emergency medical services of the County shall pay the County for such services. Charges for emergency medical services may include, but not be limited to, standing time, standby time, oxygen, medication, and other related expenses incurred by County EMS. The County Commissioners shall, by resolution, set the rates for emergency medical services including, but not limited to, emergency calls, standing time, and emergency prehospital care provided by the County EMS. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-18(art. II), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-115. - Standby service. 
(a)  All requests for standby emergency medical service shall be made to the County EMS at least 24 hours in advance of the time such services will be necessary. The County EMS shall not be required to provide standby service, but may provide such services where feasible. In the event the standby vehicle is used to transport a person to a hospital or other medical facility from the standby site, each person transported shall be charged by the County EMS for an emergency call and any additional services rendered. 
(b)  The City Council shall by periodic resolution and negotiation of interlocal contract amendment with the County, adopt the rates for standby and other emergency services as determined by the County Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-19(art. II), 4-10-2007)  
Secs. 14-116—14-143. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE AMBULANCE SERVICE FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 14-144. - Franchise required; cause for revocation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, operate, advertise or otherwise engage or profess to be engaged in the operation of private ambulance service upon the streets of the City without a franchise as provided by this division. Ambulance services provided and operated by a private medical facility within the City's municipal corporate boundaries, with no separate charge for such transport, are not precluded by this section. 
(b)  A private ambulance service franchise shall be subject to City revocation if it is found that the holder of said franchise or any company, service or corporation with which the holder is affiliated, or in partnership with, is duplicating emergency service in areas in which the County EMS is providing such service, unless requested to do so by the County EMS, the City Fire Department, or any area director of emergency management. Furthermore, if a private ambulance franchise holder receives an emergency call from any source to respond either in the City or those areas under EMS contract with the County, franchisee shall immediately notify the County EMS dispatcher, and shall not respond unless requested to do so by the County dispatcher. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-35(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-145. - Review and public hearing. 
(a)  Copies of each application for a private ambulance service franchise shall be forwarded to the City Manager for review and recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on an application for a private ambulance service franchise under this division at the time and place specified in the notice published in a newspaper of general circulation 15 days prior to the hearing, and no such franchise shall ever be granted until a resolution, an ordinance granting the same, has been read at two regular meetings of the City Council and passed by vote of the majority of the City Council. 
(b)  An applicant therefore shall not be granted a private ambulance franchise unless the City Council finds and determines that the public convenience will be served by the issuance thereof. In all hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish clear, cogent and convincing evidence that the public convenience will be served by the granting of a private ambulance service franchise. 
(c)  In determining public convenience, the City Council shall consider the following: 
(1)  The distance from the permanent address at which the applicant proposes to operate the ambulance service to City hospitals and other area medical facilities. 
(2)  The number of ambulance vehicles which will be covered by the ambulance franchise and the hours during the day and days during the week that the applicant proposes to furnish such service. 
(3)  In the event the applicant has previously participated, or is currently participating, in a private ambulance service, evidence as to whether the applicant performed or is performing in a satisfactory manner shall be presented. 
(d)  Public convenience shall further mean that the local address from which the ambulance service is proposed to be operated, and where the ambulance will be temporarily or permanently garaged, will be within the City limits. 
(e)  Any authority hereby granted to provide private ambulance services in the City is not and shall not be deemed to be an exclusive right or permission. The City expressly reserves the right to grant similar nonexclusive franchises to other persons at any time or for any period of time. No additional franchise granted by the City shall in any way affect the obligations of the franchise hereunder 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-37(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-146. - Prerequisite to issuance of franchise. 
No ambulance service franchise will be granted unless: 
(1)  The City Council determines that the application as required by section 28-5 is true and correct; and 
(2)  The City Council determines that the proposed operation of the ambulance service will be in compliance with all provisions of this article, and all applicable County, State and federal statutes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-38(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-147. - Length of franchise. 
The length of the franchise will be for not more than two years ending on September 30 of the second year, whether or not two full years have elapsed, however, the ambulance service franchise holder will be subject to review and analysis by appropriate City staff monitoring ambulance operations on an annual basis, with results being presented to the City Manager, Fire Chief and City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-39(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-148. - Insurance. 
No ambulance vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the City unless the applicant provides evidence to the City Manager that he has in full force and effect a Commercial General Public Liability Insurance policy and a Comprehensive Business Vehicle Liability policy on that applicant company and the ambulance vehicle, with such insurance policies to be issued by a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in the State. Such insurance policies shall: 
(1)  Provide the franchisee with a primary public Commercial General Liability Insurance policy to a limit not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $3,000,000.00 in the aggregate for bodily injury, death, or damage to property, including loss of use thereof. In addition, the franchisee shall provide Excess or Umbrella Liability Insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000.00 per each occurrence and $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate; 
(2)  Provide Comprehensive Business Vehicle Liability coverage for each vehicle of not less than $250,000.00 per person, or $500,000.00 per occurrence, for personal injury or death, and $100,000.00 for property damage; 
(3)  Name the City, its public officials, officers and employees as additional insured, and provide a waiver of subrogation in favor of the City; 
(4)  Not contain a passenger liability exclusion; and 
(5)  Provide for at least 30 days' prior written notice of any proposed insurance policy modification or cancellation to the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-40(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-149. - Performance bond and revocation clause. 
(a)  The ambulance service franchise holder shall establish a $5,000.00 performance bond with a reputable commercial surety with the City listed as the obligee/beneficiary. The purpose of this bond is to incentivize franchisee compliance with this article and recover administrative, monitoring and enforcement costs to be incurred by the City for terminating the franchise of an ambulance service for cause, in the event the franchise is revoked. 
(b)  If the ambulance service franchise holder violates any provision or standard of this article, and the violation or standard remains uncured for ten or more business operational days, or such longer period as the City might thereafter establish based upon special circumstances, the City Council may order the revocation of the franchise and forfeiture of the performance bond to the City. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-41(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-150. - Gross receipts franchise fee. 
(a)  The ambulance service franchise holder shall, during the life of said franchise, pay to the City, at the Office of the Director of Finance, in lawful money of the United States, 3½ percent of the total amount billed to customers for the nonemergency ambulance service fees and any other income derived from the operation of the nonemergency ambulance service within the City, which said remittance shall be made monthly on or before the tenth day of each calendar month. The compensation provided for in this section shall be in lieu of any other fees or charges imposed by any other ordinance now or hereinafter in force during the life hereof but shall not release the franchise holder from the payment of ad valorem taxes levied, or to be levied, on local property it owns. The purpose of the franchise fee is to fund City monitoring and administrative staff, vehicle inspections, and wear and tear upon the City's roadways. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of a franchisee to file with the City's Director of Finance a sworn statement for each calendar quarter showing the total amount billed for nonemergency ambulance service within the City for the preceding three months, which statement shall be filed within ten days following the end of the third month. The sworn statement shall be accompanied by an executed copy of the State sales tax return, including sales tax return schedules indicating sales within the City as submitted by the franchisee to the State Comptroller. A franchisee herein shall be required to install and adequately maintain a system of bookkeeping to be approved by the Director of Finance, which books shall be subject to reasonable audits by the City and such skilled person as the City may designate so as to enable the City to periodically check the correctness of the accounts kept and to compute fairly and accurately the percentage of the amounts privately billed that may be due to the City. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-42(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-151. - Transfer of franchise. 
No assignment, sale or subletting of any part of this franchise shall ever be made by the franchisee herein without first receiving written approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-43(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-152. - Inspection of books and records. 
The private books and records of the private ambulance service franchise holder, including operational, vehicular maintenance, driver/attendant training certifications, insurance certifications, traffic compliance, accident records, financial, tax and related records shall be open at any reasonable time for inspection and audit by the City Manager, or any official designated by the City Manager, or any professionally trained accountant/auditor. The franchisee may deem and mark certain materials as proprietary and confidential, which may still be viewed by City representatives, but not disclosed to the general public unless a State Attorney General ruling or court of competent jurisdiction so orders such a public release. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-44(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-153. - Private ambulance services personnel. 
Attendants and drivers employed by the ambulance service franchise holder shall: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States; 
(3)  Be licensed by the State as a commercial vehicle operator; 
(4)  Be certified as having obtained any legally required training as may be required by any regulatory bodies having jurisdiction over the provision of private ambulance services to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-45(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Secs. 14-154—14-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TERMINATION, REVOCATION, AND ENFORCEMENT OF FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 14-175. - Termination. 
(a)  Either party, at its option, may terminate a franchise granted under this article upon expiration of 120 days prior written notice to the other party. An ambulance provider may reapply for a franchise at any time. 
(b)  The acceptance of a franchise by an operator constitutes an agreement to comply with applicable required City, County, State, and federal standards at all times. Each franchised ambulance service shall comply at all times with the requirements of this article, the franchise granted hereby, and all applicable federal, State, and local laws relating to health, sanitation, safety, equipment, and ambulance design and all other laws and ordinances. Failure to comply will result in the suspension or revocation of the franchise by the City. 
(c)  Upon suspension or revocation of a franchise granted hereby, such franchised ambulance service shall immediately cease operations. Upon suspension, revocation, or termination of a driver's license or attendant's certification, such persons shall immediately cease to drive an ambulance or to provide medical care in conjunction with the ambulance service. 
(d)  Upon any change in ownership of a franchised ambulance service made without prior written approval by the City, the City shall have the option to suspend or revoke the franchise, effective immediately. No franchise shall be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred, in whole or in part, without the prior written approval of the City. The City shall have the option to suspend or revoke the franchise, in either case requiring a new application to be submitted, and a finding of conformance with all requirements of this article as upon original franchising. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-55(art. IV), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 14-176. - Enforcement and revocation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the City Manager and/or his designee to periodically inspect the franchisee stations and ambulances licensed under this article in order to determine compliance or any violations of its provisions. 
(b)  Upon acquiring reasonable and substantial evidence that an ambulance provider requiring a franchise under this article, or an owner, officer, or employee of such ambulance provider, has violated any provision of this article, the City Manager shall notify the City Council of such evidence. The City Council shall then determine if there is sufficient danger to the morals, public health, safety, or general welfare of the citizens and residents of the City to warrant suspension or revocation of the ambulance provider's franchise. 
(c)  Upon a determination that there is probable cause for suspension or revocation and after notification to the ambulance provider of such determination and the reasons therefor, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing at which the ambulance provider or his representative shall be afforded the opportunity to show good cause why his franchise should not be suspended or revoked. Failure to show such good cause will warrant the City Council to suspend or revoke the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-56(art. IV), 4-10-2007)  
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for home-rule municipality to provide for a fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-19. - Creation. 
There is hereby created the positions of Volunteer Fire Chief, two Volunteer Assistant Fire Chiefs and Volunteer Fire Marshal under the general supervision of the City Manager. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1984, § 1)  
Sec. 16-20. - Powers and duties of fire officials. 
There is hereby established the positions of Volunteer Fire Chief, two Volunteer Assistant Fire Chiefs and Volunteer Fire Marshal, all of whom shall be appointed by and be responsible to the City Manager. 
(1)  Volunteer Fire Chief. 
a.  Powers and duties are as follows: 
1.  Be responsible for the direction of all firefighting, fire prevention and fire service activities in the municipality, including the enforcement of the fire code of the City. 
2.  Develop recommendations for the protection of life and property in the City. 
3.  Report directly to the City Manager. 
4.  Provide technical assistance and supervision to firefighters and clerical employees of the Volunteer Fire Department. 
5.  Negotiate contracts with members of the public, departmental officials and the City Manager subject to the approval of City Council. 
6.  Develop policies for the administration of the Department. 
7.  Confer with supervisors concerning firefighting problems and direct activities at larger fires. 
8.  Develop in-service training programs. 
9.  Assist in preparing plans, technical reports, budget estimates and ordinances and regulations on safety. 
10.  Attend conferences on fire prevention and fire protection problems. 
11.  Participate in public information programs. 
12.  Purchase supplies and equipment for the Department subject to approval of the City Manager and/or City Council. 
13.  Work with the Volunteer Fire Department and all work done as a Volunteer Fire Chief shall be without compensation and entirely as a volunteer. 
b.  The person designated or appointed as Volunteer Fire Chief shall meet the following minimum qualifications and/or standards and such other standards as set out by the City Council: 
1.  Education: High School Diploma or equivalent. 
2.  Experience: Three to five years progressively responsible supervised work as a firefighter. 
3.  Knowledge: Fire administration; laws and regulations relating to the control and prevention of fires. 
4.  Skill: Plan, organize and evaluate the activities of a fire department. 
5.  Ability: Prepare, read and interpret policies governing fire prevention. Calculate costs involved in purchasing equipment. 
(2)  Volunteer Assistant Fire Chief. 
a.  Powers and duties are as follows: 
1.  Act for the Fire Chief in his absence. 
2.  Report to the Fire Chief. 
3.  Provide technical assistance and supervision to all firefighters and technical employees. 
4.  Keep contact with firefighters, officials of other departments, and members of the public. 
5.  Develop and recommend programs for the training, home inspection, maintenance of stations and equipment. 
6.  Coordinate personnel and activities of the Department. 
7.  Supervise the maintenance of personnel records. 
8.  Conduct performance evaluations of personnel. 
9.  Supervise activities at large fires. 
10.  Supervise inventories of Fire Department equipment. 
11.  Make recommendations concerning Department activities. 
12.  Work with the Volunteer Fire Department and all work done as a Volunteer Assistant Fire Chief shall be done without compensation and entirely as a volunteer. 
b.  The person designated or appointed as the Volunteer Assistant Fire Chief shall meet the following minimum qualification and/or standards and such other standards as set out by the City Council: 
1.  Education: High School diploma or equivalent. 
2.  Experience: At least two years progressively responsible work in a fire department. 
3.  Knowledge: Principles methods and practices of firefighting; laws and ordinances pertaining to firefighting. 
4.  Skill: Plan, organize and evaluate the activities of personnel and equipment in a fire department. 
5.  Ability: Prepare, read, and interpret policies governing fire prevention; calculate costs involved in purchasing equipment. Analyze and predict trends in Departmental activity. 
(3)  Volunteer Fire Marshal. 
a.  Powers and duties are as follows: 
1.  Responsible for planning, organizing and carrying out a Citywide fire prevention program. 
2.  Report to the Fire Chief or an Assistant Fire Chief. 
3.  Provide technical assistance and vision to fire inspectors who assist in conducting inspections. 
4.  Deep extensive contact with members of the public, officials of other departments and individual firefighters. 
5.  Engage in the enforcement of fire safety laws and regulations and Fire Code ordinances of the City. 
6.  Examine building plans for fire safety. 
7.  Assist in the development of plans and procedures for a program of fire inspections. 
8.  Investigate the cases of major fires and cases of arson. 
9.  Investigate complaints and answer questions about fire hazards. 
10.  Keep records of fire losses. 
11.  Work with the Volunteer Fire Department and all work done as a Volunteer Fire Marshal shall be done without compensation and entirely as a volunteer. 
b.  The person designated or appointed as Volunteer Fire Marshal shall meet the following minimum qualifications and/or standards and such other standards as set out by the City Council: 
1.  Education: High School diploma or equivalent. 
2.  Experience: At least two years progressively responsible work as a firefighter. 
3.  Knowledge: Principles, practices and methods of fire prevention and fire suppression; causes and effects of fires. 
4.  Skill: Inspect buildings and premises to detect violations of fire codes and possible fire hazards. 
5.  Ability: Read and interpret fire aids; calculate costs required to correct fire hazards. Analyze buildings for violations of fire codes. 
6.  Proper certification as a peace officer as required by the laws of the State. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1984, § 2)  
Secs. 16-21—16-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— State law does not preempt municipal authority to prohibit or regulate use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004; regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fireworks use, displays and regulations, 28 Tex. Admin. Code § 34.800 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fireworks means any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs, or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display and shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks whether herein specially designated and defined or not. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1996, § 2)  
Sec. 16-46. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall be in any place, public or private, within the City, and without authorization of the Fire Marshal or previous approval of the City Council, to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer, or have in his possession with intent to sell, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1996, § 3)  
Sec. 16-47. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroad and which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any such railroad for use in railroad operations; nor shall this article apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1996, § 4)  
Sec. 16-48. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the City in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The Fire Marshal is directed and required to seize, remove, and safely dispose of any fireworks found within the jurisdiction in violation of this article and any member of the Fire Department or any police officer or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks may be seized and disposed of in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the City Attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the City or Fire Marshal, or both, for injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the City and to aid the Fire Marshal in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and disposal of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunction relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and disposal. The Fire Marshal or any member of the Fire Department is hereby authorized to enter any buildings where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to inspect the same for the presence of such fireworks. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1996, § 5)  
Chapter 18 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; authorizing municipalities to take all necessary and reasonable actions to comply with the requirements and criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AR or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding man average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by pending or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable pan of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, elevated building also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of the term "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60-3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding ). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance, and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodproofing means am combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure, 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved suite program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which arc constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which start construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, Pub. L 97-348, includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage rack, that is principally above ground as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of suite or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. II)  
Sec. 18-2. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State has in V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council does ordain the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. I, § A)  
Sec. 18-3. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. I, § B)  
Sec. 18-4. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. I, § C)  
Sec. 18-5. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. I, § D)  
Sec. 18-6. - Applicable lands. 
The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. III, § A)  
Sec. 18-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Pearsall," dated November 19, 1980, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. III, § B)  
Sec. 18-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. III, § C)  
Sec. 18-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. III, § D)  
Sec. 18-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. III, § E)  
Sec. 18-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeat any other powers granted under State Statutes. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. III, § F)  
Sec. 18-12. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. III, § G)  
Secs. 18-13—18-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 18-43. - Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. IV, § A)  
Sec. 18-44. - Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintaining and holding open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Reviewing permit application to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Reviewing, approving or denying all applications for development permits required by adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Reviewing permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, State or local governmental agencies, including section 404 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334, from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notifying, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State coordinating agency, which is the State Coordinator of Emergency Management, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensuring that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 18-7, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision). 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. IV, § B)  
Sec. 18-45. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 18-68(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 18-44(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. IV, § C)  
Sec. 18-46. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Appeal Board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 18-45(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted in this section and the intent of this article, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of section 18-4. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances are: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. IV, § D)  
Secs. 18-47—18-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 18-66. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located extended converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $2,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. V)  
Sec. 18-67. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed, or modified, and adequately anchored to prevent notation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. V, § A)  
Sec. 18-68. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in sections 18-7, 18-44(8), or 18-69(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 18-45(a)(1) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones AI-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 18-45(b) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. V, § B)  
Sec. 18-69. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 18-3, 18-4, and 18-5. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet the development permit requirements of sections 18-8 and 18-45 and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 18-7 or 18-44(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. V, § C)  
Sec. 18-70. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by pending or sheet flow, therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number is specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 18-45(a)(1), are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones A-1 or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. V, § D)  
Sec. 18-71. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18-7 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If section 18-70(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. of 6-27-2002, art. V, § F)  
Chapter 20 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Liability for adversely affecting historic structure or property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 315.006; characteristics and designation of structures and buildings as State archeological and historical landmarks, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 191.092; municipal authority to exempt from taxation a historic structure or building, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.24; rules and procedures by which local governments may become certified regarding the identification, evaluation, and preservation priorities of the Texas Historical Commission's Statewide, comprehensive, historic preservation planning process, 13 Tex. Admin. Code § 15.6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Historic structures and landmarks. 
The City Council does hereby declare that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of districts and landmarks of historical and cultural importance and significance is necessary to promote the economic cultural, educational, and general welfare of the public. It is recognized that the historical resources of the City represent the unique confluence of time and place that have shaped the identity of generations of citizens, collectively and as individuals, and these resources constitute the heritage of the citizens of the City. This chapter is intended to: 
(1)  Perpetuate, project, enhance, and preserve the historic districts and landmarks which represent distinctive elements of the City's historic, architectural, social, economic, ethnic and political heritage and to develop appropriate settings for such places; 
(2)  To safeguard the City's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reelected in such historic landmarks, by application of appropriate procedures; 
(3)  To stabilize and improve property values in such locations; 
(4)  To foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past, and to promote the use of historic landmarks for the culture, prosperity, education, and general welfare of the people of the City; 
(5)  To strengthen the economy of the City and to protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors, as well as provide support and stimulus to business and industry; 
(6)  To provide assistance to property owners and tenants, as well as civic organizations, concerned with historical preservation; 
(7)  To provide property owners the opportunity of historic landmark designation by written request to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. This request is subject to a 60-day review by the City Council before it becomes effective and no penalties apply. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997(1), § 1)  
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 20-21. - Landmarks Preservation Commission created. 
(a)  The City hereby creates the Pearsall Historic Landmarks Preservation Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, in accordance with the City's Home Rule Charter, article 10,pertaining to boards and commissions. 
(b)  The purpose of the Commission is to serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council in matters concerning the designation and qualification of significant landmarks within the City limits considered historical in nature. 
(c)  The primary duties of the Commission are to develop general policies and procedures to be considered in designating and qualifying significant landmarks within the City limits considered historical in nature. Additionally, the Commission will develop general policies, criteria, and procedures to be considered in the event that the City wishes to confer, change, or remove a specific name on a given public facility, street, or natural feature within the City limits or owned by the City. Upon completion, the Commission will recommend said policies and procedures to the City Council for adoption by ordinance. Thereafter, the Commission will review, consider, and recommend significant landmarks within the City limits to be designated as historical in nature. The Commission will also review, consider, and recommend directly to the City Council any qualified requests to confer, change, or remove a specific name on a given public facility, street, or natural feature within the City limits or owned by the City. 
(d)  The number of members comprising the Commission shall be five. 
(e)  The term of appointment of members comprising the Commission shall be two years. The members may be removed in accordance with the provisions set forth in the City's Home Rule Charter, article 10, section 3. 
(f)  The Commission itself shall appoint and designate from its members a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson to preside over Commission actions. Meetings shall be held monthly or as required. Guidelines, regulations and responsibilities shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2005, §§ I—VI)  
Sec. 20-22. - Duties of Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission, along with its regular powers and duties as defined by the Charter and the Zoning chapter, shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Recommend adoption of criteria for the identification of historic, architectural, and cultural landmarks and the delineation of historic districts; 
(2)  Conduct surveys and maintain and update an inventory of significant historic. architectural, archaeological and cultural landmarks and historic districts within the City; 
(3)  Recommend the designation of resources as landmarks and historic districts; 
(4)  Recommend conferral of recognition upon the owners of landmarks or within districts by means of certificates, plaques or markers; 
(5)  Approve or disapprove applications for certificate of appropriateness pursuant to this chapter; 
(6)  Propose a tax abatement program for historic landmarks or structures, or rehabilitations; 
(7)  Prepare specific design guidelines for the review of landmarks and districts; 
(8)  Review informally annually the conditions of the properties and possible future needs. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997(1), § 2)  
Secs. 20-23—20-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 20-48. - Designation of Historic District and landmarks. 
The City Council designates within this article the Central Business District as the area that is a Historic Business District (HBD). Within this area, buildings, sites, structures, and objects can be designated as historic landmarks, if requested by the property owner. The Central Business District shall be defined as North Elm Street from Comal Street to Trinity Street; Trinity Street from Elm Street to Ash Street; Ash Street from Trinity Street to Comal Street; and Comal Street from Ash Street to Elm Street. The boundary line shall run in the middle of the street. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997(1), § 3)  
Sec. 20-49. - Demolition permit. 
(a)  A permit for the demolition or relocation of a historic landmark, or property within a historic district, shall not be granted by the Building Inspector without the review of a completed application by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(b)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application within 60 days, during which time it shall consider the state of repair of the building, reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair, the existing and/or potential usefulness, the purpose behind preserving the structure as a historic landmark, the character of the neighborhood, and all other factors it finds appropriate. If the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that, in the interest of preserving historical values, the structure should be preserved, it shall notify the Building Inspector that the application has been disapproved. If disapproved, no further obligation shall be upon the landowner under this chapter in regards to the proposed demolition under consideration; however, all other City ordinances must be adhered to. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997(1), § 4)  
Sec. 20-50. - Tax abatement. 
(a)  The appraised value of improvements completed pursuant to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall not be added to the appraised tax value of the historic landmark structure for a period of five years. Application for abatement shall be made prior to February 1 of the tax year in which the abatement is to be granted to the City and forwarded to the County appraisal district. 
(b)  Tax abatement programs. 
(1)  Historic landmark structures which are nonresidential and which are located in the designated historic downtown area as shown on the downtown historic district map which is on file in the City offices and incorporated herein for all intents and purposes, shall be eligible for historic reinvestment tax abatements upon the terms and conditions as hereinafter ordained. 
(2)  Eligible historic landmark structures shall be entitled to reinvestment tax abatement equal to the amount of investment completed within one calendar year. The maximum tax abatement for a project shall not exceed the annual tax liability of the real property. The investments eligible shall be investments made for structural repairs and improvements, electrical repairs and improvements, plumbing repairs and improvements, mechanical repairs and improvements, interior repairs and improvements or exterior restoration. Taxes incurred for investment in personal property shall not be eligible for abatement. Each landowner who desires to apply for a historic reinvestment tax abatement shall apply for said abatement on or before May 1 of the year the tax abatement is to be granted. The abatement, if granted, shall be applicable for only one year. Subsequent abatements for additional projects must be applied for each year. Application shall be made on the official form promulgated by the City. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements in subsection (b)(2) of this section, each applicant must submit documentation reflecting the cost of the eligible reinvestment project, complete the reinvestment project within the agreed timeframe and, if facade restoration is contemplated, the project must comply with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Restoration. All contemplated reinvestment projects must be approved by the City and all facade restoration projects must also be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The applicant must secure all City permits and must secure City inspection of the project to ensure proper completion of the project. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997(1), § 5)  
Sec. 20-51. - Ordinary maintenance; decision by Planning and Zoning Commission. 
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued under this chapter shall conform to all requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect periodically any such work to ensure compliance. In the event work is found that is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, or upon notification of such fact by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or such work shall be found to be in violation of appropriate zoning requirements contained herein, the Building Inspector shall issue a stop work order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work order is in effect. A decision shall be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission concerning the stop work order within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997(1), § 6)  
Sec. 20-52. - Extraordinary maintenance; decision by Historic Landmarks Commission. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district which does not involve a change in design, material, color or outward appearance. In-kind replacement or repair is included in this definition of ordinary maintenance. The plan for cleaning of the exterior of a designated historic landmark shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review when the means to be used may change the exterior of said building. The Building Inspector shall be authorized to issue a stop work order if the owner's planned activity exceeds ordinary maintenance and repair. In this instance a decision concerning the need for a certificate of appropriateness shall be decided within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, by the Historic Landmarks Preservation Commission. If a certificate of appropriateness is deemed necessary, the standard rules for its procedures shall apply. 
(Ord. of 10-8-1997(1), § 7)  
Chapter 22 - HUMAN RELATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City Manager or his designee means the City Manager of the City of Pearsall or a designated employee of the City. 
Disability means a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits at least one major life activity, a record of the impairment, or being regarded as having the impairment. The term "disability" does not include current illegal use or addiction to any drug or illegal or federally controlled substance and does not apply to an individual because of an individual's sexual orientation or because that individual is a transvestite. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 22-21, 22-22, 22-23, and 22-24. 
Dwelling means any: 
(1)  Building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families; or 
(2)  Vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a structure or part of a structure described by subsection (1) of this definition. 
Family includes a single individual living alone. 
Family status or familial status means: 
(1)  The status resulting from one or more persons who are under the age of 18 years being domiciled with an individual who is either the: 
a.  Parent of the person under age 18; 
b.  Legal custodian of the person under age 18; or 
c.  Designee (with written authorization) of the parent or legal guardian or custodian of the person under age 18. 
(2)  The status resulting from being pregnant; or 
(3)  The status of being in the process of securing legal custody of any person who is under the age of 18. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, labor organization, legal representative, joint stock company, trust, trustee, trustees in bankruptcy, receiver, fiduciary, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
To rent means to lease, sublease, let and otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 2; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 2)  
Sec. 22-20. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to bring about, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to his race, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or disability. 
(b)  It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition of the inalienable right of each individual to provide for himself and his family a dwelling according to his own choosing, and further, that the denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color, sex, religion familial status, national origin or disability is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 1; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 1)  
Sec. 22-21. - Discrimination in selling or renting. 
Except as exempted by section 22-25, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  After the making of a bona fide offer, to refuse to sell or rent, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, familial status, or national origin. 
(2)  To discriminate against any individual in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or disability. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to he made, printed or published, any notice, statements or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, sex religion, national origin, familial status or disability or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, familial status or disability that any dwelling is not available for inspection for sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact available for inspection. 
(5)  For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to induce, attempt to induce to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or disability. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 3; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 3)  
Sec. 22-22. - Disability. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered multifamily dwellings means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four or more units if the buildings have one or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
Discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person having a disability, a reasonable modification of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modification may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises; 
(2)  A refusal to make a reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices, or services if the accommodation may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  The failure to design and construct a covered multifamily dwelling in a manner that: 
a.  Allows the public use and common use portions of the dwellings to be readily accessible to and usable by persons having a disability; 
b.  Allows all doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings to be sufficiently wide to allow passage by a person who has a disability and who is in a wheelchair; and 
c.  Provides all premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
1.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
2.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
3.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
4.  Kitchens and bathrooms that are usable and have sufficient space in which an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver. 
(b)  A person may not discriminate in the sale or rental of, or make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
(1)  The buyer or renter; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(c)  A person may not discriminate against another in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of: 
(1)  The other person; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with the other person. 
(d)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for persons having physical disabilities, commonly cited as ANSI A 117.1, satisfies the requirements of subsection (a)(3)c of this section. 
(e)  Subsection (a)(3) of this section does not apply to a building the first occupancy of which occurred on or before March 13, 1991. 
(f)  This section does not require a dwelling to be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.  
Sec. 22-23. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Residential real estate related transaction means: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance: 
a.  To purchase, construct, improve, repair, or maintain a dwelling; or 
b.  To secure residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property. 
(b)  A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions may not discriminate against another in making a real estate related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a real estate related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 4; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 4)  
Sec. 22-24. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status or disability. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 5; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 5)  
Sec. 22-25. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of sections 22-21, 22-22, 22-23, 22-24, and 22-33: 
(1)  The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by the owner if: 
a.  The owner does not: 
1.  Own more than three single-family houses at any one time; or 
2.  Own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on the person's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three single-family houses at any one time; and 
b.  The house is sold or rented without: 
1.  The use of the sales or rental facilities or services of a broker, agent, or salesperson licensed under chapter 1101, Occupations Code (V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1101.001 et seq.), or of an employee or agent of a licensed broker, agent, or salesperson, or the facilities or services of the owner of a dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five or more families; or 
2.  The publication, posting, or mailing of a notice, statement, or advertisement prohibited by section 301.022 (V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.022); or 
(2)  The rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members. 
(d)  The exemption in subsection (a)(1) of this section applies only to one sale or rental in a 24-month period if the owner was not the most recent resident of the house at the time of the sale or rental. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 6; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 6)  
Sec. 22-26. - Exemption for elderly. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to familial status do not apply to housing: 
(1)  That is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly individuals under a federal or State program; 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, individuals 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one individual 55 years of age or older for each unit as determined by Commission rules.  
Sec. 22-27. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will he irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as persons aggrieved) may file a complaint with the City Manager. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The City Manager or his designee is directed to prepare and adopt from time to time standard complaint forms and to furnish them without charge to any person aggrieved. 
(b)  The City Manager or his designee shall receive and accept notification and referral of complaints from the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed directly by the person aggrieved. 
(c)  If, in the course of any investigation as provided in section 22-28 hereof on a complaint filed with or referred to the City Manager or his designee, he shall receive credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that the person named in such complaint have committed a discriminatory housing practice on grounds not stated in such complaint, the City Manager or his designee shall refer the question to the original complainant for supplementary complaint and such supplementary complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as an original complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(d)  If at any time the City Manager or his designee shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice, as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the City Manager or his designee may refer the question to the person aggrieved, who may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)  Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the City Manager or his designee shall furnish a copy of the same to the person named in the complaint together with any other information available. 
(f)  A complaint under subsections (a), (c), (d), and (e) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred and not otherwise. Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time prior to a hearing. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him, and may amend his answer at any time prior to a hearing. Both complaints and answers shall be signed. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 7; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 7)  
Sec. 22-28. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint as herein provided, the City Manager or his designee shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  In connection with such investigation, the City Manager or his designee may question and take and record testimony and statements of such persons who appear and may examine, record, and copy documents which are produced. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, the City Manager or his designee shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice act has occurred, or is about to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance or rectification of the discriminatory housing practice and voluntary compliance and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provision of this article. 
(d)  In the event conciliation is effected, the City Manager or his designee shall disclose nothing said or done in the course of such reconciliation in such way as to make public identification of the person named in the complaint without the written consent of the persons concerned, subject to the requirements of law. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 8; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 8)  
Sec. 22-29. - Council hearing. 
(a)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the City Manager or his designee, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the City Manager, and if conciliation has not been effected, the City Manager or his designee shall refer the complaint to the Council, together with the answer of the respondent, if any, and a full report of his investigation and activities in the matter. 
(b)  The Council shall promptly set a date for the hearing. This date shall be within 30 days of the date on which the City Manager referred the complaint. At least five days prior written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice. The hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner and shall be public. Proof of the matters alleged within the complaint may be presented by the City Manager. If complainant and the person alleged to have committed a discriminatory housing practice shall fail to appear at the Council hearing either personally or by representative, after notice as provided in this subsection, the such hearing shall be deemed waived by such person. 
(c)  If, after such hearing, a majority of the Councilmembers present shall determine on the basis of the evidence at the hearing that the complaint is well founded, the Council shall forthwith by persuasion, education and entreaty diligently attempt to secure within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, voluntary discontinuance of any discriminatory housing practice. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 9; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 9)  
Sec. 22-30. - Certification to City Attorney. 
If the Council shall determine that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred and if a hearing before the Council on the complaint alleging such violation has been waived, or if the Council has held a hearing and the efforts of the Council to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, the Council shall cause the City Manager to certify in writing to the City Attorney that such discriminatory housing practice has occurred and request prosecution thereof in the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 10; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 10)  
Sec. 22-31. - Legal proceedings. 
(a)  Upon certification by the City Manager pursuant to the direction of the Council, the City Attorney shall prosecute the complaint in the Municipal Court to final conclusion. 
(b)  Their certification to the City Attorney and the actions to be taken shall be cumulative of all other remedies and procedures for the effectuation and enforcement of this article and the prosecution of alleged violators of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 11; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 11)  
Sec. 22-32. - Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
The Council and the City Manager are authorized and encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, as amended, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 12; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 12)  
Sec. 22-33. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force, to willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(1)  Any person because of his race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or disability and because he is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; 
(2)  Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or class of persons from: 
a.  Participating without discrimination on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status or disability, in any of the activities, services organization or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section; or 
b.  Affording another person or classes of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
(3)  Any person because he is or has been or in order to discourage such person or any other person from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, sex, religion, familial status, national origin, or disability, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceable assembly opposing any denial or the opportunity so to participate. 
(Ord. of 1-9-1980, § 13; Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 13)  
Sec. 22-34. - Legal actions. 
The City or any person aggrieved by a violation of any provision of this article may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Injunctive relief or an order otherwise compelling compliance with this article; 
(2)  Compensatory and/or punitive damages; 
(3)  Reasonable attorney's fees and costs; and 
(4)  Such other or further relief as is appropriate for the enforcement of this article and the elimination of violations thereof. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 15)  
Sec. 22-35. - Other remedies. 
This article shall not prevent the City or any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise be entitled or from filing any complaint with any other agency or court of law or equity. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(2), § 16)  
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 24-19. - Manual adopted by reference. 
The "Pearsall Police Department Policy Manual and Code of Conduct," as approved by the City Council on August 8, 1984, and amended thereafter, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out.  
Chapter 26 - MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1201.001 et seq.; regulation by municipality of mobile and manufactured housing, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1201.008; regulation of certain types of housing and buildings, reservation of municipal authority, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1202.252. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Conditional use means a use which may be permitted in a district subject to meeting certain conditions or procedures set forth in this chapter. 
HUD Code manufactured home. 
(1)  The term "HUD Code manufactured home" means a structure: 
a.  Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and 
(2)  The term "HUD Code manufactured home" includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and 
(3)  The term "HUD Code manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 CFR section 3282.8(g). 
Manufactured home or manufactured housing means a HUD Code manufactured home or a mobile home. 
Manufactured home park means a unified development of a minimum of three acres and ten approved manufactured home spaces for rent or lease, arranged on a tract of land, in which the tenant of the manufactured home are not the owners of the land. 
Manufactured home subdivision means the division of land as the term "subdivision" is defined in this chapter for the purpose of manufactured home occupancy. A manufactured home subdivision shall consist of not less than three acres and ten approved manufactured home sites. 
Mobile home. 
(1)  The term "mobile home" means a structure: 
a.  Constructed before June 15, 1976; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and 
(2)  The term "mobile home" includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home. 
Mobile home park means a lot, tract or parcel of land used in whole or in part and divided into unit plots for the parking of house trailers or mobile homes which are used by persons for temporary or permanent dwelling places. Where cottages and facilities for house trailers or mobile homes are provided at one site, the whole shall also be known as a house trailer park. 
Modular homes means a structure or building module which is a minimum of 20-feet wide and is manufactured at a location other than the location where it is installed and used as a residence; transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device and to be used as a permanent dwelling when installed and placed upon a permanent foundation system. 
Owner or manager means any person or society who has the control, direction, maintenance or supervision of a house trailer park. Executors, administrators, guardians, conservators or trustees shall also be regarded as owner. 
Recreational vehicle means any of the following while in use as a residence: 
Dependent trailer means a trailer which is dependent upon a service building for toilet and lavatory facilities. 
Motor homes means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation. 
Self-contained trailer means a trailer which can operate independent of connections to sewer, water, and electric systems. It contains a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower, and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and sewage-holding tanks located within the trailer. 
Travel trailer means vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding state maximum. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 2)  
Sec. 26-2. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or who builds or alters any building in violation of any plan or statement submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(b)  No oversight or dereliction on the part of the Zoning Administrator or on the part of any official or employee of the City shall legalize, authorize or excuse the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the appropriate authorities of the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 25)  
Sec. 26-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe, sanitary and suitable methods for construction and operation of mobile home and manufactured home parks within the City, to provide adequate space and restrictions for the placement of mobile, modular and manufactured homes in the City, and to provide guidelines for the placement of such parks, to ensure that these parks shall not become a menace or a public nuisance to health, or is offensive to the community, morals and safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 1)  
Sec. 26-4. - Mobile home park permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or operate any present or future mobile home park within the City limits without first having obtained a permit therefore from the Building Official of the city. Such permit shall be for the calendar year or any part thereof, ending on December 31 of each year with the right to renew the permit yearly, if a mobile home park is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 4)  
Sec. 26-5. - Location of manufactured homes. 
(a)  No person shall park or occupy a manufactured home on any lot or tract not within a zoning district which permits manufactured homes. 
(b)  Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of manufactured homes is permitted on any street or highway for not longer than three hours subject to any other prohibitions, regulations or ordinances pertaining to the particular street or highway. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 6)  
Sec. 26-6. - Manufactured home park plan. 
(a)  Submission. Each applicant seeking approval of a manufactured home park shall submit to the Director of Planning five blue or black line copies of a manufactured home park plan and one 8½-inch by 11-inch reduced copy of vellum or similar quality material accompanied by the plan review fee specified herein. 
(b)  Review. Upon receipt of a manufactured home park plan, the director of planning shall distribute copies to various City departments and agencies as the director deems appropriate for their review. The departments/agencies receiving copies of the plan shall submit their comments and recommendations for approval or disapproval in writing back to the director of planning within 30 days of receipt of the plan. 
(c)  Approval. Within 45 days of the date of submission of the manufactured home park plan, the director of planning shall submit the plan with his recommendation and comments received from other City departments and agencies to the planning commission for consideration. The planning commission may approve the plan as submitted, amend and approve the plan as amended or disapprove the plan. If the manufactured home park plan is approved, the director of planning shall retain one copy or file in the planning department and distribute one copy to the director of building inspections and other departments/agencies appropriate. 
(d)  Grandfathered. All existing mobile home parks are grandfathered relative to this provision. This does not excuse compliance with any and all setback requirements conditional use requirements including tiedowns, skirting and duration. Any additions to the existing mobile home parks triggers the compliance requirements of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 7)  
Sec. 26-7. - Plan specifications. 
(a)  Generally. The manufactured home park plan shall be drawn to a scale not to exceed one inch to 100 feet. Where more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area to be developed, an index sheet showing the entire park at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plan. 
(b)  Site improvement data. The following data regarding site improvements are required: 
(1)  A plan and typical section of streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, slabs, patios, if any, and details on sewer and water sections. 
(2)  The name of the developer. 
(3)  The name of the record owner of the land involved. 
(4)  The legal description of the land being developed, with an identification number assigned to each manufactured home site. 
(5)  The tract boundary lines. 
(6)  The scale; north arrow and date. 
(7)  The final contour data to show drainage of the site of the proposed manufactured home park. If the average grade of the site is five percent or less, the maximum contour interval shall be two feet. If the average grade of the site is greater than five percent, the contour interval may be increased to five feet. 
(8)  The source of water supply and layout of the water system, including locations of standard fire hydrants. 
(9)  The method of sewage disposal and layout of the sewer system. 
(10)  The name of the manufactured home park and the legal description of the property. 
(11)  The location and dimensions or all streets, easements, and other rights-of-way. 
(12)  The boundaries of each manufactured home stand and site and other sites with accurate dimensions. 
(13)  The front building setback lines on all manufactured home stands and other sites and side yard setback lines at street intersections and crosswalks. 
(14)  A location diagram. 
(15)  An owner's certificate in the following form: 
State of Texas 
County of Frio 
I hereby certify that this plan is true and correct and if approved by the planning commission, all development will be in accordance with this plan, and no alterations will be made in this plan after approval. 
	_____
Owner or authorized agent 
 
(16)  An approval form in the following format: 
This Manufactured Home Park Plan for ___________ has been considered and is hereby approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Pearsall, Texas. Dated this ___ day of ________, 20___. 
	By: _____
  Chairman 

	By: _____
  Secretary 
 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 8)  
Sec. 26-8. - Plat requirement. 
Property to be developed as a manufactured home park shall be platted prior to obtaining any building permits or utility services. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 9)  
Sec. 26-9. - Manufactured home standards. 
(a)  Manufactured homes shall be of adequate quality and safe design, as certified by a label stating that the unit is constructed in conformance with the federal manufactured home construction and safety standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
(b)  Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with metal, masonry, pressure-treated wood, or other nondegradable material which is compatible with the structure's exterior siding. 
(c)  Driveways and off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for single-family dwellings. 
(d)  Living area additions, carports and garages are permitted, provided they are constructed of material compatible with the primary structure, meet the minimum standards of the zoning districts and comply with the structural standards as required of the primary structure. 
(e)  Manufactured houses which do not bear a label certifying that the structure was constructed in compliance with the federal manufactured home construction and safety standards, may be acceptable provided they meet the previously listed standards and satisfy the following criteria: 
(1)  All electrical material, devices, appliances and electrical equipment are in sound and safe condition. Aluminum wiring and conductors are not acceptable. 
(2)  All mechanical systems including space and water heating are in sound and safe condition. 
(3)  All plumbing, gas piping and wastewater systems are in sound and safe condition. 
(4)  The unit is in sound and safe structural condition. Uncompressed finish floorings greater than one-eighth-inch in thickness beneath load-bearing walls which are fastened to the floor structure are not acceptable. Mobile homes which show signs of fire damage are not acceptable. 
(5)  The determination of the foregoing acceptance of any mobile home shall be made by the local Building Official and Department of Inspections. 
(f)  All mobile homes and manufactured housing shall be installed in accordance with the locally adopted building codes. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 10)  
Sec. 26-10. - Use restrictions. 
In a manufactured home park (MHP) district, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any other use than: 
(1)  One manufactured home on each space as approved for manufactured homes. 
(2)  The owner or manager's single-family dwelling unit. 
(3)  Accessory buildings including a private garage, or bona fide servants' quarters, for use of servants employed on the premises, and not for rent. 
(4)  Recreational and commercial facilities designed for the exclusive use of the park occupants. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 11)  
Sec. 26-11. - Prohibited uses of new and existing parks. 
Prohibited uses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any building erected on land used for other than one or more of the uses specified in section 26-10. 
(2)  Any use of property that does not meet the required minimum lot/space size: front, side and rear yard dimensions; and/or lot width, or exceeds the maximum height, building coverage or density per gross acre as required. 
(3)  Any use of a single-family detached dwelling unit by more than six individuals who are unrelated by blood, legal adoption, or marriage. The owner and any agent of the owner shall be legally responsible for any dwelling unit use. 
(4)  Mobile homes, except those meeting the established mobile home standards. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 12)  
Sec. 26-12. - Density, area requirements. 
Density and area requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 
a.  Singlewide: 60 feet by 90 feet. 
b.  Doublewide: 80 feet by 90 feet. 
(2)  No manufactured home park shall have less than ten manufactured home lots, or consist of less than three acres in total area. 
(3)  No manufactured home park shall exceed a density of more than ten dwelling units per gross acre. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 13)  
Sec. 26-13. - Standards of development. 
(a)  Dedicated streets. Dedicated streets, for maintenance purposes, shall be provided and shall extend continuously from the public right-of-way so as to provide suitable access to all mobile home lots and other facilities or uses permitted in mobile home parks; as well as provide adequate connection to future streets at the boundaries of the mobile home park property line. Dedicated streets shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum driving surface shall be as follows: dedicated streets which provide direct access to 25 or more mobile home lots shall be 24-feet wide. 
(2)  Dedicated street intersections shall generally be at right angles; offsets at an intersection of less than 125 feet, centerline to centerline, should be avoided; and an intersection of more than two streets at one point should be avoided. 
(3)  Dead-end dedicated streets shall be limited to a maximum length of 600 feet and shall be provided with a vehicular turning space with a turning circle of 80 feet in diameter. 
(4)  All dedicated streets shall be constructed of all-weather materials which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(5)  Dedicated streets which may connect two public street rights-of-way shall, by the use of curves, offsets, location, and/or the use of two or more streets, be located so as to discourage through traffic. 
(b)  Mobile home space. Each mobile home space shall conform to the following standards: have available sanitary sewer, water, electrical power, telephone and natural gas if required. Those services shall be installed under the appropriate City codes to the point of service. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 14)  
Sec. 26-14. - Parking for parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or occupy any mobile home or recreational vehicle on any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or other public place in the City for a longer period than 24 hours. 
(b)  No mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be parked, used, or occupied on any tract of ground within the City limits except in a duly permitted mobile home park and is herein permitted by this section. 
(c)  Each mobile home space shall provide at least one off-street parking space. Additional parking places shall be provided at the rate of one-half parking space per mobile home unit. In common areas which are accessible to those units being served, said space shall: 
(1)  Have a permanent all-weather surface. 
(2)  Have dimensions of not less than nine feet by 20 inches. 
(3)  Be appropriately defined and marked. 
(4)  Be accessible to an all-weather surface private street. 
(5)  Be so located and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street or walk. 
(6)  Provide adequate barriers to keep any parked vehicle from extending into or overhanging any public dedicated street or private street. 
(7)  Be so designed that any vehicle may be parked and unparked without requiring the moving of any other vehicle. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 15)  
Sec. 26-15. - Streets for parks. 
(a)  Generally. Streets shall be provided within manufactured home parks to provide convenient circulation by means of local streets and properly located collector streets. Streets within a manufactured home park shall be private streets and shall be maintained by the manufactured home park owner or licensee. 
(b)  Design standards and construction specifications. The street system shall comply with the standards for private streets as specified in the Subdivisions chapter. The radius of the curb returns of private streets to public streets shall be 25 feet. Closed ends of dead-end streets shall be provided with a turning circle at least 80 feet in diameter. 
(c)  Alignment and gradient. Streets shall be adapted to the topography and shall have suitable alignment and gradient for safety of traffic, satisfactory surface and groundwater drainage, and properly functioning sanitary and storm sewer systems. 
(d)  Intersections. Street intersections shall generally be at right angles. Off-sets at intersections and intersections of more than two streets shall be avoided. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 16)  
Sec. 26-16. - Driveways for parks. 
The maximum width of driveways to manufactured home stands and other facilities shall be 12 feet, plus any extra width necessary for maneuvering a manufactured home on a curve. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 17)  
Sec. 26-17. - Setbacks for parks. 
All mobile homes shall be placed as follows: 
(1)  The minimum front yard setback shall be ten feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space. 
(2)  No mobile home shall be closer than ten feet to any property line nor closer than 25 feet to the property line adjoining a public street. 
(3)  For other structures on each space, the minimum front yard setback shall be at least ten feet. 
(4)  The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be 20 feet. 
(5)  The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the mobile home park shall be 35 feet. 
(6)  The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet. 
(7)  Mobile homes must be skirted with nonflammable material before City utilities are connected. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 18)  
Sec. 26-18. - Floodplain for parks. 
Every manufactured home park shall comply with the provisions of chapter 18, Floodplain Management, as applicable. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Building Official that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New Construction or substantial improvement of any commercial industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Building Official that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. 
(3)  Mobile homes. 
a.  No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway, except in an existing mobile home park or existing mobile home subdivision. 
b.  All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapses, or lateral movement. Specific requirements shall be: 
1.  Over-the-top ties at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
2.  Frame ties at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
3.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; 
4.  Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly anchored. 
c.  For new mobile home parks and subdivisions; for expansions to existing mobile home parks and subdivisions; for existing mobile home parks and subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or subdivision require: 
1.  Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Building Official that the standards of this section; 
2.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and 
3.  In the instance of elevation on pilings: 
(i)  Lots are large enough to permit steps; 
(ii)  Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and 
(iii)  Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 19)  
Sec. 26-19. - New and existing parks—City improvements and services. 
The City will withhold all public improvements and services from manufactured home parks, including wastewater, water, gas and electric service, until a manufactured home park has been approved in the manner prescribed by those regulations. 
(1)  Drainage structures. Provisions for the collection and disposal of surface and subsurface water to protect buildings and manufactured home stands, and to provide safe and convenient use of streets, lot areas and other improvements shall be required in all manufactured home parks. 
(2)  Water supply. Every manufactured home park shall be provided by the park licensee with an ample supply of water under pressure and approved by the director of health. Individual water lines from service outlets to manufactured homes shall be constructed to a minimum of one-half inch interior diameter PVC service weight pipe, galvanized pipe, polyethylene pipe, 100-pound pressure test strength, or copper line secured properly so as to eliminate any water leakage or spillage. Internal water supply systems shall be constructed so that they will not be damaged by the parking of manufactured homes and shall be maintained in good condition so as to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(3)  Sewage disposal. All sewer lines shall be connected to the public sewage system or a private sewage disposal system approved by the director of health. Individual sewage drains from manufactured homes to the park service connections shall be installed utilizing three-inch schedule 40 pipe or three-inch ABS service weight pipe, with all connections of same material sealed with sealing agents prescribed by the pipe manufacturer so as to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(4)  Electrical power lines. Electrical facilities shall comply with the rules and regulations regarding placement, installation, operation, and maintenance of electrical facilities as included in, but not limited to the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(5)  Fire hydrants. Standard fire hydrants, in workable condition, shall be located within 500 feet of each manufactured home. All such fire hydrants shall be connected to not less than a six-inch diameter water line. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 19)  
Sec. 26-20. - Same—Certificate of occupancy. 
No building, mobile home site or other permanent structure within the meaning and scope of this chapter shall be occupied in any part thereof unless or until a certificate of occupancy for the respective mobile home park has been issued by the Building Inspector. An application for the certificate of occupancy shall be filed by the owner or by his agent with the Building Inspector who shall cause an inspection to be made to determine whether the premises comply with the requirements of this chapter. Upon the incorporation of any area to the City, any person maintaining or operating a mobile home park in such area shall immediately make application as provided in this section for a certificate of occupancy to continue the operation of such mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 20)  
Sec. 26-21. - Same—Building permit required. 
No person shall erect or construct or proceed with the erection or construction of any building or structure, nor add to, enlarge, move, improve, alter, repair, convert, extend or demolish any building or structure or any part thereof or install any plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment as part of a building or structure, or make any other improvement in any building or structure or cause the same to be done within a mobile home park without first obtaining a building permit therefor from the Building Inspector. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 21)  
Sec. 26-22. - Permits for parking mobile homes outside a licensed mobile home park. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for all recreational vehicles and mobile homes now parked outside mobile home parks, and hereafter any person proposing to move or remove a mobile home or recreational vehicle outside a licensed mobile home park shall be required first to make an application for and obtain a permit for the same. 
(1)  The application for parking of mobile homes shall contain the following: 
a.  A graphic representation of the location of any existing dwellings or structures on the tract and the proposed placement of the mobile home in relation thereto, including all pertinent dimensions. 
b.  The street address, the subdivision name, lot and block number of the tract where placement is proposed. 
c.  A statement as to location of water and sewer facilities and other utilities. 
(2)  The permit required by this section does not affect in any way the requirement for obtaining any and all permits for construction, installation, alteration, or repair. 
(3)  The application procedure shall be as follows: 
a.  Application for permit to place a mobile home on a tract of ground outside a licensed mobile home park shall be made on standard forms provided for that purpose by the City. The application shall contain all information as specified in this subsection. 
b.  Upon receipt of the properly completed application, graphic representation and permit fee, the Building Official or other responsible official shall review the application with appropriate City departments to determine conformance with the requirements contained herein. 
c.  After review, the Building Official shall notify the applicant of any necessary revisions, in writing. 
d.  No permit shall be issued for the placement of a recreational vehicle outside a licensed mobile home park. 
(b)  Whenever the holder of a permit for a mobile home parked outside a duly licensed mobile home park that does not conform to the minimum standards contained in this section fails to obtain a permit for the same or upon damage to such mobile home by fire, explosion, or any act of God to the extent of 25 percent of the market value of such mobile home, such permit shall terminate and become void and of no effect. Thereafter only when the placement of the mobile home shall conform in every respect to the standards for placement shall a permit be reissued or renewed. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 22)  
Sec. 26-23. - Conditional use permit. 
A conditional use permit is required for all conditional uses. A conditional use permit may have a specified time limitation attached and may impose conditions other than those which are specifically set forth in the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Granting a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with the requirements of all applicable building codes or other applicable ordinances. Uses other than those unconditionally permitted to occur within the mobile home district may be permitted by means of a conditional use permit authorized by the City. Said uses must be listed as a conditional use permit for the mobile home district in the use table and must be granted in accordance with the regulations provided for conditional use permits. 
(1)  No singlewide mobile homes are permitted in any residential district without a conditional use permit. 
(2)  Modular homes must be approved with a conditional use permit if placed in an R-1 or R-2 district, provided the conditional use permit process is adhered to. Modular homes are a permitted use in the R-3 district. 
(3)  An application shall be made by the property owner or certified agent thereof to the Zoning Administrator on a form prescribed for this purpose by the City. The application shall be accompanied by site plans. 
(4)  Site plans required are as follows: 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the site plan is to ensure compliance with the provisions of Zoning chapter, and to assist in the orderly and harmonious development of the City; to protect and enhance the general welfare; and to help prevent the impairment or depreciation of land values and development by erection of structures, additions or alterations thereto, without proper attention to site planning. 
b.  Recording. The applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator three copies of his site plan. The Zoning Administrator shall keep one copy in his files. The duplicate copies shall be used during investigation of the case and for review of the Commission in the event a hearing is required. 
c.  Contents. The site plan shall contain drawings to scale, in triplicate, to indicate the following: 
1.  The location of all structures on the subject property and on adjoining property. 
2.  Landscaping and/or fencing of yards and setback areas and uses of landscaping and/or walls or fences for screening purposes. 
3.  Design of ingress and egress to minimize interference with traffic flow on abutting streets. 
4.  Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
5.  Height of all structures. 
6.  Proposed uses. 
7.  The location and types of all signs, including lighting and heights. 
(5)  Guidelines for approval. 
a.  The Commission and/or Council may approve a conditional use permit, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, when it is found that: 
1.  The proposed use meets all the minimum standards established in this chapter for this type of use. 
2.  The proposed use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and of the plan for the physical development of the district, as embodied in the comprehensive plan or part thereof adopted by the Commission. 
3.  The proposed use will not be determinal to the health, welfare and safety of the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, nor be substantially or permanently injurious to neighboring property. 
b.  The Commission and/or Council may impose additional, reasonable restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter and to mitigate adverse effects on the proposed conditional use. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements, suitable landscaping and additional improvements, such as curbing and sidewalks. 
(6)  Approval procedure. The following procedure shall be complied with prior to the approval or denial of any conditional use permit: 
a.  Within five days after receiving an application for a conditional use permit, notification of such request, by mail, shall be made to all owners of real property living within 200 feet of the property on which an application has been made. The names and addresses of the affected parties shall be supplied by the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall supply the envelopes and stamps and will have to address all envelopes. (Note: letters will be mailed by the Zoning Administrator from City Hall to ensure proper notification to all affected parties). 
b.  The Commission may, if no adverse response to the notification referenced in subsection (b) of this section is received within ten days, set the appropriate conditions for the permit, if any, and approve issuance of same upon agreement by the applicant. 
c.  If there is a negative response to the notification in writing, the notification process, to all affected property owners, shall be repeated and handled in the same manner as stated in subsection (6)a of this section. Furthermore, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary preparations for a public hearing before the Commission on the request as set forth. Such hearing shall occur not later than the second regular monthly meeting of the Commission from the date of filing for the same conditional use permit. Notice of such hearing shall be published in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation within the City, not more than 15 days nor less than five days prior to the date of said hearing. 
d.  Upon the date of the hearing of such application for a conditional use permit, the Commission shall approve or deny the same and, a report of such action, together with a recommendation for final approval or denial, shall be made by the Commission to the City Council. 
e.  Before acting upon any application for a conditional use permit, the City Council shall set a time and place for a hearing thereon, following the regular public notification process. Notice of hearing shall be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. Note: individual notice by mail will not be required. 
f.  Upon the date of the final hearing of such application for a conditional use permit, the Council shall approve or deny same with appropriate conditions attached, if any. 
g.  Said conditions may include, but are not limited to, location, construction, maintenance and operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in the chapter for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 
(7)  Issuance of permit. A conditional use permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator upon approval of such permit as provided herein. 
(8)  Development. Following the issuance of a conditional use permit, the Building Official shall ensure that if the development is undertaken, it is completed in compliance with said permit; however, if a conditional use permit has not been used within six months after the date granted, the permit is automatically cancelled. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 23)  
Sec. 26-24. - Revocation, suspension of permit. 
The Building Official, or any other duly authorized employee of the City, such as the Police Chief, Fire Chief, or Fire Marshal, shall have the right and authority to enter upon the mobile home parks at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting same, and to see that no legal violations are being made. The Building Official shall have the authority at any period of time, to suspend or revoke licenses, or to order utility disconnections for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  That the licensee, or any of his agents or representatives or employees are violating or have violated any provisions of this section or any other ordinance of the City or the laws of the State. 
(2)  For refusal to allow the Building Official or any other duly authorized person to enter upon and inspect the mobile home park. 
(3)  Upon notification by the Finance Director of the licensee's failure to pay the permit fee by the stated time. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 24)  
Sec. 26-25. - Appeals from decision of Building Official. 
Appeal of any decision of the Building Official regarding mobile homes or mobile home parks shall be made in writing to the Board of Adjustment (BOA) within ten days after being notified of such decision. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the Board of Adjustment (BOA) on the matter. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 26)  
Sec. 26-26. - City employees not personally liable. 
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this section. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this section shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 27)  
Chapter 28 - MUNICIPAL FEES, RATES, AND DEPOSITS 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Schedules of licenses and fees. 
The fees, rates, or security deposits for the service, license, or permit provided for anywhere in this Code shall be in the amount shown in the schedules set out in this chapter. The presence of a fee, rate, or security deposit in this chapter without a requirement elsewhere in this Code that the fee, rate, or security deposit be paid, shall be construed as a requirement that the fee, rate, or security deposit be paid.  
Sec. 28-2. - Animals; charges, fees and fines. 
(a)  Fine for interference with the duties of the Animal Control Officer: $25.00. 
(b)  Fine for an animal owner's failure to have his animal wear a rabies tag: $10.00. 
(c)  Fine for keeping over the limit the number of animals permitted: $25.00. 
(d)  Fine for keeping of innately wild animals: $5.00 to $50.00. 
(e)  Fee for the disposition of an unwanted, sick or injured animal: $20.00. 
(f)  Fine for riding a horse within the City limits: $50.00. 
(g)  Fine for keeping livestock within the City limits: $50.00. 
(h)  Fine for killing or wounding animals or fowl within the City limits: $50.00 to $200.00. 
(i)  Fine for safety and endangering animals in moving vehicles within the City limits, at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer: $5.00 to $125.00. 
(j)  Fine for safety and endangering animals in a standing or parked vehicle: $25.00. 
(k)  Permit fee to allow horses to parade in parades or festivals: $25.00. 
(l)  Permit fee to allow the use of horses within the City limits for special events or a special occasion: $50.00. 
(m)  Any owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall, before the animal will be released to him, pay the following: 
(1)  Fine for the animal running at large and being a public nuisance: $5.00 to $50.00, at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer; 
(2)  Room and board minimum and for first time impoundment: $5.00 per day; 
(3)  Room and board minimum and for second time impoundment: $10.00 per day; 
(4)  Room and board minimum and for third time impoundment: $20.00 per day; 
(5)  Room and board minimum and for fourth time and subsequent impoundment: $100.00 per day. 
(n)  Provided, however, if the animal is being held for observation because the animal has bitten a human being or another animal, the impoundment fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  First time impoundment: $50.00 per ten days. 
(2)  Second time impoundment: $75.00 per ten days. 
(3)  Third and subsequent time: owner fined $200.00 and animal euthanized. 
(o)  No dog or cat shall be released from the Animal Control Facility without the owner presenting proof that the dog or cat has had a rabies vaccination within the past 12 months. An owner of any dog or cat who cannot provide proof of said rabies vaccination shall be subject to a fee of $15.00 for rabies vaccination of each dog or cat. 
(p)  Persons adopting an animal from the animal control facility shall put up a $40.00 spay/neuter deposit which will be collected and deposited with the City for each animal adopted that has not yet been spayed or neutered. This deposit will be returned by the City upon application and presentment of a valid spay/neuter certificate. The Animal Control Department is authorized to collect a $15.00 fee for each animal spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2001, §§ 19, 37)  
Sec. 28-3. - Buildings; schedule of fees. 
(a)  Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal herein. 
(b)  The City is authorized to collect fees, charges and expenses for said permits, with no allowance of refunds on any of these fee charges, in accordance with the following schedule. 
(1)  Residential fees. 
a. 	Application fee (AF) 	$75.00 
b. 	Building permit—Type of improvement 	
	1. 	New building (construction) 	$200.00 + $75.00 AF 
	2. 	Addition/alteration 	$100.00 + $75.00 AF 
	3. 	Remodeling (repair/replacement) 	$65.00 + $75.00 AF 
	4. 	Demolition—Residential 	$75.00 + $75.00 
	5. 	Moving (relocation) 	$65.00 + $75.00 
	6. 	Foundation/slab (miscellaneous) 	$50.00 + $75.00 
c. 	Certificate of occupancy: 	
	1. 	Commercial (application/inspection/certificate fee) 	
		Certificate fee 	$350.00 
		Application fee (AF) 	$75.00 
		Fee per inspection 	$50.00 
	2. 	Residential/rental (application/certificate fee) 	
		Certificate fee 	$150.00 
		Application fee (AF) 	$75.00 
		Fee per inspection 	$50.00 
	3. 	Homestead (application/inspection/certificate fee) 
Inspected every 10 years 	
		Certificate fee 	$100.00 
		Application fee (AF) 	$75.00 
		Fee per inspection 	$50.00 
 
(2)  Commercial fees. 
a.  Application fee (based on acreage). 
1. 1.0 acre of less 	$500.00 
2. 1.01 acre to 5.0 acres 	$650.00 
3. 5.01 acres to 10.0 acres 	$800.00 
4. 10.01 acres to 25.0 acres 	$950.00 
5. 25.01 acres to greater 	$1,100.00 
 
b.  Building permits—Type of improvement. 
1. New building (construction) 	$300.00 + $0.65 sf 	+ $75.00 AF 
2. Addition/alteration 	$150.00 + $0.65 sf 	+ $75.00 AF 
3. Remodeling (repair/replacement) 	$100.00 + $0.65 sf 	+ $75.00 AF 
4. Demolition—Commercial 	$200.00 	+ $75.00 AF 
5. Moving (relocation) 	$100.00 	+ $75.00 AF 
6. Miscellaneous 	$150.00 	+ $75.00 AF 
 
(3)  Subdivision and platting fees: 
Platting fee 	$50.00 + costs assessed by City Engineer for plat approval 
 
(4)  Variance/special exception fees: $15.00; 
(5)  Conditional use permit: $50.00; 
(6)  Appeal to Board of Adjustment: $15.00; 
(7)  Rezoning fee: $50.00; 
(8)  Floodplain management fees: 
Development permit application fee 	$50.00 - costs assessed by City Engineer for elevation review 
 
(9)  Demolition of unsafe structures. The owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee shall be charged a demolition of unsafe structures fee of $106.00 per hour plus an administrative fee of 7.02 percent. 
(10)  Temporary construction noise. A person seeking a temporary construction noise permit shall complete and file a written application for a permit with the Director on the form provided by the Director, and pay a fee of $50.00 to cover measuring device and administrative expenses of processing the application or such amended amount as may be established by ordinance. Such application shall be submitted at least 20 business days prior to the date on which the proposed noise will commence. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987(4), § 5; Ord. of 1-10-1996(4), § 6; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 6; Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.50), 4-8-2008; Ord. No. 2012-12-174, § 6, 1-8-2013)  
Sec. 28-4. - Businesses—Peddler and itinerant vendor fee. 
Each itinerant or transient vendor, at the time of registration provided for in chapter 10, Businesses and Business Regulations, shall pay a registration fee to the City Manager or designee in the amount of $50.00, such fee being based upon the reasonable expenses anticipated to be incurred by the City in conducting the investigation provided for in chapter 10, Businesses and Business Regulations. Such fee shall be deposited by the City Manager or designee in the General Fund of the City. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(2), § 9)  
Sec. 28-4.2. - Same—Business licenses. 
The first application will be due by July 1, 2017. The application fee for those timely filed by July 1, 2017 shall be waived. Thereafter, every business operating in the City shall pay an annual business license fee of $50.00 that expires on December 31st of each year. The fee for a change of name on an existing business will be $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-03, § 4, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 28-4.4. - Same—Amusement redemption machine permitting. 
An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to obtain a permit for each amusement redemption machine. As part of the application, the owner, operator, or lessee must submit, at their own expense, each amusement redemption machine, including hardware and software source code, to an independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory approved in advance by the City to ensure that the machine does not generate the resultant outcome independent of the skillful actions of the player. Any game that is determined to be beyond the ability of a player to predict or control the outcome will not be permitted or allowed to operate within the incorporated limits of the city. The annual permit application fee is $3,000.00 per game room. The annual inspection permit fee per amusement redemption machine is $1,800.00 collected monthly at $150.00 per month. 
(Ord. No. 2012-12-179, § 1(2.03), 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 28-4.6. - Same—Sexually oriented business license application fee. 
Application for a license under these regulations may be made by submitting to Code Compliance Department a completed application form and a check or money order in the amount of $1,500.00 made payable to the City. Such fees are required to cover the cost of processing the application and, in the case of a license, investigating the applicant Application forms may be obtained from the Code Compliance Department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07-162, art. VI, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 28-4.8. - Same—Towing and wrecker service. 
(a)  Application for permit. Every company approved by the City Council to provide non-consent towing services within the City and desiring to be placed on the permitted wrecker list shall make application in writing, on a form provided for that purpose, to the Chief of Police. Such application shall contain the name, address, telephone number, the number and types of wrecker equipment operated and the owner of the business. Every application when filed shall be sworn to by the applicant and accompanied by a fee in the sum of $125.00 plus $25.00 per tow truck to be used on City streets. Said fees are non-refundable. The applicant shall file as an attachment to the application the following: 
(1)  A certificate or policy of public liability and property damage insurance meeting the requirements of section 10-142(6)a and b. 
(2)  A certificate or policy of public liability and property damage insurance meeting the requirements of section 10-142(6)a and b. 
(3)  Cargo insurance or a surety bond to cover damage to a towed vehicle during a hookup or towing, in an amount satisfying the requirements of section 10-142(6)c. 
(b)  Renewal of permit; annual fees. All permits shall be renewed during the month of December each year. A newly issued permit shall be valid until December 31 of each year of its issuance and may be renewed at any time during the month of December. The fee for renewal of each permit shall be $75.00 plus $25.00 per tow truck to be used on City streets. Said fees are non-refundable. A permit may be renewed upon payment of the annual fee and the execution of a verified statement that the information on the original application form continues to be valid. If any of said information is no longer valid, the permit holder must present the corrected information at the time of renewal of the permit. 
(c)  Towing charges and storage. A wrecker owner is hereby authorized to collect up to, but not more than, the following fees for services rendered as a result of a call from the City, a call resulting from being on the permitted wrecker list, or the request of any person who is not the owner of such vehicle. Such fee shall include the use of all equipment during a tow, such as double hookup, dollies, winching or a flatbed. 
(1)  For vehicles not requiring a heavy duty wrecker ..... $175.00. 
Basic towing charges include: 
a.  Use of dolly. 
b.  Towing motorcycles. 
c.  Wheel and tire change. 
d.  Winch, if required. 
e.  Upright vehicle. 
f.  Use and cleanup of absorbent material. 
(2)  For vehicles requiring a heavy-duty wrecker ..... $300.00. 
(3)  Disregard fee after wrecker arrives by request of police officer ..... No charge. 
(4)  Storage fees. Storage fees shall comply with applicable State law. 
(5)  All other labor: $100.00 per hour, charged prorated in 15-minute increments. This does not include charges incurred by the service for rented or subcontracted equipment for the cleanup. 
(6)  The wrecker service may charge no more than the amount granted by the State and charges for impoundment fees if they preserve a vehicle or remove and store personal property from the vehicle for safekeeping. 
The above fees and charges for towing services are not applicable to vehicles towed at the request of the owner of such vehicle and for such owner requested services are not regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02-02, §§ 7, 14, 21, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 28-5. - Emergency Services franchise application; requirements. 
Application for a private ambulance service franchise to operate an ambulance service within the City limits shall be filed with the City Manager; made upon such forms as may be prescribed by the City; and shall be subject to, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Ambulance service license, application and inspection fees. 
a.  There is hereby imposed a nonrefundable application fee of $500.00 for processing an application for a license to provide nonemergency ambulance service within the City limits. Said nonrefundable application fee shall be submitted with the application. 
b.  The annual renewal fee for processing a renewal application for such a license is hereby set at $350.00. Said nonrefundable application renewal fee shall be submitted with the application for renewal. 
c.  In addition to the aforementioned charges, there is also hereby imposed a nonrefundable ambulance vehicle inspection fee of $100.00 per vehicle. An additional charge of $30.00 per hour shall be assessed at the time during which a City inspector or his designate must wait on site between inspection of ambulance vehicles; provided, however, that said charges shall be imposed only after the first ambulance unit has been inspected and only for those time periods during which the City inspector or his designate is required to wait more than 30 minutes between inspections. In addition to the aforementioned charges, there is hereby imposed a reinspection fee of $50.00 per ambulance unit for each ambulance unit that fails inspection and has to be inspected again; if more than one reinspection of the same ambulance unit is required, said fee shall be imposed for each additional reinspection. 
(2)  An applicant shall furnish the following proof and information, which shall be subscribed and sworn to before a notary public: 
a.  That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the last ten years. 
b.  A statement that the applicant has obtained, or will obtain prior to operation within the City, liability insurance in accordance with the requirements provided by chapter 14, Emergency Management Services, before commencing service, in the event a City franchise should be granted. 
c.  The trade or other assumed business names, if any, under which the applicant does business, along with a certified copy of an assumed name certificate stating such names or articles of incorporation stating such names. 
d.  The names of all persons having a financial interest, direct or indirect, in such application and the name of the ambulance service to be conducted thereunder. 
(3)  An application shall also include the following information: 
a.  A full description of the type and level of service to be provided, including detailed plans stating the method of implementation and operation of service. 
b.  The application shall set out the number of nonemergency transfer vehicles which the applicant proposes to operate and the year of manufacture, make, model, and body style of each vehicle, including the license numbers for each. 
c.  An audited financial statement of the applicant as same pertains to the operations within the City, and such financial statement to be in such forts and detail as the City may require. 
d.  A list of employees, job status, and State motor vehicle operator license numbers. This list must be kept current at all times. 
e.  Proof of required insurance. 
f.  Proof of registered State certifications for vehicles and employees. 
g.  The address and physical location of all places where the applicant's office business is conducted. 
h.  A consent form allowing a representative of the City to inspect the applicant's stations, vehicles, equipment, and attendants' State medical certification cards during the term of the franchise. 
i.  A corporate resume of the training and experience of the applicant's employees in the transportation and care of patients. 
j.  A list of cities where the applicant is currently providing, or has in the past five years provided, similar private ambulance services. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-026, § 5-36(art. III), 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 28-6. - Mobile home park permit application procedure. 
(a)  Application for a permit to operate a mobile home park, or renewal thereof, shall be made to the Building Official on the forms provided for that purpose. Application for the original permit or to open a new mobile home park shall also include a plot plan on the proposed site showing all streets, utilities, mobile home locations, accessory buildings, fences, etc., to scale. Included with the application shall be the nonrefundable permit fee of $100.00, this fee being retained by the City to cover the cost of inspection and study. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the properly completed application, plot plan, if required, and review fee, the Building Official shall review the plans with the appropriate City departments to determine conformance with the standards set out herein, and any amendments thereto. 
(c)  After review, the Building Official shall notify the applicant of any revisions required, in writing. 
(d)  Upon approval of the application by the Building Official and other appropriate City departments, a permit for the operation of a mobile home park shall be issued to the applicant, which shall be valid until December 31 of that year, at which time application for renewal shall be made for the next calendar year as described in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 3)  
Sec. 28-7. - Mobile home park annual permit fee. 
The annual permit fee for each permit or renewal thereof to operate a mobile home park shall be determined by the following fee schedule: on all existing mobile home parks the fee is set at $25.00 per park, plus $2.00 for each trailer within the park, renewable every two years. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 5)  
Sec. 28-8. - Permits for parking mobile homes outside a licensed mobile home park. 
An original permit fee of $50.00 is hereby established for all recreational vehicles and mobile homes parked outside mobile home parks. 
(Ord. of 5-13-1998, § 22)  
Sec. 28-9. - Natural resources; filing fee for oil drilling permit. 
All applications for permits to drill shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $1,000.00 made payable to the City. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.2))  
Sec. 28-10. - Oil well inspection fee. 
There shall be a yearly inspection fee of $100.00 per well per year which is payable in the month of January of each and every year. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 7(7.3))  
Sec. 28-11. - Utilities; water connection fee. 
Any person requesting water from the City shall be charged an initial connection fee of $10.00. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 3)  
Sec. 28-11.5. - Utilities surcharge rate amounts. 
The City Council hereby adopts a monthly surcharge of $6.50 for each water account and $3.60 for each garbage account which shall be assessed and collected by the Utility Billing Department for each water and garbage account serviced by the City, and which receives such water and garbage services from the City. Such surcharge shall be expended by the City for repairs and/or improvements to the water and garbage systems within the City in order to meet all Federal, State and local standards and service requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11-01, § 1, 11-17-2016)  
Sec. 28-12. - Water service; temporary disconnect fee. 
The charge for turning on of water service shall be $10.00. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 4; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 4)  
Sec. 28-13. - Deposits for water service. 
(a)  Residential or domestic water consumers—Homeowners. Each resident water consumer, who owns his home or is purchasing his home in an area supplied by the City Waterworks System shall put up a $25.00 meter deposit, which may be applied to the payment of any unpaid bills, and when so used the deposit shall be restored to the original amount. When such service is discontinued, such deposit, or such part of such deposit not consumed in bills due for such service, shall be returned to such depositor, his heirs or legal representatives. 
(b)  Same—Renters. Each residential or domestic water consumer, who is renting the premises to which water is to be supplied, shall put up a $40.00 meter deposit, which may be applied to the payment of any unpaid bills, and when so used the deposit shall be restored to the original amount. When such service is discontinued, such deposit, or such part of such deposit not consumed in bills due for such service, shall be returned to such depositor, his heirs or legal representatives. 
(c)  Commercial consumers. Each commercial consumer shall put up a $75.00 meter deposit, which may be applied to the payment of any unpaid bills, and when so used the deposit shall be restored to the original amount. When such service is discontinued, such deposit not consumed in bills due for service, shall be returned to such depositor, his heirs or legal representatives. 
(d)  Use of meter deposit. Any residential or commercial consumer which has put up a deposit according to subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section is entitled to use such deposit as deposit on any additional house or building; provided, however, that such consumer has been a continuous customer in good standing of the City waterworks system for the past 18 months from the date of such request. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 8; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 8)  
Sec. 28-14. - Monthly water rates. 
(a)  The following uniform monthly rates shall be charged to all persons for the use of the City's water within the corporate limits of the City. Customers provided water service outside of the corporate limits of the City shall be charged 1.5 times the rate of the applicable customer class within the City limits. 
Water - Residential Minimum Charges: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Residential ICL 
Minimum Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
?" meter 	$18.00 	$18.25 	$18.50 	$18.75 	$19.25 	$20.00 
1" meter 	$18.00 	$19.14 	$20.28 	$21.41 	$22.55 	$23.69 
 
**Meters larger than 1 inch will be considered nonresidential and subject to nonresidential rates. 
Water - Residential Volumetric Rates Charged per Thousand Gallons: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Residential ICL 
Consumption Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
2,001 	3,000 	$0.00 	$0.61 	$0.47 	$1.01 	$1.07 	$1.13 
3,001 	4,000 	$0.00 	$0.61 	$0.93 	$1.01 	$1.07 	$1.13 
4,001 	5,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.24 	$1.34 	$1.42 	$1.51 
5,001 	6,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.46 	$1.58 	$1.67 	$1.78 
6,001 	7,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.46 	$1.58 	$1.67 	$1.78 
7,001 	10,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.46 	$1.58 	$1.67 	$1.78 
10,001 	11,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
11,001 	16,000 	$1.25 	$1.33 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
16,001 	20,000 	$1.25 	$1.33 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
20,001 	21,000 	$1.25 	$1.33 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
21,001 	25,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
25,001 	31,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
31,001 	50,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
50,001 	100,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.75 	$1.85 	$1.96 
100,001 	Greater 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.79 	$1.89 	$2.01 
 
Water - Senior Citizen Minimum Charges: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Senior Citizen ICL 
Minimum Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
?" meter 	$11.00 	$11.15 	$11.31 	$11.46 	$11.76 	$12.22 
1" meter 	$11.00 	$11.70 	$12.39 	$13.09 	$13.78 	$14.48 
 
**Senior Citizens subsidized rates shall only be available to meters sizes 1 inch and smaller. 
Water - Senior Citizen Volumetric Rates Charged per Thousand Gallons: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Senior Citizen ICL 
Consumption Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
2,001 	3,000 	$0.00 	$0.29 	$0.38 	$0.72 	$0.58 	$1.15 
3,001 	4,000 	$0.00 	$0.38 	$0.58 	$0.77 	$1.15 	$1.15 
4,001 	5,000 	$1.15 	$1.15 	$1.15 	$1.15 	$1.15 	$1.15 
5,001 	6,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.46 	$1.58 	$1.67 	$1.78 
6,001 	7,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.46 	$1.58 	$1.67 	$1.78 
7,001 	10,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.46 	$1.58 	$1.67 	$1.78 
10,001 	11,000 	$1.15 	$1.22 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
11,001 	16,000 	$1.25 	$1.33 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
16,001 	20,000 	$1.25 	$1.33 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
20,001 	21,000 	$1.25 	$1.33 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
21,001 	25,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
25,001 	31,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
31,001 	50,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.69 	$1.79 	$1.89 
50,001 	100,000 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.75 	$1.85 	$1.96 
100,001 	Greater 	$1.35 	$1.43 	$1.56 	$1.79 	$1.89 	$2.01 
 
Water - Commercial Minimum Charges: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Commercial ICL 
Minimum Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
?" meter 	$20.00 	$21.50 	$23.25 	$25.25 	$27.50 	$30.00 
1" meter 	$20.00 	$23.77 	$27.54 	$31.31 	$35.07 	$38.84 
1½" meter 	$20.00 	$24.18 	$28.37 	$32.55 	$36.74 	$40.92 
2" meter 	$20.00 	$33.83 	$47.65 	$61.48 	$75.31 	$89.14 
3" meter 	$20.00 	$47.95 	$75.89 	$103.84 	$131.79 	$159.74 
4" meter 	$20.00 	$66.97 	$113.94 	$160.91 	$207.88 	$254.85 
6" meter 	$20.00 	$92.93 	$165.87 	$238.80 	$311.73 	$384.67 
8" meter 	$20.00 	$115.92 	$211.83 	$307.75 	$403.67 	$499.59 
10" meter 	$20.00 	$104.28 	$188.57 	$272.85 	$357.14 	$441.42 
 
Water - Commercial Volumetric Rates Charged per Thousand Gallons: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Commercial ICL 
Consumption Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
2,001 	3,000 	$0.00 	$1.08 	$1.21 	$1.82 	$2.06 	$2.33 
3,001 	4,000 	$0.00 	$1.08 	$1.61 	$1.82 	$2.06 	$2.33 
4,001 	5,000 	$1.20 	$1.44 	$1.61 	$1.82 	$2.06 	$2.33 
5,001 	6,000 	$1.20 	$1.44 	$1.61 	$1.82 	$2.06 	$2.33 
6,001 	7,000 	$1.20 	$1.44 	$1.61 	$1.82 	$2.06 	$2.33 
7,001 	10,000 	$1.20 	$1.44 	$1.61 	$1.82 	$2.06 	$2.33 
10,001 	11,000 	$1.20 	$1.44 	$1.61 	$1.97 	$2.23 	$2.52 
11,001 	16,000 	$1.30 	$1.56 	$1.75 	$1.97 	$2.23 	$2.52 
16,001 	20,000 	$1.30 	$1.56 	$1.75 	$1.97 	$2.23 	$2.52 
20,001 	21,000 	$1.30 	$1.56 	$1.75 	$2.13 	$2.40 	$2.71 
21,001 	25,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$1.88 	$2.13 	$2.40 	$2.71 
25,001 	31,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$1.88 	$2.13 	$2.40 	$2.71 
31,001 	50,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$1.88 	$2.13 	$2.40 	$2.71 
50,001 	100,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$1.88 	$2.13 	$2.40 	$2.71 
100,001 	200,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$1.88 	$2.37 	$2.68 	$3.03 
200,001 	300,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$2.08 	$2.37 	$2.83 	$3.20 
300,001 	400,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$2.08 	$2.37 	$2.91 	$3.29 
400,001 	500,000 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$2.08 	$2.37 	$2.91 	$3.29 
500,001 	Greater 	$1.40 	$1.68 	$2.08 	$2.37 	$2.99 	$3.38 
 
Water - Fire Hydrant Minimum Charges: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Fire Hydrants 
Minimum Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
?" meter 	$50.00 	$50.00 	$50.68 	$51.37 	$52.74 	$54.00 
1" meter 	$50.00 	$50.00 	$50.68 	$51.37 	$52.74 	$54.00 
1½" meter 	$50.00 	$102.00 	$154.00 	$206.00 	$258.00 	$310.00 
2" meter 	$50.00 	$126.00 	$202.00 	$278.00 	$354.00 	$430.00 
3" meter 	$50.00 	$178.00 	$306.00 	$434.00 	$562.00 	$690.00 
4" meter 	$50.00 	$326.00 	$602.00 	$878.00 	$1,154.00 	$1,430.00 
6" meter 	$50.00 	$460.00 	$870.00 	$1,280.00 	$1,690.00 	$2,100.00 
 
Water - Fire Hydrant Volumetric Rates Charged per Thousand Gallons: 
Proposed Water Rates: 	Fire Hydrants 
Consumption Charge 	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
2,001 	3,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
3,000 	4,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
4,000 	5,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
5,000 	6,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
6,000 	7,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
7,000 	10,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
10,000 	Greater 	$20.00 	$3.50 	$3.59 	$3.68 	$3.77 	$3.86 
 
(b)  Bulk sales water service classification, rates and fees schedule: 
(1)  Bulk sales through fire hydrant water meters temporarily installed at locations remote from the West San Marcos Street water plant: 
a.  Advance, nonrefundable payment of $50.00 to the City at City Hall for setting the meter connection at the fire hydrant or other appropriate locations as the City may determine; 
b.  Payment of bulk sales rate of $50.00 per month for the first 1,000 gallons of water dispensed, or any fraction thereof; $20.00 per month per 1,000 gallons dispensed, or any fraction thereof, beyond the initial 1,000 gallons dispensed; and 
c.  Advance, refundable fire hydrant meter deposit payment of $200.00 to the City at City Hall. 
(2)  Bulk sales through permanently installed water meter dispensation point at the West San Marcos Street water plant: 
a.  No requirement for payment of meter setting fee; 
b.  Payment of bulk sales rate of $50.00 for the first 1,000 gallons of water dispensed, or any fraction thereof; $20.00 per 1,000 gallons dispensed, or any fraction thereof, beyond the initial 1,000 gallons dispensed; and 
c.  No requirement for payment of the $200.00 fire hydrant meter deposit, however, each water dispensation transaction authorized under subsection (b)(1) of this section must be prepaid to the City at City Hall where a one-day dispensation voucher will be issued for presentation to the water plant operator to authorize a one-day dispensation of a not to exceed amount of water in gallons. The one-day dispensation voucher identifying the cumulative number of gallons purchased will allow for scheduled multiple withdrawals of water, but only during the same City working day upon which initial dispensation commences. 
(c)  Bulk sales water service customers must provide a suitable mobile water containment vessel of sound quality for receiving and hauling water for use or consumption at any location within the City water system. 
(d)  Public or private volunteer firefighting organizations that procure water only for fire prevention and control purposes and do not resell such water for other purposes, are exempt from this classification, rates and fees schedule. Contractors constructing City public works projects requiring potable water for dust control and construction operations, shall also be exempt from this classification, rates and fees schedule. 
(e)  The established rates in this section include any incidental fuel adjustment charges related to electrical consumption during the City's water supply and dispensation functions. 
(f)  Any $200.00 refundable fire hydrant meter deposit paid to the City may be applied by the City to the payment of any bulk sales customer unpaid bills, and when so partially consumed through past-due account application, shall be restored by the bulk sales customer to the original $200.00 amount. The City shall pay six percent interest per annum on the average monthly deposit balance to the depositor, his heirs or assigns, from the time of such deposit, the same to be calculated and/or paid annually on demand, or sooner if such account status is discontinued. When such service classification is discontinued, such deposit, together with any unpaid interest thereon, or such part of such deposit and unpaid interest not consumed in bills past due for such service, shall be returned to such depositor, his heirs, assigns or legal representatives. 
(g)  Bulk sales water service dispensation to consumers having only an occasional need for such water service are encouraged to utilize the permanently installed water meter dispensation point at the City water plant located on West San Marcos Street pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(h)  Use of the West San Marcos Street permanently installed water meter dispensation point requires advanced payment by check or cash to the City at City Hall and at least four hours advanced scheduling of prospective water withdrawals which shall also only occur during the following City working hours: Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., Saturday, Sunday and City holidays excluded. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 9; Ord. of 1-13-1993, § I; Ord. of 6-9-1999, § I; Ord. No. 2009-090-071, § I(9), 9-17-2009; Ord. No. 2012-06-160, § I, 9-27-2012)  
Sec. 28-15. - Water service payment due. 
Where service has been disconnected for failure to pay for water service furnished, a charge of $5.00 shall be made as reconnection fee for each and every meter disconnected before such service shall be restored or water turned on again. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(02), § 10)  
Sec. 28-16. - Water tapping fees and charges for connection. 
The tapping fees and charges for connection with the City water mains and laterals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water tap fees. 
Inside City Tap 	Tap Fee 
¾" 	$200.00, plus cost of meter. 
1" 	$350.00, plus cost of meter. 
2" 	$200.00, plus cost of meter, material, equipment, and labor. 
4" 	$600.00, plus cost of meter, material, equipment, and labor. 
6" 	$900.00, plus cost of meter, material, equipment, and labor. 
 
Outside City Tap 	Tap Fee 
¾" 	$375.00, plus cost of meter. 
1" 	$475.00, plus cost of meter. 
2" 	$200.00, plus cost of meter, material, equipment, and labor. 
4" 	$600.00, plus cost of meter, material, equipment, and labor. 
6" 	$900.00, plus cost of meter, material, equipment, and labor. 
 
(2)  The tap fees provided in subsection (1) of this section shall apply to service connections made on dirt streets. Whenever a tap is made on a paved street, an additional charge equivalent of the actual cost of labor and materials required to repave the street shall be added to the tap fee. 
(3)  For each service connection on a dirt street where the meter size used is not herein provided, whether the connection is inside the corporate limits of the City or outside the City limits the tap fee shall be the actual prevailing cost of labor, parts and materials necessary to complete the connection. For each service connection on a paved street where the meter size used is not herein provided, whether the connection is inside the corporate limits of the City or outside the City limits, the tap fee shall be the actual prevailing costs of labor, parts and materials necessary to complete the connection and the actual prevailing costs of labor and materials required to reconstruct or repave the street. 
(4)  Whenever a tap is requested for the purpose of connection to an automatic fire water sprinkler device system, the tap fee shall be equivalent to the actual prevailing costs required to complete the connection. 
(5)  None of the tap fees or one-time rental fees as herein provided shall be refundable to the consumer upon termination of the water service. 
(6)  For each service connection tap on noncommercial, permanent, single-family dwellings within the corporate limits of the City, constructed in accordance with the City housing code, the City waterworks system shall furnish, if necessary, 200 feet of pipe extension. The customer will pay for the difference of the actual cost of labor, materials, and equipment. Any customer desiring water service outside the City limits will be required to pay the City for the entire cost of extension, including labor, material and equipment. The material used shall be of equal quality to the material used by the City waterworks system. The material and the construction of said line outside of the City limits shall be installed under the supervision of the Water Works Superintendent or his assistants. The customer shall then deed the completed water line to the City Water Works System. All customers desiring water service outside the City limits shall comply with all the rules and regulations herein provided or the service will not be extended. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 11; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 11; Ord. No. 2006-12-016, exh. A, 12-12-2006)  
Sec. 28-16.5. - Wastewater rates. 
The following uniform monthly rates shall be charged to all persons, firms or corporations for the use of the City's wastewater system within the corporate limits of the City. Customers provided wastewater service outside of the corporate limits of the City shall be charged 1.5 times the rate of the applicable customer class within the City limits. 
Wastewater - Residential Minimum Charge and Volumetric Rates Charged per Thousand Gallons: 
Proposed WW Rates: 	Residential ICL 
Winter average 	8,051 
	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
Minimum charge (all meter sizes) 	$9.00 	$10.50 	$12.00 	$14.00 	$16.00 	$18.00 
Consumption charge 	
2,001 	3,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
3,001 	4,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
4,001 	5,000 	$0.00 	$0.42 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
5,001 	6,000 	$0.00 	$0.42 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
6,001 	7,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
7,001 	10,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
10,001 	11,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.94 
11,001 	16,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.94 
16,001 	20,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.94 
20,001 	21,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.95 
21,001 	25,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.95 
25,001 	31,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.84 	$0.97 	$1.16 	$1.30 
31,001 	50,000 	$0.45 	$0.50 	$0.84 	$0.97 	$1.16 	$1.30 
50,001 	100,000 	$0.45 	$0.50 	$0.84 	$0.97 	$1.16 	$1.30 
100,001 	Greater 	$0.45 	$0.50 	$0.84 	$1.09 	$1.31 	$1.47 
 
Wastewater - Senior Citizen Min. Charge and Volumetric Rates Charged per Thousand Gallons: 
Proposed WW Rates: 	Senior Citizen ICL 
Winter Average 	6,278 
	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
Minimum charge (all meter sizes) 	$9.00 	$9.00 	$9.00 	$9.00 	$9.00 	$9.00 
Consumption charge 	
2,000 	3,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
3,001 	4,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
4,001 	5,000 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 
5,001 	6,000 	$0.00 	$0.42 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
6,001 	7,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
7,001 	10,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.47 	$0.55 	$0.65 	$0.73 
10,001 	11,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.94 
11,001 	16,000 	$0.35 	$0.42 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.94 
16,001 	20,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.94 
20,001 	21,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.95 
21,001 	25,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.61 	$0.70 	$0.84 	$0.95 
25,001 	31,000 	$0.40 	$0.44 	$0.84 	$0.97 	$1.16 	$1.30 
31,001 	50,000 	$0.45 	$0.50 	$0.84 	$0.97 	$1.16 	$1.30 
50,001 	100,000 	$0.45 	$0.50 	$0.84 	$0.97 	$1.16 	$1.30 
100,001 	Greater 	$0.45 	$0.50 	$0.84 	$1.09 	$1.31 	$1.47 
 
Wastewater - Commercial Minimum Charge & Volumetric Rates Charged per Thousand Gallons: 
Proposed WW Rates: 	Commercial ICL 
	Current 	10/01/12 	10/01/13 	10/01/14 	10/01/15 	10/01/16 
Minimum charge (all meters) 	$13.00 	$15.00 	$17.00 	$19.50 	$22.25 	$25.75 
Consumption charge 	
2,000 	3,000 	$0.00 	$0.74 	$0.85 	$0.98 	$1.13 	$1.30 
3,001 	4,000 	$0.00 	$0.74 	$0.85 	$0.98 	$1.13 	$1.30 
4,001 	5,000 	$0.63 	$0.74 	$0.85 	$0.98 	$1.13 	$1.30 
5,001 	6,000 	$0.63 	$0.74 	$0.85 	$0.98 	$1.13 	$1.30 
6,001 	7,000 	$0.63 	$0.74 	$0.85 	$0.98 	$1.13 	$1.30 
7,001 	10,000 	$0.63 	$0.74 	$0.85 	$0.98 	$1.13 	$1.30 
10,001 	Greater 	$0.63 	$0.74 	$0.85 	$0.98 	$1.13 	$1.30 
 
(Ord. No. 2012-06-160, § II, 9-27-2012)  
Sec. 28-17. - Water and gas; new service fees. 
New service connect fees are $10.00 for water; $5.00 for gas. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1990, § 2)  
Sec. 28-18. - Methods, penalties and fees for billing. 
(a)  Request for check read fee. The fee is $10.00. Each customer will get one free check read during the calendar year. After the one free check read is performed, any customer requesting that a meter be checked for accuracy will be assessed the fee if the reading is found to be correct. If the reading is incorrect, no charge shall be assessed. 
(b)  Reconnection fee. A customer whose water or gas service has been disconnected for failure to pay shall be assessed the following fees in order to effect a reconnect: 
Reconnect for nonpayment during business hours 	$12.50 per service (water and gas) 
Collection fee 	$12.50 
	Total 	$25.00 
 
Customers 65 years and older are exempt from paying the reconnect/collection fees. 
(c)  Redisconnection. A redisconnection fee of $100.00 shall be charged to any customer who reconnects service after the City has disconnected service for failure to pay. Any customer who illegally reconnects or attempts to reconnect services, or anyone who benefits from services received at a location where service has been reconnected by someone other than an authorized employee of the City, shall be subject to the penalties specified in section 1-13. 
(d)  NSF checks. Any checks found to be without sufficient funds will be charged a $25.00 fee. After two such offenses the customer will be prohibited from making any further payment with checks. From then onward, the customer shall pay exclusively in cash or C.O.D. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1990, § 3; Ord. of 12-13-2000, § 1; Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 1)  
Sec. 28-19. - Sewer service monthly surcharge. 
(a)  User charge rates. There shall be charged for sanitary sewer service in the City for each month the following rates. The monthly sewer rate shall be charged as follows: 
First 	6,000 gals. 	Minimum $9.00 
Next 	10,000 gals. 	$0.35 per thousand gals. 
Next 	15,000 gals. 	$0.40 per thousand gals. 
Above 	31,000 gals. 	$0.45 per thousand gals. 
 
(b)  In addition to the charges stated in subsection (a) of this section, a 50 percent surcharge shall be added at billing time to the total monthly billing of each customer furnished sewer service outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 16; Ord. of 6-13-2001, § I)  
Sec. 28-20. - Sewer tap fees. 
Sewer tap fees are as follows: 
4-inch tap 	$275.00, plus cost of parts, material, equipment, and labor. 
6-inch tap 	$500.00, plus cost of parts, material, equipment, and labor. 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-12-016, exh. A, 12-12-2006)  
Sec. 28-21. - Gas service fees defined. 
Residential and commercial consumers will be assessed a fee to make a gas tap on an existing main in accordance with the schedule of tap fees below. If it is necessary to excavate into a paved street to make a gas tap, an additional tapping charge equivalent to the actual cost of parts, material, equipment, and labor required to repave the street, shall be collected by the City to cover costs of repair to the paved street. 
Schedule of Tap Fees 	Charge 
Gas tapping fee - 1" gas tap - Inside City 	$650.00 
Gas tapping fee - 1" gas tap - Outside City 	$650.00 
Gas tapping fee - 1½" gas tap - Inside City 	At cost 
Gas tapping fee - 1½" gas tap - Outside City 	At cost 
Gas tapping fee - 2" gas tap - Inside City 	At cost 
Gas tapping fee - 2" gas tap - Outside City 	At cost 
 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 4; Ord. of 12-10-2003, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-12-016, exh. A, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 2015-10-01, § 1(4), 10-27-2015)  
Sec. 28-22. - Gas service connect or reconnect fee. 
(a)  Whenever gas customers request to connect or re-connect to the City's gas distribution system, a fee of $50.00 will be charged to connect or re-connect per meter during regular working hours, and a $100.00 fee will be charged to connect or re-connect per meter after regular working hours. These gas connect or re-connect fees are in addition to any other charges included in this Code. 
(b)  Whenever gas customers request to temporarily discontinue service from the City's gas distribution system, the request must be submitted to the City in writing. The charges for re-connection of service shall be as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 5; Ord. of 12-10-2003, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-10-01, § 1(5), 10-27-2015)  
Sec. 28-23. - Deposits for gas service. 
(a)  Required; amount. On all requests for gas service and connections to the City's gas distribution system a deposit will be required. The following schedule sets forth the required deposits to open an account and receive gas service from the City: 
Deposits 
Gas meter deposit - Residential 	$100.00 
Gas meter deposit - Commercial 	$200.00 
 
While deposits may be applied to the payment of any unpaid bills, they must be restored to the original amount when so used. When gas service is discontinued, customer deposits, or such deposit balance not consumed in application to gas bills due will be returned to such customer, his heirs, or legal representatives. 
(b)  Residential or domestic gas consumers—Renters. Each residential or domestic gas consumer, who is renting the premises to which gas is to be supplied, shall put up a $75.00 meter deposit, which may be applied to the payment of any unpaid bills, and when so used, the deposit shall be restored to the original amount. When such service is discontinued, such deposit or such part of such deposit not consumed in bills due for such service, shall be returned to such depositor, his heirs, or legal representatives. 
(c)  Commercial gas consumers. Each commercial gas consumer shall put up a meter deposit as follows: 
(1)  $250.00 deposit per gas meter measuring less than 750 cubic feet. 
(2)  $500.00 deposit per gas meter measuring 750 cubic feet and larger, including cleaners, laundries, etc. 
(3)  $500.00 deposit per gas meter for manufacturing companies plus one month's average calculated usage. 
Deposits may be applied to the payment of any unpaid bills, and when so used, the deposit shall be restored to the original amount. When such service is discontinued, such deposit or such part of such deposit not consumed in bills due for such service, shall be returned to such depositor, his heirs, or legal representatives. 
(d)  Use of deposit. Any residential or commercial consumer who has put up a deposit according to subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section is entitled to use such deposit as deposit on any additional house or building; provided, however, that such consumer has been a continuous customer in good standing of the City gas distribution system for the past 18 months from the date of such request. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 9; Ord. of 12-10-2003, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-10-01, § 1(9), 10-27-2015)  
Sec. 28-24. - Gas rates. 
(a)  For each defined customer class, monthly bills shall be comprised of the following three components: a minimum charge, a base consumption charge, and a purchased fuel adjustment charge. 
(1)  Minimum charges will be assessed to all active accounts irrespective of consumption. 
(2)  Base consumption charges are designed to partially recover the City's administrative and distribution costs related to delivering natural gas to retail customers. 
(3)  Purchased fuel adjustment charges ("PFACs") are designed to fully recover the City's cost of purchased wholesale natural gas. The PFAC shall be established in the wholesale billing statement provided by the City's natural gas provider for the corresponding billing month. 
(4)  The sum of the base consumption charge and the PFAC shall be applied to the customer's meted consumption for the purpose of calculating the customer's monthly bill. The sum of the customer's minimum charge, consumption charge, and purchased fuel adjustment charge will equal the total amount payable. 
(5)  Billed consumption shall be based on metered natural gas consumption converted into therms. This conversion shall be calculated each month by multiplying the metered natural gas consumption expressed in CCFs, or hundreds of cubic feet, by the energy factor of the natural gas, which is provided by the City's Wholesale Natural Gas Provider in its corresponding monthly statement. Therm billing will enable Pearsall's natural gas customers to pay for the heating value of their natural gas, not the volume of gas used. 
(b)  The following tables illustrate the scheduled natural gas minimum charge and base consumption charge adjustments that will begin on December 1, 2015, and continue every year that follows through December 2019. 
Monthly Natural Gas Charges by Customer Class 
Proposed 
Rate Structure 	Effective: 
	Current 	12/01/15 	12/01/16 	12/01/17 	12/01/18 	12/01/19 
Residential inside 
Minimum charge 	
Standard connection 	$15.49 	$16.04 	$16.59 	$17.14 	$17.69 	$18.24 
Consumption charge (per therm) 	
0 	3 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.63 
3 	5 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.60 	$0.63 
5 	10 	$0.00 	$0.13 	$0.27 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
10 	15 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
15 	20 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
20 	30 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
30 	40 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
40 	50 	$0.45 	$0.48 	$0.50 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.59 
50 	90 	$0.45 	$0.48 	$0.50 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.59 
90 	Greater 	$0.41 	$0.45 	$0.49 	$0.52 	$0.54 	$0.58 
 
Proposed 
Rate Structure 	Effective: 
	Current 	12/01/15 	12/01/16 	12/01/17 	12/01/18 	12/01/19 
Senior residential inside 
Minimum charge 	
Standard connection 	$8.49 	$8.79 	$9.09 	$9.39 	$9.70 	$10.00 
Consumption charge (per therm) 	
0 	3 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.63 
3 	5 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.60 	$0.63 
5 	10 	$0.00 	$0.13 	$0.27 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
10 	15 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
15 	20 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
20 	30 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
30 	40 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
40 	50 	$0.45 	$0.48 	$0.50 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.59 
50 	90 	$0.45 	$0.48 	$0.50 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.59 
90 	Greater 	$0.41 	$0.45 	$0.49 	$0.52 	$0.54 	$0.58 
 
Proposed 
Rate Structure 	Effective: 
	Current 	12/01/15 	12/01/16 	12/01/17 	12/01/18 	12/01/19 
Commercial inside 
Minimum charge 	
Standard connection 	$15.49 	$17.49 	$19.49 	$21.49 	$23.49 	$25.49 
Consumption charge (per therm) 	
0 	3 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.63 
3 	5 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.00 	$0.60 	$0.63 
5 	10 	$0.00 	$0.13 	$0.27 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
10 	15 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
15 	20 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
20 	30 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
30 	40 	$0.48 	$0.51 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.60 	$0.63 
40 	50 	$0.45 	$0.48 	$0.50 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.59 
50 	90 	$0.45 	$0.48 	$0.50 	$0.53 	$0.56 	$0.59 
90 	Greater 	$0.41 	$0.45 	$0.49 	$0.52 	$0.54 	$0.58 
 
(c)  Gas customers residing outside corporate limits of the City are charged at 1½ times the rate paid by gas customers who reside inside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 10; Ord. of 12-10-2003, § 1; Ord. No. 2009-090-072, § I(10(A)), 9-17-2009; Ord. No. 2015-10-01, § (10), 10-27-2015)  
Sec. 28-25. - Gas connect, reconnect, and disconnect fees. 
(a)  Residential and commercial connect fees. 
(1)  $25.00 gas connect fee and re-connect fee per meter, during regular working hours. 
(2)  $50.00 gas connect fee and re-connect fee per meter, after regular working hours. 
(b)  Gas tap fees. 
(1)  Residential: 
Residential: 
Inside City 	$150.00, plus cost of parts, material, equipment, and labor. 
Outside City 	$200.00, plus cost of parts, material, equipment, and labor. 
 
(2)  Commercial: 
a.  Inside City limits: $250.00 gas tap fee, plus parts, material, equipment, and labor when excavating through a paved street. 
b.  Outside City limits: $300.00 gas tap fee, plus parts, material, equipment, and labor when excavating through a paved street. 
(c)  Deposits. 
(1)  Residential or domestic consumers: $75.00 deposit per gas meter. 
(2)  Commercial consumers: 
a.  $250.00 deposit per gas meter measuring less than 750 cubic feet. 
b.  $500.00 deposit per gas meter measuring 750 cubic feet and larger, including cleaners, laundries, etc. 
c.  $500.00 deposit per gas meter for manufacturing companies plus one month's average calculated usage. 
All charges for gas service furnished or rendered by the gas distribution system shall be due and payable in accordance with this chapter and chapter 44, Utilities. Where services have been disconnected for failure to pay for gas service furnished, a charge of $25.00, during regular working hours, and $50.00, after regular working hours, shall be made as reconnection fee for each and every meter disconnected before such service shall be restored or gas turned on again. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 11; Ord. of 12-10-2003, § 1; Ord. No. 2006-12-016, exh. A, 12-12-2006)  
Sec. 28-26. - Taxicab permit fee. 
A permit shall be required as provided in section 46-21 for each vehicle operated as a taxi or taxicab, and the fee for such permit shall be $50.00 per year, per car or vehicle operated as a taxi or taxicab within the City, and shall be payable on an annual basis not later than January 10 of each year of operation. If any permit to operate any taxicab is granted during a current year, the fee shall be made pro rata for the balance of the calendar year on the basis of the number of months and fractions thereof remaining in said calendar year, and such pro rata rates to be figured from the first day of each month. In the event a taxicab on which the fee has been paid for the current year is sold, wrecked or destroyed, the operator thereof shall have the right to replace the taxicab with another vehicle, and upon written application to the Director of Public Safety, the license and inspection fee therefore paid on said taxicab shall be applicable to the vehicle designated to replace such taxicab, and the permittee shall surrender the permit certificate to the City. There shall not in any event, be any refund of permit or inspection fees paid under this section. The fee shall be paid to the Tax Assessor and Collector of the City, who shall issue receipt therefor on a form to be prepared by him for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-23), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 28-26.5. - Taxicab driver's license application fee. 
Every person driving a taxicab must be licensed as such and each applicant for a driver's license shall pay a one-time $25.00 fee to the City upon making any such application, and, before any such license is finally issued, pay an additional $10.00 to defray the City's cost in physically making the operator's license, for a total fee of $35.00, but if such license is not issued, said applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of the $25.00 paid on filing his application. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-31), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 28-27. - Taxicab inspection fee. 
In order to defray part of the expense necessary to provide surveillance, supervision and inspection of taxicabs required under the terms and provisions of article II of chapter 46 and other ordinances of the City regulatory thereof, there is hereby levied a permit and inspection fee of $25.00 per year for each taxicab so operated, which fee shall be collected by the Tax Assessor and collected from every person operating taxicabs on the streets of the City. Said fee shall be payable on an annual basis and shall be due and payable for any year not later than January 10 of said year, such fee to cover the upcoming calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-24), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 28-27.5. - Taxicab fares. 
Each owner or operator of a taxi or taxicab shall be entitled to charge the following rates for operation within the City for 24-hour-a-day service: 
(1)  $1.50 for the first one-sixth of a mile; 
(2)  $0.28 for each additional one-sixth of a mile; 
(3)  $1.50 for each additional passenger; 
(4)  $0.12 for each minute of waiting time when the taxicab is requested to wait for a passenger; 
(5)  A minimum charge of $2.00 for each trip, if the amount due for such trip as shown on the taximeter, calculated in accordance with subsections (1) through (4) of this section, is less than $2.00; 
(6)  A gas surcharge of an additional $0.50 when the average gas prices for regular unleaded fuel are over $3.50 per gallon in the City. The calculation to test the $3.50 gas surcharge cap will be conducted at three intervals of the calendar year: April, July, and October. The average gas price is equal to the sum of the price of regular unleaded gasoline for the four Saturdays of the test month at gas service stations divided by the number of gas service stations used in the calculation. When obtaining the gas prices of gas service stations, the minimum number of gas service stations to use in the test should be four and they must be verifiable and located within the City limits. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-34), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 28-28. - Solid waste rates. 
(a)  The City Council hereby adopts the solid waste collection customer service rates for the 2009 calendar year. Such rates are set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  The City Manager and staff are hereby authorized to advertise, implement, administer and enforce the following solid waste collection regulations and service rates. 
(c)  Due to the health, safety and general welfare need to provide continuous solid waste collection services to benefit area citizenry, a public emergency is hereby officially declared and the ordinance from which this section is derived shall take effect immediately upon passage. 
(d)  Solid waste service rates. 
CITY OF PEARSALL 
SOLID WASTE FRANCHISE CONTRACT - TDS 
2009 SCHEDULE OF INCREASES IN SERVICE RATES APPLIED TO CUSTOMER SERVICE 
PERIOD BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2009 
	Frequency 
of 
Collection 	TDS 
Current 
Rates 	TDS 
New 
Rates 	TDS 
Rate 
Increase 	COP 
Rate 
Increase 	Net $ 
Increase 	Current 
City 
Rates 	New 
City 
Rates 	Net % 
Increase 
Cart service - Residential, 1X 
Residential inside City 	1X 	$14.38 	$15.66 	$1.28 	$0.43 	$1.71 	$16.79 	$18.50 	9.243% 
Residential outside City 	1X 	$23.44 	$25.52 	$2.08 	$0.72 	$2.80 	$24.20 	$27.00 	10.370% 
Extra cart 	N/A 	$7.46 	$8.12 	$0.66 	- 	$0.66 	$8.38 	$9.04 	7.301% 
Standby 	N/A 	$5.33 	$5.80 	$0.47 	- 	$0.47 	$6.27 	$6.74 	6.973% 
Cart service - Small business, 1X 
Commercial inside City 	1X 	$25.57 	$27.84 	$2.27 	$0.42 	$2.69 	$26.31 	$29.00 	9.276% 
Commercial outside City 	1X 	$29.83 	$32.48 	$2.65 	$0.82 	$3.47 	$30.53 	$34.00 	10.206% 
Extra cart 	N/A 	$11.72 	$12.76 	$1.04 	- 	$1.04 	$12.60 	$13.64 	7.625% 
Standby 	N/A 	$5.33 	$5.80 	$0.47 	- 	$0.47 	$6.27 	$6.74 	6.973% 
Commercial 
containers 									
2 cubic yard 	1X 	$79.89 	$87.00 	$7.11 	- 	$7.11 	$86.61 	$93.72 	7.586% 
2 cubic yard 	2X 	$140.61 	$153.13 	$12.52 	- 	$12.52 	$152.43 	$164.95 	7.590% 
3 cubic yard 	1X 	$86.28 	$93.96 	$7.68 	- 	$7.68 	$93.54 	$101.22 	7.587% 
3 cubic yard 	2X 	$161.92 	$176.33 	$14.41 	- 	$14.41 	$175.53 	$189.94 	7.587% 
4 cubic yard 	1X 	$105.46 	$114.84 	$9.38 	- 	$9.38 	$114.32 	$123.70 	7.583% 
4 cubic yard 	2X 	$183.22 	$199.53 	$16.31 	- 	$16.31 	$198.62 	$214.93 	7.589% 
6 cubic yard 	1X 	$131.03 	$142.69 	$11.66 	- 	$11.66 	$142.04 	$153.70 	7.586% 
6 cubic yard 	2X 	$229.03 	$249.41 	$20.38 	- 	$20.38 	$248.28 	$268.66 	7.586% 
8 cubic yard 	1X 	$181.09 	$197.21 	$16.12 	- 	$16.12 	$196.31 	$212.43 	7.588% 
8 cubic yard 	2X 	$273.77 	$298.13 	$24.36 	- 	$24.36 	$296.78 	$321.14 	7.585% 
Extra pickups 									
2 cubic yard 	N/A 	$31.96 	$34.80 	$2.84 	- 	$2.84 	$36.14 	$38.98 	7.286% 
3 & 4 cubic yard 	N/A 	$37.28 	$40.60 	$3.32 	- 	$3.32 	$42.17 	$45.49 	7.298% 
6 cubic yard 	N/A 	$42.61 	$46.40 	$3.79 	- 	$3.79 	$48.19 	$51.98 	7.291% 
8 cubic yard 	N/A 	$47.94 	$52.20 	$4.26 	- 	$4.26 	$54.21 	$58.47 	7.286% 
Roll-offs 									
20 cubic yard 	N/A 	$512.38 	$557.98 	$45.60 	- 	$45.60 	$579.46 	$625.06 	7.295% 
30 cubic yard 	N/A 	$545.41 	$593.94 	$48.53 	- 	$48.53 	$616.84 	$665.37 	7.294% 
40 cubic yard 	N/A 	$579.49 	$631.06 	$51.57 	- 	$51.57 	$655.40 	$706.97 	7.295% 
Container delivery 	N/A 	$327.03 	$356.13 	$29.10 	- 	$29.10 	$369.86 	$398.96 	7.294% 
Container rental 	N/A 	$3.20 	$3.48 	$0.28 	- 	$0.28 	$3.61 	$3.89 	7.198% 
 
(Ord. No. 2008-11-046, §§ 1—3, att. A, 11-12-2008)  
Sec. 28-29. - Brush collection rates. 
(a)  The City Council hereby adopts "Attachment A," attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and incorporated by reference, setting forth the brush collection rates and establishing the regulations and procedures for the disposal of brush collection at the City's waste collection station in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the area citizenry. 
(b)  The City Council hereby authorizes the City Manager to implement, administer and enforce the regulations and rates as set forth by this chapter. 
(c)  The ordinance from which this section is derived, upon passage, shall be published twice in the newspaper of general circulation in the City, effective from and after the date of its publication, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-090-070, §§ I—III, 9-17-2009)  
Sec. 28-30. - Brush dumping fees. 
(a)  Brush dumping fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  $3.00 per pickup load. 
(2)  $10.00 for trailers up to 16 feet. 
(3)  $20.00 for commercial vehicles larger than 16-foot trailers but smaller than 18 wheelers. 
(4)  $50.00 for 18 wheelers and larger vehicles. 
(b)  Free brush dumping will be allowed for the first two pickups or one trailer up to 16 feet during designated annual and/or semi-annual City cleanups. 
(Ord. No. 2009-090-070, exh. A, 9-17-2009)  
Sec. 28-31. - Brush collection rates at waste collection station. 
(a)  For dumpster disposal. 
Type of Waste 	Unit of 
Measure 	Inside 
City 
Limits 	Outside 
City 
Limits 
Construction site material 	Per yard 	$25.00 	$45.00 
Roofing material 	Per yard 	$20.00 	$40.00 
Loose trash 	Per yard 	$16.00 	$28.00 
30 gal. trash bag 	Each 	$1.00 	$5.00 
55 gal. trash bag 	Each 	$2.00 	$10.00 
30 gal. trash can 	Each 	$3.00 	$7.50 
55 gal. trash can 	Each 	$4.00 	$15.00 
White goods (refrigerators, stoves, AC units, etc.) 	Each 	$10.00 	$55.00 
 
(b)  Brush fees during regular operations. 
(1)  For residential customers showing valid I.D. and current utility bill: no charge. 
(2)  For commercial customers showing valid I.D. and current utility bill: 
a.  Two loads of brush (maximum 16-foot trailers) per month there will be no charge. 
b.  Additional loads during a month will be charged at $10.00 per load (maximum 16-foot trailers). 
c.  Loads larger than 16-foot trailers, but smaller than 18 wheelers, will be charged at $20.00 per load. 
(3)  For residential citizens not showing valid I.D. and current utility bill, the charge for a load of brush (maximum 16-foot trailers) will be $25.00. Maximum loads per day will be three. 
(4)  For commercial operators not showing valid I.D. and current utility bill 
a.  The charge for a load of brush (maximum 16-foot trailers) will be $25.00. Maximum loads per day will be three. 
b.  The charge for a load of brush larger than 16-foot trailers, but smaller than 18 wheelers, will be $35.00. Maximum loads per day will be three. 
c.  The charge for an 18 wheeler load of brush will be $100.00. Maximum loads per day will be two. 
(c)  Brush fees during designated City cleanup periods. 
(1)  Free brush disposal will be allowed for regular size pickup loads and/or one trailer up to 16 feet per household during designated City cleanup period. 
(2)  Currently our garbage contractor will have two cleanups per year for bulk waste. There will be one in the spring and the second one in the fall. Bulk waste will be limited to 4 cubic yards. Bulk waste must be placed at curb side. Cleanup is for residential customers only. 
(3)  The City's garbage contractor will pick up brush at curbside every first and third Thursday of every month. Brush must be in piles of no longer than four feet, no wider than three feet, and no higher than three feet. Customers must call the office before 4:30 p.m. the Tuesday before to be placed on the list. 
(d)  Transfer station hours of operation. Transfer station hours of operation are as follows: every Tuesday thru Friday (except for holidays), from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12-01, exh. A, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 2017-10-05, exh. A, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 28-32. - Fee schedule for convention and civic center rental. 
The City Council hereby adopts the fee schedule for convention and civic center rentals, cleaning deposit, and cleaning fee attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01-02, 1-10-2017)  
Sec. 28-33. - Court funds. 
(a)  Municipal Court Technology Fund. This fee shall be in the amount of $3.00. The fee shall be assessed against and collected from the Defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court as a cost of court. 
(b)  Municipal Court Building Security Fund. The Municipal Court of the City (the "Municipal Court") is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the Municipal Court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09-043, § 2, 9-9-2008; Ord. No. 2015-10-02, § 1(b), 10-27-2015)  
Chapter 30 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code, Chs. 51, 81, 91; lease of municipal oil, gas, or mineral land, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 253.005; municipal authority to regulate exploration and development of mineral interests, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 92.007. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person, firm or corporation who applies for a permit under the provisions of this article. 
Drilling operation means the making of a hole in the earth for the purpose of discovery, exploration or production of oil, gas or minerals. 
Operator includes every person, and the agents, servants and employees of such person, engaged in operations for the drilling, reworking, redrilling, well service or plugging and abandonment of any well subject to this article and the production or transportation of any product therefrom. 
Permit means a permit granted pursuant to this article. 
Permittee means any person holding a permit granted pursuant to this article. 
Production unit means those areas surrounding a well designated as a unit by an operator. 
Railroad Commission, R.R.C., as used in this article means Railroad Commission of the State. 
Terminology. All words herein having accepted meanings in the oil and gas industry shall have the same meanings in this article. 
Unitize means the grouping of mineral interests in a given surface unit for the purpose of producing hydrocarbons as a unit. 
Well means any hole, excavation or bore downward from the surface, intended to extend 200 feet or more into the subsurface, made by any means or manner, for the purpose of exploring for, discovering, producing, or injecting hydrocarbons, water or other mineral, and which has not been officially plugged and abandoned. 
Well service operations means operations on a well, other than drilling operations or recompletion operations. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 2)  
Sec. 30-20. - Purpose. 
The City Council finds that there has been drilling and production operations for oil and gas within the corporate limits of the City, and that there is a likelihood of drilling and production operations and other operations incident to exploration, drilling and production, and incident to the existence of such operations, which should be regulated because of the fire hazards created by such operations, as well as the menace of unsanitary conditions, noise and possibility of injury to persons and property and threats to the health, safety and welfare of the public in general, for which the police power of the State which is delegated to the City, is to be and is hereby invoked, in aid of the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 1(1.1))  
Sec. 30-21. - Scope. 
This article shall govern the exploration, drilling, and production of hydrocarbons and matters incident thereto, in all areas of the City. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 1(1.2))  
Sec. 30-22. - Well locations. 
All wells drilled in search of oil and gas within the City limits shall be drilled in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Streets, alleys, easements and City-owned water wells. No well shall be drilled within, or at any location nearer than 50 feet from any street, alley, or utility easement. No well shall be drilled nearer than 1,000 feet from any City-owned and operated water well. 
(2)  Distance from residences, buildings or structures. No well shall be drilled at any location which is nearer than 300 feet from any residence or permanent structure intended for humane occupancy, unless the applicant furnishes to the City Manager written waivers executed by all owners of such residences and such structures which are located within 300 feet from the proposed location whereby the owners waive objections to the location and, unless the applicant furnishes to the City Manager evidence of reasonable appropriate written notification furnished by the applicant to the occupants of all such residences and structures, or said owner by lease has contracted otherwise. 
(3)  Location near schools, hospitals, etc. No well shall be drilled at any location which is on, or within 400 feet from any exterior boundary line of, land used by any school, hospital, or public building. The City Manager is authorized to grant a variance to this requirement, if the applicant presents written evidence to the City Manager that the owners or the governing body of such school, hospital, church or public building, have consented and agreed in writing to the proposed well location. 
(4)  Location near cemeteries and parks. No well shall be drilled at any location which is less than 175 feet from the exterior boundary line of lands utilized for cemeteries or public parks without prior approval of the cemetery association in the case of cemeteries. 
(5)  Surface rights. Neither this article nor any permit issued hereunder shall be interpreted as granting any right or license to the permittee to enter upon or use any land nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of the owner of such land to contract for any payment of any kind for damages or for rights or privileges with respect thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 3)  
Secs. 30-23—30-47. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRILLING AND OPERATING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 30-48. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, acting either for himself or as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to drill, to drill or to operated any well or to assist in the drilling, completing, or operating of any such well for which a permit has not been obtained. In addition to other requirements of this section, a new permit is required to re-enter any well which has been plugged and abandoned as though the plugged and abandoned well were a new well and it shall be unlawful for any person, acting either for himself, or as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of another, person, to re-enter such a well without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.1))  
Sec. 30-49. - Application for drilling permit. 
An application for a drilling permit shall be filed in duplicate in the Office of the City Manager for each well to be drilled. Such application shall be signed, and the accuracy of the contents thereof and exhibits attached thereto shall be sworn to before a notary public by the applicant having legal authority to enter into contracts binding upon the applicant, and shall include, as exhibits constituting a part of same, where appropriate,) the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant, is a corporation, the name and address of the person upon whom process may be served for such corporation, and if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a person, other than the applicant, designated as the local agent of the applicant to receive for the applicant all process, citation, notices and demands hereunder. If appropriate, more than one telephone number should be furnished. 
(3)  Designation of a drilling block or production unit to be covered by the application with a metes and bounds description as reflected by the official survey thereof or plat thereof where previously subdivided, and a statement to the effect that to the best of the knowledge and belief of the applicant his application for a permit to drill complies with all of the requirements of this division. 
(4)  In addition to the designation of the unit by plat, the applicant shall file a proposed surface location of the well, together, with distances from said well to the exterior boundary lines of the drilling unit certified to by a surveyor licensed by the State. Said plat shall show distances from the proposed surface well location to any residences or structures intended for human occupancy which are located within 300 feet from said surface well location and shall show whether or not such well location is in compliance with other sections of this article and shall be attached as exhibit 1. 
(5)  Proposed total depth of the well. 
(6)  A true copy of the Railroad Commission form and Railroad Commission drilling permit, if issued, shall be attached as exhibits 2 and 3, respectively. 
(7)  An insurance certificate dated not more than ten days prior to the filing of the application shall be attached as exhibit 4. This certificate shall indicate that the applicant has complied with at least the minimum insurance requirements specified herein. 
(8)  A copy of the bonds required by this article shall be attached as exhibit 5. If no bond is required, the applicant shall attach as exhibit 5 a statement to the effect that no bond is required with a brief statement pertaining to the reason for the exception to the bond requirement. 
(9)  Each application shall be accompanied by a list of the names and last known addresses of all record owners of interests in and to oil, gas, and other minerals under the property included within the drilling block on which the proposed well is to be located. Said list shall be attached as exhibit 6 and shall specify the fractional share of operating rights within the drilling unit by each of said owners. This requirement can be waived by the City Manager provided that the operator agrees to furnish the City a true and correct copy of the division order contract once it is executed by all interested parties. Said division order contract shall be furnished to the City within six months following completion of a well. 
(10)  The permit application shall include a statement by the applicant authorizing the City to expend such funds as may be necessary, under the circumstances, to regain well control in accordance with the terms and provisions hereinafter set out regarding wells that are out of control. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.2))  
Sec. 30-50. - Well service operations. 
No applications or reports are required for well service operations. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.3))  
Sec. 30-51. - Application in compliance with requirements granted by City Manager. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit to drill and operate a well, the City Manager shall date and set up a file for this application and examine same for compliance with this division. If the application is found in compliance with all requirements of this division, the City Manager shall publish a notice of the intention to grant such application unless a written protest in opposition thereto is filed within seven days from the date of publication. If the application is in compliance with all provisions of this division, and no written protest in opposition to the granting of the permit is filed, based upon one or more of the grounds set fourth herein, then the City Manager will, in accordance with this division, within ten days after dates of publication of notice, issue a permit. If a written protest in opposition to the application is filed within seven days from the date of publication of the notice, and the City Manager determines that the protest is not well founded, he will, after three days' notice to the protestant, issue the permit unless the protestant, within such three days, files notice of appeal to the City Council. In the event the City Manager has found cause to deny the permit, then the City Manager shall, within ten days of the filing of said application, inform the applicant in writing of reasons for such denial, and return the original copy of the application and filing fee to the applicant. In the event of a written protest on grounds which are found sufficient by the City Manager followed by the denial of the permit, the City Manager shall return the original copy of the application and filing fee to the applicant and inform the applicant in writing of his reasons for such denial. In either case the applicant may rectify the reason for denial of the permit and resubmit the same to the City Manager or appeal to the City Council through the procedure herein described. In the event of appeal by the protestant, the City Council shall set a date for hearing and publish notice as provided herein and inform the applicant of the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.4))  
Sec. 30-52. - Application denied by City Manager; appeal procedure. 
If the City Manager does not grant a permit and the applicant desires to appeal to the City Council, the applicant shall comply with the following procedure. The original copy of the application, accompanied by the filing fee and a copy of the City Manager's written denial, shall be presented to City Council by the City Manager. The City Manager shall set the hearing for the next regular meeting of the City Council after seven days from notice of appeal and publish a notice of such hearing at least five days prior to the date of hearing. Provided, however, where it is shown by the application, without contradiction by the City Manager, that all of the land within 300 feet of the proposed surface drilling site is under lease to the applicant and no residence building or other permanent structure intended for human occupancy is within 300 feet of the proposed drilling surface site, no notice shall be necessary under this division, and a hearing may be held by the City Council at any time after filing of the application with the City Manager. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.5))  
Sec. 30-53. - Hearing notice. 
Notice of the filing of an application and hearing to be held either by the City Manager or the City Council, as the case may be, shall be by publication, one time, in a newspaper published in the City at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notices shall essentially name the applicant subject of the application, property affected and state that the application, and maps reflecting the unit and drilling location are on file in the Office of the City Council for inspection during regular office hours. Notice of the day, time and place of the meeting shall be given in such notice. Proof of publication of such notice shall be made by the printer or publisher of the newspaper publishing the same by affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.6))  
Sec. 30-54. - Refusal of application for permit. 
(a)  The City Council shall have the power to refuse any application for a permit to drill and operate any well at any particular location within any area of the City where by reason of such particular location and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on or approximately adjacent to the particular location in question, and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for school, hospital, park or civic purpose, or for health or safety reasons or any of them, the drilling or operation of such well on the particular location might be injurious or a disadvantage to the City or to its inhabitants as a whole, or to a substantial number of its inhabitants or visitors as a group; or the Council may grant a permit, as it may deem necessary, on such reasonable conditions as to protect all persons who, and property which, may be affected by the drilling and production operations. When the Council refuses to issue a permit for the particular drilling location as applied for by the applicant, it may, in lieu thereof, designate as the drilling location a different drilling site subject to the applicant obtaining all requisite leases, contracts and surface permission for the designated substituted drilling site. 
(b)  The City Manager shall inform the applicant of the action of the City Council within three days after the Council has made a decision. If, for any reason, the permit as applied for is not granted or if the applicant refuses the permit because of any condition imposed therein, the application and filing fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.7))  
Sec. 30-55. - Transfer of permit. 
A permit validly in force may be transferred from the permittee to another operator upon written application to the City Manager upon proper showing that such new operator has acquired by assignment or contract the operating rights of the permittee, has assumed all of the obligations of the permittee under this division and has complied with the insurance, bond, and all other requirements of this division. Upon approval by the City Manager of such application, the City Manager shall issue a substitute permit to such new operator and cancel the original permit without notice to third parties. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.8))  
Sec. 30-56. - Effect of drilling permit. 
A drilling permit properly applied for and issued in accordance with this division is permission to the permittee to drill such well in accordance with the application and conditions of the permit and is also permission to produce the well and erect necessary facilities or equipment to handle its production all in accordance with the terms and conditions of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.9))  
Sec. 30-57. - Tenure of drilling permit. 
The term of a drilling permit shall be for a period of one year, unless within such year operations are commenced, in which event the term shall continue as long thereafter as production is obtained or drilling, reworking or well service operations are conducted, with no cessation of all such production and operations for more than 90 consecutive days, and until the well is plugged and abandoned in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 4(4.10))  
Secs. 30-58—30-87. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RULES FOR DRILLING AND PRODUCING OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-88. - Compliance with laws, rules and regulations. 
Any violation of any valid law, rule, regulation or requirement of any State or federal regulatory body or having jurisdiction with reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining, or abandoning oil or gas wells or related appurtenances, equipment of facilities, or with reference to firewalls, fire protection, blowout protection or safety of persons or property shall be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.1))  
Sec. 30-89. - Earthen pits. 
The use of earthen pits for drilling operations shall be permissible; however, upon completion of drilling, all material in said earthen pit shall be removed and the pits backfilled with good soil. In no event shall said pits be left open for more than three weeks after the drilling rig has been taken off the well. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.2))  
Sec. 30-90. - Derricks and rigs. 
No operator shall use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well, any wooded derrick or steam-powered rig, or permit any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the drilling site for a period longer than 60 days after the completion or abandonment of any well. All engines shall be equipped with effective mufflers. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.3))  
Sec. 30-91. - Drilling fluid. 
The bore hole of any well while being drilled or reworked shall at all times contain drilling fluid of a weight and viscosity which a reasonably prudent operator would use to keep the well under control. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.4))  
Sec. 30-92. - Blowout preventers. 
Adequate blowout preventers of the type used in the industry in drilling wells to the formations shall be used by the operators. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.5))  
Sec. 30-93. - Casing. 
All wells shall be properly cased and cemented so as not to contaminate any freshwater sands. The casing shall be cemented and shall extend to a depth of 100 feet beyond any freshwater sands in accordance with the requirements of the State Water Development Board and any other governmental agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.6))  
Sec. 30-94. - Drill stem tests. 
No operator shall conduct or allow to be conducted swabbing operations or the taking or completion of any drill stem test except during daylight hours. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.7))  
Sec. 30-95. - Pressurization. 
No pressurization of formation shall be conducted except during daylight hours. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.8))  
Sec. 30-96. - Pipelines. 
Before any excavation or construction work is commenced on any pipeline to move oil, gas, water or other product to or from any well site, on, over, under, along, or across any City street, sidewalk, alley, or other City property, a franchise shall first be obtained from the City Council. All pipelines shall be laid only in accordance with the provisions of such franchise, this division and other ordinances of the City. All pipelines used in this connection shall be new pipes meeting U.S. Department of Transportation Pipeline Safety Studies. No operator shall interfere with or damage any existing storm sewer, drainage facility, water line, sewer line, gas line, or facility of a public utility located on, under or across the course of any such pipeline. Temporary lines may be laid under revocable easements. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.9))  
Sec. 30-97. - Storage facilities. 
Stall storage tanks shall be used for the storage of liquid hydrocarbons and shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a good and workmanlike manner. Each tank or tank battery, as the case may be, shall be surrounded by an earthen firewall located at such a distance from the tanks and of sufficient height to hold and retain at least 1½ times the maximum capacity of such storage facilities. An operator may use, construct and operate steel conventional separators and such other appurtenances as are reasonably necessary for treating oil, condensate, or gas at each tank battery location. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.10))  
Sec. 30-98. - Fired vessels. 
No fired vessels or open flame shall be located nearer than 150 feet from any well or storage tank. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.11))  
Sec. 30-99. - Fences. 
All wells and production facilities shall be adequately protected by a fence constructed so as to prevent easy entry. Safety precautions normally taken by reasonably prudent operators shall be observed. Fences to prevent easy entry shall be approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.12))  
Sec. 30-100. - Pumping unit prime movers. 
Only electric prime movers shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.13))  
Sec. 30-101. - Vented gas. 
No operator shall allow gas to escape or be vented into the air except for bleed gas normally vented from standard gas operated controls and normal stock tank vapors. All gas burned shall be burned in a manner which does not create or constitute a fire hazard and the location of the torch, pipe or other burning device, the construction thereof, the maintenance thereof, and the operation thereof shall at all times be maintained in a good and sufficient manner. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.14))  
Sec. 30-102. - Salt water and wastewater disposal. 
All salt water shall be disposed of off of the premises or through a salt water injection well located upon the premises. No pits or unlined storage facilities for salt water shall be used. No person shall permit any crude oil, gas or other flammable petroleum product to spill over, overflow, leak, drain out, escape, or accumulate in any sewer or about the premises, or on the surface, or in any open surface ditch or any other exposed surface conduit, or handle any hydrocarbon in any manner or amount which creates a potential fire hazard, or permit any condition which may pollute any surface water or damage any publicly owned land. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.15))  
Sec. 30-103. - Production equipment. 
The operator shall maintain all production equipment in good condition. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.16))  
Sec. 30-104. - Premises to be kept clean. 
All surface areas utilized by on operator for production facilities shall be kept clear of high gross, weeds and combustible trash or other rubbish or debris that would, if allowed to accumulate, result in a fire hazard. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.17))  
Sec. 30-105. - Blocking of street or alleys. 
No street or alley shall be blocked or obstructed by any drilling or producing operations unless prior consent is obtained by the operator in the form of a resolution adopted by the City Council, except when necessary to protect life or property in connection with emergency operations. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.18))  
Sec. 30-106. - Abandonment procedure. 
Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the operator to plug such well in accordance with the laws of the State and the rules of the Railroad Commission. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 5(5.19))  
Secs. 30-107—30-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INSURANCE AND BONDS 
 
Sec. 30-126. - Insurance requirements. 
All operators shall maintain public liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 for each person and $3,000,000.00 for each accident and property damage limits of not less than $100,000.00 for each accident and $200,000.00 for any number of accidents. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 6(6.1))  
Sec. 30-127. - Bond requirements. 
Each applicant shall file a bond with the City Manager, executed by the applicant as principal and by a good and sufficient corporate surety company licensed to do business in the State. Said bond shall provide that the principal will remedy any and all damages to streets, curbs, gutters, water lines, water wells, fire hydrants and other public property, occasioned in any manner by the principal, his agents, employees, servants and contractors, and that the applicant will reimburse the City for any expenditures made by the City under the authority granted herein. Such bond shall insure to the benefit of the City, shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and shall be in an amount not less than $10,000.00 nor more than $100,000.00. Said amount to be determined by the City Manager at his discretion. The applicant shall not be required to post additional bonds if he has in effect by renewal on or before any expiration date unless the applicant is sooner released by the City Manager. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 6(6.2))  
Sec. 30-128. - Release of bonds and permits. 
The City Manager may release bonds and permits, as to the City, under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the permittee ceases all operations covered by this article, all wells for which the permittee holds permits have been plugged in accordance with the terms hereof, including the removal of all equipment and machinery, and files a request for release with the City Manager, the City Manager shall furnish a release, as to the City, of all the permittee's bonds pertaining to the particular well. 
(2)  If the permittee assigns all of his interest in the drilling unit covered by a bond or bonds, such assignor shall be released from such bond as to that drilling unit, except as to any liability then existing, after the assignee has fully complied with the bond and insurance requirements of this division, and the issuance of a substitute permit as provided shall constitute a release of the original permit. 
(3)  Any permittee who has plugged and abandoned a well in accordance with the requirements of this article and complied with all other requirements of this article may, upon request to the City Manager, be furnished with a release of the permit pertaining to such well. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 6(6.3))  
Sec. 30-129. - Well control. 
In the event of the loss of control of any well the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control of such well regardless of any other provisions of this article and the City and its forces may take such actions as deemed necessary to protect adjacent properties and the public from such well, if it deems that the operator is not taking or is unable to take the steps to regain control of such well. Any expenses in this regard shall constitute a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners who have voluntarily joined in the drilling of such well, to secure payment of any expenditure made by the City pursuant to such action. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 6(6.4))  
Secs. 30-130—30-156. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-157. - Administrative enforcement and supervision. 
Administrative enforcement of the terms of this article shall be by the City Manager and to that end he is hereby vested with police authority. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 7(7.1))  
Sec. 30-158. - Enforcement. 
In addition to any other penalty provided by this article, the Council may direct the City Attorney to initiate an action in any court having competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violations of the provisions of this article or for an injunction to compel compliance with any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 7(7.2))  
Sec. 30-159. - Public excluded. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the operator, to enter a fenced area around any well or production facility. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the operator to touch any well or production equipment. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, the City Manager shall have the right to enter the area of any drill site at any time. In the event any fence surrounding any well or production facility shall be kept locked, upon request of the City Manager, the key shall be furnished to him for use in access to the premises. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 7(7.4))  
Sec. 30-160. - Waiver by City Council. 
Any and all provisions of this article may be waived by the City Council upon a showing by the applicant to the satisfaction of the City Council that the planned manner of operations by the applicant or the equipment to be used by the applicant will adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-17-1976, § 7(7.8))  
Chapter 32 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule city to define and declare nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.042; persons not to permit abandoned property to become public health nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.013; municipality authority to require the owner of a lot in the municipality to keep the lot free from weeds, rubbish, brush, and other environmental nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brush includes all trees or shrubbery under seven feet in height not cultivated and cared for by the person owning or controlling the premises. 
Developed area means any new City block which is divided into more than four lots or parcels under separate ownership or occupancy, upon which buildings exist on more than 25 percent of such lots or parcel; and in addition, shall include any new City block not meeting the above definition of developed area if at least 50 percent of its perimeter is adjacent to or across a road, street, or alley from a new City block which is divided into more than four lots or parcels under separate ownership or occupancy, upon which buildings exist on more than 25 percent of such lots or parcels. 
Lot includes the land within its boundaries and all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curbline of adjacent streets and, where no curb exists, to the existing street surface. The term "lot" shall also include all land lying between the property line of any lot and the center of adjacent alleys. 
Owner includes any tenant, lessee, or other occupant of property under an existing agreement or understanding with the owner thereof. 
Parcel means any tract of land which has not been subdivided into lots, but shall also include, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curbline of adjacent streets, and where no curb exists, to the surface of an adjacent public street or road. Parcel shall also include all land lying between the property line and the center of any adjacent alley. 
Rubbish includes all trash, refuse, tin cans, old vessels of all sorts, discarded auto parts, useless articles, inoperative appliances, discarded clothing and textile of all sorts, and all litter and other debris. 
Weeds includes all rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which has grown to more than 12 inches in height, or which, regardless of height, is unsightly. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 1)  
Sec. 32-2. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-13, and each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case the owner or occupant of any lot or premises under the provisions of this article shall be a corporation, and shall violate any provisions of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of such corporation or any manager, agent, or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 13)  
Sec. 32-3. - Prohibited acts. 
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances and, as such, are liable to abatement: 
(1)  All cellars, vaults, drains, pools, privies, yards, grounds or premises which have for any cause become foul, nauseous, offensive or injurious to health or unpleasant to adjacent residents or to persons passing by. 
(2)  All carcasses, decaying flesh, fish, fowl, or vegetables, all deposits of manure or other unwholesome substances or flesh of any kind or description whatever and all filthy or offensive water or slops in any private yard or premises or when thrown or conducted into or upon any street, alley, public ground or any enclosure, so as to be unwholesome or offensive, or are liable to become unwholesome or offensive. 
(3)  All privies that are offensive from use, all markets, cellars, laundries, stores, or other buildings or places which are not kept clean and free from filthy or unwholesome substances and odors and all deposits or substances that are offensive or liable to endanger disease. 
(4)  Every trade, business or occupation injurious to the health or comfort of those who reside in the vicinity and any lot or receptacle whatever, containing water or slops suffered to become stagnant or offensive or unwholesome from any cause. 
(5)  Depositing filth or any foul, offensive, nauseous or injurious substances upon any sidewalk, street, alley or other public place. 
(6)  Sweeping or depositing any trash, paper, rubbish, weeds, or grass into or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place within the City and allowing the same to remain in such place for more than six hours. 
(7)  Permitting or allowing any weeds, filth, or rubbish of any kind to remain on any sidewalk in front or at the side of any premises owned by him or in the street to the middle thereof the rear or side of any lots or premises owned or controlled by him. 
(8)  Hauling, conveying, or transporting of any meat or slaughtered or dead animals or fish through the streets of the City without having the same entirely covered, screened or protected from dust and the public view. 
(9)  Allowing any wastewater or slop of any kind to drain or run over, into or upon any street, sidewalk, or alley of the City. 
(10)  Scattering of any advertisements, circulars, handbills, printed or written announcements or papers of like character or of any medicines upon the streets, sidewalks, alley or within the public buildings or grounds within the City. 
(11)  Posting, writing, printing, or tacking of any kind of sign or advertisement or any kind of written or printed matter of any character upon any telephone, electric light, or telegraph pole within the City. 
(12)  Cutting of any telephone, electric light, or telegraph pole, or of any wall of any building, or of any fence, or any kind of property in the City with any object whatever. 
(13)  Allowing any privy to become dilapidated or out of repair was to expose its contents or any persons using it. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 2)  
Sec. 32-4. - Owner, occupant responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, or suffer any nuisance upon any premises, lot, or in any building occupied or controlled by him, or in any street, alley, sidewalk, or gutter immediately adjacent to such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or his agent or the occupant of any lot, building, or place of any kind in this City where any nuisance may exist to remove, abate, or destroy the same without delay. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 3)  
Sec. 32-5. - Issuance and service of abatement notice. 
(a)  Whenever the Zoning Administrator receives information of the existence of any property not meeting the standards set out in section 32-3, he or any building inspector or sanitary officer assigned such responsibility shall serve the owner of the property with a written notice informing the owner of such condition and directing that action be taken to bring the property into compliance within 15 days. 
(b)  The notice shall be in writing; will state the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within 15 days after receipt of notice; state that a request for a public hearing to determine whether or not a public nuisance exists, as defined herein, must be made to the Zoning Administrator or an agent appointed to receive such request before expiration of 15 days after receipt of such notice; and state that in the event no request for a hearing is received, criminal charges of maintaining and permitting a public nuisance to exist, such public nuisance constructing a public nuisance to exist, such public nuisance constructing a public nuisance may be filed in the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 4)  
Sec. 32-6. - Service of notice. 
(a)  Notice may be served by personal delivery to the owner if he can be located within the City limits, but if he cannot be so located or served after reasonable effort, notice may be served by certified letter addressed to such owner at his post office address, but if such address cannot be served, by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City. In case of community property, service upon either the husband or the wife shall be deemed sufficient notice hereunder. 
(b)  If the property owner is a corporation, service may be made by delivery of same to any office or place of business of such corporation or any officer of the corporation if such office, place or business or officer can be located within the City limits, but if such office, place of business or officer cannot be so located after reasonable effort, service may be made by certified letter addressed to its corporate headquarters' post office address, but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, the notice may be served by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 5)  
Sec. 32-7. - Form of notice. 
Whether delivered personally, by mail or by publication, the notice provided for in section 32-5 shall be addressed to the owner, but if the owner is not known, service may be made by publication addressed to the owner of legal description of property. The notice shall give the legal description of the property, state the condition which constitutes a violation hereof and shall state that upon failure of the owner to rectify the situation within 15 days from the date the notice is delivered, or within 15 days from the date of the second publication if notice is served by publication, a criminal complaint may be filed in the Municipal Court of the City for violation of this article, stating the penalties for violation. In addition, the notice shall advise that the City may cause the correction and abatement work to be done on its own and charge the owner for the expense involved, and upon failure of the owner to pay the City for such expense, file a lien on the property for the expense involved as provided for in section 32-9. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 6)  
Sec. 32-8. - Unlawful noncompliance; providing notice. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any land within the City to fail to have any weeds, brush, or rubbish mowed, cut, removed, or other actions to bring the property into compliance with the standards set forth in sections 32-3 and 32-4, within 15 days after notice is received, or published, directing that such standards be met. 
(b)  Upon failure of the owner, occupant, or person in control of the property to comply with sections 32-3 and 32-4, it shall become the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to have the weeds cut. 
(c)  Before having the weeds or grass cut or to have rubbish, debris, or garbage properly disposed of the Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner of the premises to bring the premises into compliance with sections 32-3 and 32-4 within ten days or, if hardship exists, 25 days. The notice must be in writing and may be served on the owner in accordance with sections 32-5, 32-6, and 32-7. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 7)  
Sec. 32-9. - Abatement by City; payment of costs by owner; impose lien for nonpayment; removal of trees for access. 
(a)  In addition to the remedy provided for in section 32-8, the City may also cause the work necessary to bring any property into compliance herewith to be done, if the owner has failed to either do such work or cause work to be done within 15 days from the date notice has been received, or public shed, and to charge to the owner for the costs incurred by the City. A statement of the costs incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises, if the owner and mailing address is known, and if not known, may be published in a newspaper. The statement shall demand payment within 30 days from the date of receipt or publication. 
(b)  If such statement has not been paid within such period, the City Manager may cause a statement to be filed with the County Clerk of the expenses incurred to abate and correct such condition on the premises to be filed in the deed records, and the City shall have a privileged lien upon the lot, parcel or tract of land where such expenses were incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, together with ten percent interest per annum on the delinquent amount from the date such payment was due. For any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure made in the name of the City; and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof; shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work. 
(c)  Although large trees are not covered hereby, and are not felt to be a nuisance or a hazard, it may be necessary at times to remove trees or parts thereof in order for the City crews or contractors to effect entry of mowing or clearing equipment to property or portions of property not meeting standards established in this article, In such case, the removal of such trees or parts thereof as is found necessary shall be done and is hereby authorized, and the cost of this work shall be included in the cost charged to the owner. 
(d)  The City may abate the property for noncompliance. In the event the City does abate and the owner fails to pay for costs incurred in such abatement the City shall have the right to add these costs on the monthly utility bill of said person. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 8; Ord. No. 2011-06-112, § I, 6-14-2011)  
Sec. 32-10. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises, on which a public nuisance exists in violation of this article, may within 15 days after receipt of notice to remove or abate same, request of the Zoning Administrator or his agent, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of bond, that a date and time be set when he may appear before the Zoning Administrator for a hearing to determine whether or not a condition then existing on the landowner's property is a public nuisance. The hearing shall be administrative in nature. A record shall be made which shall include: 
(1)  The names of those appearing before the Board; 
(2)  A description of the lot or premises; 
(3)  The decision as to whether or not a public nuisance exists on the premises. 
(b)  Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that the condition is a public nuisance and therefore in violation of this article, the owner or occupant of the premises where the public nuisance is located shall be ordered to abate the condition within ten days, or where hardship is found to exist, within 25 days. 
(c)  During the pendency of any of the above actions, the cited property owner, tenant, or occupant shall have the right to receive a public hearing to protest to the Planning and Zoning Commission any of the following: 
(1)  The determination that the property is in violation of standards set out in this article; 
(2)  The cost to rectify the situation; 
(3)  The adequacy of the notice; 
(4)  Whether a lien should be placed on the property. 
(d)  This protest to the Planning and Zoning Commission must be made by filing a written notice within ten days following the Zoning Administrator's administrative hearing. If the person so ordered fails to abate the condition declared to be a public nuisance within the period specified, the Board shall turn over the record of the case to the Chief Prosecutor of the Municipal Court, and he shall file criminal charges under the penal provision of this article in the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 9)  
Sec. 32-11. - Wrongful conduct to be penalized. 
It shall be unlawful to do or perform any act prohibited hereby, and it shall be unlawful to fail to do or perform any act required hereby. Conviction of any violation within this article shall be punished in accordance with section 32-2. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 10)  
Sec. 32-12. - Award of bid by City. 
The City may award any quantity of work under section 32-8 to any person whose bid shall be accepted by the City Manager as being the best for completing such work. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 11)  
Sec. 32-13. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The enumeration of remedies for the suppression of nuisance, as provided in this chapter, are not to be deemed as exclusive, but as cumulative. In particular, prosecution for the offense described in section 32-4 shall not affect the right of the City to abate the nuisance in the manner provided by this chapter, nor shall abatement by the City be a bar to prosecution for the offense described in section 32-4. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1999, § 12)  
Secs. 32-14—32-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 
 
Sec. 32-45. - Prevention and destruction of mosquito breeding areas. 
For the prevention of breeding, and for the destruction of mosquitoes, it shall be required that any and all wells, tanks, underground cisterns, vessels, or ponds containing water where mosquitoes may live, breed, or raise and where they are breeding and raising, shall be protected by thorough screening or by the use of oil in such sufficient quantity to destroy and prevent them from breeding and raising. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1910(1), § 1)  
Sec. 32-46. - Duty of City. 
It shall be the duty of the City to furnish the oil and also to pay a man whose duty it is to see by making such investigation as may be necessary to ascertain whether or not mosquitoes are breeding or raising in any well, tank, cistern, or other place or vessel containing water, and to apply oil to all such wells, tanks, cisterns, or vessels or places containing water in such quantity and manner as may be required to destroy and prevent the breeding of mosquitoes. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1910(1), § 2)  
Sec. 32-47. - Exempt areas. 
That provided any person owning or controlling a well, tank, or cistern in which they keep fish so as to prevent the breeding or raising of mosquitoes, such well, tank, or cistern shall be exempt from the use of oil; if without it is proven that such well, cistern, or tank does breed or contain mosquitoes, then it shall be subject to the use of oil as are all others. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1910(1), § 3)  
Sec. 32-48. - Right of entry. 
Any person who may refuse to allow his wells, tank, or cistern examined to ascertain whether or not they contain or that mosquitoes are breeding therein, or who shall refuse to allow the inspector to use oil in his well, tank, or cistern for the purpose of destroying and preventing the breeding of mosquitoes shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100.00, and each day that any person shall refuse to obey or object to complying with the requirements of this article, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to a fine for each and every offense. 
(Ord. of 3-11-1910(1), § 4)  
Secs. 32-49—32-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNFIT BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority regarding substandard buildings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 32-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous premises means all premises, buildings or structures which have any or all of the structures which have any or all of the following defects: 
(1)  Those buildings or structures whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those buildings or structures which, exclusive of the foundations, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those buildings or structures which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the City. 
(5)  Those buildings or structures which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or, the condition of which is likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living therein or to persons or property in the vicinity. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of human beings who occupy or live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may reasonably be expected to fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, insanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of the City. 
Lot includes, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curbline of adjacent streets, and, where no curb exists, to the existing street surfaces. The term "lot" also includes all land lying between the property line of any lot and the center of adjacent alleys. 
Owner as used herein also includes any tenant, lessee, or other occupant of property who is in control of the property under an existing agreement or understanding with the owner thereof. 
Parcel means any tract of land which has not been subdivided into lots, but shall also include, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curbline of adjacent streets, and, where no curb exists, to the surface of an adjacent public street or road. The term "parcel" also includes all land lying between the property line and the center of any adjacent alley. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 1)  
Sec. 32-71. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined according to the general penalties described in section 1-13, and each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case the owner or occupant of any lot or premises under the provisions of this article shall be a corporation, and shall violate any provisions of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation, shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 13)  
Sec. 32-72. - Declared public nuisance. 
All dangerous premises within the terms of section 32-70 are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be abated as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 2)  
Sec. 32-73. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector in ordering repair, vacation, and/or demolition: 
(1)  If the dangerous premises can be feasibly repaired or the condition remedied so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered remedied or repaired. Repairs shall be deemed feasible only if less than 50 percent of the value or structure of the building must be repaired or replaced. 
(2)  If the dangerous premises is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health or safety of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  If any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent or more damaged or decayed or deteriorated from its value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 3)  
Sec. 32-74. - Inspection of buildings. 
The Zoning Administrator or Director of Building Inspections shall inspect or cause to be inspected periodically, all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial manufacturing, or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render any such place a dangerous premises within the terms of section 32-70. The Zoning Administrator or Director shall also inspect buildings under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any premises, building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that any premises or a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article; 
(2)  Any premises, building, wall or structure reported, as provided for in this article, by the health, fire or police departments as possibly existing in violation of the terms of this article; 
(3)  Any premises, building, wall or structure which he has reason to believe may be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 4)  
Sec. 32-75. - Notice to vacate and/or repair or demolish. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator or the Director of Building Inspections shall notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the premises, at last known address as shown by the records of the assessor-collector of taxes of the City, of any premises found by him to be dangerous premises within the standards set forth in section 32-70, that: 
(1)  The owner must vacate, and/or repair, or demolish such building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article; 
(2)  The occupant or lessee must vacate such building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession. 
(b)  The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in such building may at his own risk repair, vacate, or demolish the building or have such work or act done, provided that any person notified under this section to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given any reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by the notice provided for. 
(c)  The notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall set forth a description, of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which made the building or structure a dangerous building, and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable. 
(d)  If the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee shall be charged a demolition of unsafe structures fee, per hour, plus an administrative fee. 
(e)  If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the notices provided in this section within ten days, the Zoning Administrator or the Director of Building Inspections shall report the condition to the City Attorney giving him a copy of the notice described in this section. 
(f)  The City Attorney shall then take any necessary action to secure compliance with the order of the Zoning Administrator or the Director of Building Inspections provided in this section, and in particular shall proceed as provided in section 32-76, taking additional steps to determine names and addresses of persons having an interest in the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 5)  
Sec. 32-76. - Hearings. 
(a)  The City Attorney shall prepare a notice to the owner, lienholder, if any, occupants and any other person having an interest in such dangerous premises notifying such persons that a hearing on the matter will be heard by the City Council at a certain time on a certain day, not less than five days and not more than 30 days after receipt thereof, at City Hall. 
(b)  The notice shall be served by delivery to such persons or by U.S. mail, certified or registered. Where any such person is a corporation, service upon an officer thereof or designated agent shall be deemed sufficient. Where such person's principal place of business is located outside of the County, service upon the person in charge of the local office shall be deemed sufficient. Notices to owners other than occupants shall be deemed sufficient if addressed to the address shown on the City tax rolls. Such notice shall be published one time in the City's official publication, in the event any person having an interest in such premises or their heirs cannot be located after reasonable efforts. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator or Director of Building Inspections shall present at such hearing reports by personnel of the Departments of Fire, Public Health, Building Inspections or other City departments and any other facts as to the condition of the premises. 
(d)  Any person having an interest in the property shall have the opportunity to appear at such hearing, in person or by attorney, to present any relevant facts as to the condition of the premises and hear the reports of any City personnel or of any other persons which may be presented. 
(e)  The City Council shall, after consideration of the foregoing, determine by ordinance whether the premises in question contain or constitute a condition which should be deemed a nuisance, a hazard to the public health or safety or both, which should be abated. If the Council so determines, such ordinance shall direct the City Attorney to proceed forthwith to file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to have the premises declared a nuisance and abated by appropriate means, and to assess the costs of such proceedings and abatement against the owners of the premises and as a lien thereon. 
(f)  This remedy shall be available to the City in addition to any penal or other remedy which the City, State or any other person may have to remedy the dangerous premises condition. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 6)  
Sec. 32-77. - Emergency cases. 
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building, as defined in section 32-70, is immediately vacated and/or repaired or demolished, the Director of Building Inspections shall cause the immediate vacation and/or repair or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 32-76. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 7)  
Sec. 32-78. - Placarding. 
In such emergency cases, the Zoning Administrator or Director of Building Inspections shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such dangerous buildings a notice to read: 
"DO NOT ENTER. THIS STRUCTURE TO BE DEMOLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTIONS, CITY OF PEARSALL." 
Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition is completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the Zoning Administrator or Director of Building Inspections and no unauthorized person shall enter the building for any purpose. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 8)  
Sec. 32-79. - Administrative liability. 
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 9)  
Sec. 32-80. - Reports of suspected dangerous buildings. 
The heads of the Fire, Police, Public Health and other City Departments shall make prompt reports in writing to the Director of Building Inspections of all buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be, dangerous premises within the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 10)  
Sec. 32-81. - Disconnecting public utilities. 
The Zoning Administrator or Director of Building Inspections may request that public utilities be disconnected in order that demolition may be accomplished without delay in those cases where the structure is open, vacant and dilapidated. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 11)  
Sec. 32-82. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The enumeration of remedies for the suppression of nuisances as provided in this chapter are not to be deemed as exclusive, but as cumulative. In particular, prosecution for the offense described in section 32-70 shall not affect the right of the City to abate the nuisance in the manner provided by this chapter, nor shall abatement by the City be a bar to prosecution for the offense described in section 32-70. 
(Ord. of 4-30-1987, § 12)  
Secs. 32-83—32-107. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of junked vehicle declared to be a public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 
 
Sec. 32-108. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
Junked vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071, as amended, that is self-propelled and inoperable; and 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; or 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(3)  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
a.  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
b.  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Lot includes, in addition to the land within its boundaries, all land adjacent to and extending beyond the property line to the curbline of adjacent streets and, where no curb exists, to the existing street surface. The term "lot" also includes" all land lying between the property line of any lot and the center of adjacent alleys. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle subject to registration under chapter 501 Transportation Code (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 501.001 et seq.) except that for purposes of certain sections of this act, the term "motor vehicle" includes a motorboat, outboard motor, or vessel subject to registration under chapter 31, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code (V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.001 et seq.). 
Motor vehicle collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Owner includes any tenant, lessee, or other occupant of property under an existing agreement or understanding with the owner thereof. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from the original manufacturers' specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 1)  
Sec. 32-109. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $200.00, and each and every day's violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In case the owner or occupant of any lot or premises under the provisions of this article shall be a corporation, and shall violate any provisions of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance in violation of this article. The Court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 9)  
Sec. 32-110. - Wrongful conduct to be penalized. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any tenant or occupant of any buildings or premises, in person or by his servant, agent or employee, to keep junked vehicles, or parts thereof or other substance or thing whatsoever of an offensive nature or deleterious to health, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park, or other public place, or vacant lot or in any yard space or privately owned premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any real property within the City to keep or permit the keeping of any junked vehicle or parts thereof on such property in violation of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any land within the City to fail to have any junked vehicles removed, or otherwise bring property into compliance with the standards set forth in this article, within ten days after notice is received, or published, directing that such standards be met; the Zoning Administrator assigned such duties, whenever a violation is found and it is possible to do so, shall file a complaint which the Municipal Court; and the Prosecutor of the Municipal Court assigned such duties shall prosecute the case, and upon conviction for violation hereof the owner shall be fined in accordance with this article. Each day's violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  In addition to the fine, the Court shall, in any case wherein the owner or occupant is found guilty of keeping a junked vehicle, or part thereof, enter a written order authorizing the removal of the junked vehicle, or part thereof. 
(e)  It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this provision that the notice required by this article was not given to the defendant prior to the commencement of the criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 2)  
Sec. 32-111. - Junked vehicles declared to be a public nuisance. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public; tends to reduce the value of private property; invites vandalism; creates a fire hazard; is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the State by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the City; and such condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is a public necessity. 
(b)  It is the duty and responsibility of the owners of property within the City to keep and maintain the properties in compliance with the standards in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this section. 
(d)  A person who commits an offense under this section is, on conviction of a misdemeanor, subject to a fine as provided in this article. On conviction, the Court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 3)  
Sec. 32-112. - Issuance, service of abatement notice. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the Zoning Administrator receives information of the existence of any property not meeting the standards set out in this article he, or any building inspector or sanitary officer assigned such responsibility, shall serve the owner of the property with a written notice informing the owner of such condition and directing that action be taken to bring the property into compliance within ten days after the date of notice. 
(b)  Contents of notice. The notice required to be sent by this section shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  State the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within 15 days after date of notice; 
(3)  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle as defined herein must be made to the Zoning Administrator or an agent appointed to receive such request before expiration of ten days after the date of notice; and 
(4)  State that in the event that no request for a hearing is received, criminal charges of maintaining and permitting a public nuisance to exist on the keeping of a junked vehicle, or parts thereof, may be filed in the Municipal Court. 
(c)  Service of notice on individuals. Such notice may be served by personal delivery to the owner if he can be located within the City limits, but if he cannot be so located or served after reasonable effort, notice may be served by certified letter addressed to such owner at his post office address, but if such address cannot be ascertained after reasonable effort, the notice may be served by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. In a case of community property, service upon either the husband or the wife shall be deemed sufficient notice hereunder. 
(d)  Service of notice on corporation. If the owner is a corporation, service by personal delivery, certified mail or publication may be made by delivery of same to any office or place of business of such corporation or any officer of the corporation. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 4)  
Sec. 32-113. - Owner's right to hearing. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises on which a junked vehicle is located in violation of this article may, within ten days after notice was mailed to remove or abate same, request of the Zoning Administrator or his agent, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of bond, that a date and time be set when he may appear before the Zoning Administrator for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle. 
(b)  The hearing shall be administrative in nature. A record, which shall be administrative in nature, shall be made and include: 
(1)  The names of those appearing before the Board. 
(2)  A description of the lot, premises or vehicle. 
(3)  The identification number and most recent license number, if available. 
(4)  The decision as to whether or not the vehicle is a junked vehicle. 
(c)  Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that the motor vehicle is a junked motor vehicle, and therefore in violation of this article, the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the motor vehicle is located shall be ordered to abate the condition or remove the vehicle within ten days or where hardship is found to exist, within 30 days, the same being reasonable times. 
(d)  During the pendency of any of the actions referenced in subsection (c) of this section, any affected landowner, tenant or occupant shall have the right to receive a public hearing to protest to the Board of Adjustment any of the following: 
(1)  The determination that the property is in violation of standards set out in this article; 
(2)  The cost to rectify the situation; 
(3)  The adequacy of the notice; 
(4)  Whether a lien should be placed on the property. 
(e)  This protest to the Board of Adjustment must be made by filing a written notice within ten days following the administrative hearing before the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 5)  
Sec. 32-114. - Abatement by City; payment of costs by owner; lien imposed for nonpayment. 
(a)  In addition to the remedy provided for in section 32-112, the City may also cause the work necessary to bring any property into compliance herewith to be done, if the owner has failed to either do such work or cause work to be done within ten days from the date notice was mailed, or published, and to charge to the owner for the costs incurred by the City. A statement of the costs incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of such premises if the owner and mailing address is known and, if not known, may be published in a newspaper of general circulation. The statement shall demand payment within 30 days from the date of receipt or publication. 
(b)  If such statement has not been paid within such period, the Mayor and City Council, by ordinance duly adopted, may cause a statement to be filed with the County Clerk of the expenses incurred to abate and correct such condition on the premises, to be filed in the deed records, and such statement shall be and the City shall have a privileged lien upon the lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which such expenses were incurred, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, together with ten percent interest per annum on the delinquent amount from the date such payment was due. For any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the City; and the statement so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any of such work. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 6)  
Sec. 32-115. - Disposal of junked vehicles. 
(a)  A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by the City or County for processing as scrap or salvage. 
(b)  A vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable after removal. 
(c)  If the person so ordered fails to remove the junked vehicle within the period specified, the Board shall turn over the record of the case to the Chief Prosecutor of the Municipal Court, and he shall file criminal charges under the penal provision of this article in the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 7)  
Sec. 32-116. - Interference with removal prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the examination or identification of vehicles pursuant to this article, or to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the removal of a junked vehicle under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 8)  
Sec. 32-117. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this article shall apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from a public street, other public or private property, or public right-of-way. 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(3)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked on private property in such a manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, in connection with the business of a licensed wrecker service. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 10)  
Sec. 32-118. - Authority to enforce. 
A person authorized by the City or County to administer the procedures may enter private property to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance. An appropriate Court of the City or County that enacts procedures under this article may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 11)  
Sec. 32-119. - City employees not personally liable. 
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 12)  
Sec. 32-120. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The enumeration of remedies for the suppression of nuisance as provided in this article are not to be deemed as exclusive, but as cumulative. In particular, prosecution for the offense described in this article shall not affect the right of the City to abate the nuisance in the manner provided by this chapter, nor shall abatement by the City be a bar to prosecution for the offense described in this article. This article does not affect a law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on the public property. 
(Ord. of 1-13-1999, § 13)  
Secs. 32-121—32-138. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 32-139. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the City or the Chief's designee. 
City Manager means the City Manager of the City or the City Manager's designee. 
Daytime means all times between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
Decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
Director means the City's Director of the Building and Zoning Compliance Department or the Director's designee. 
Emergency situation means a situation in which one must take actions to prevent a traffic accident or to attempt to prevent a traffic accident. 
Emergency work means any public work or action immediately necessary to deliver essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, or abating life-threatening conditions on public or private property. 
Impulsive sound means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor. 
Nighttime means the hours from 10:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. 
Noise-sensitive area includes, but is not limited to, a posted area where a school, church, hospital, outpatient clinic, nursing home, assisted living, day care facility, funeral home, court, public library, or similar facility, where persons gather and have a reasonable expectation of quiet, peace or solitude, is located. 
Outdoor music venue means a commercial establishment which allows or uses sound equipment outside of the enclosed building on the premises, producing loud music which can be heard beyond the property line of the premises. 
Person means any individual, firm, business, entity, association, partnership, joint venture, or corporation. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, park or similar place normally accessible to the public, which is owned or controlled by any government entity. 
Public space means any real property or structure on real property owned or controlled by a government entity and normally accessible to the public including, but not limited to, parks and other recreational areas. 
Real property line means either: 
(1)  The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, which could be verified in County deed records or metes and bounds survey, that separates one parcel of real property from another; or 
(2)  The vertical and horizontal boundaries (floors, walls and ceilings) of each unit of a multiunit building which is under separate ownership or tenancy. 
Residential area means any real property zoned for residential use in accordance with the City's zoning ordinances, all other real property which has been platted for 
Sound equipment means a loud speaker, public address system, amplification system, musical instrument, radio, CD player, stereo, mp3 player, or other sound-producing device. 
Sound level means the instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels obtained by the use of a sound level meter set for A-weighting on slow integration speed, unless otherwise noted. 
Sound level meter means a regularly maintained and calibrated instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighting network used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to type 1 or type 2 standards as specified in the latest version of the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI Standard S1.4-1983). 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.20), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-140. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person makes noise in violation of a provision of this article. 
(b)  An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,000.00 or, if the person has previously been convicted of a violation under this article, by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $2,000.00, as is consistent with laws governing penalties for health and safety violations. 
(c)  Each occurrence of a violation, or, in the case of continuous violations, each day a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense and may be punished separately. 
(d)  A violation of this article is a public nuisance. The prosecution of an offense under this article does not limit the City's right to abate the public nuisance, including the use of injunctive or other civil relief. Private persons offended by noise-generating neighbors may personally file private nuisance civil actions in County or State District Court. 
(e)  No provision of this article shall be construed to impair any separate common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or from other laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.100), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-141. - General provisions. 
(a)  Scope. This article applies to the control of all sound and noise existing within the City limits and/or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  Overview. This article is designed to regulate noise by various alternative means in order to allow the enforcement of noise regulations at times when, and by City regulatory officers for whom, noise meters are temporarily not available. A noise may be in violation of this article because it is disturbing to a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities pursuant to section 32-146, or because it is prohibited without a permit pursuant to section 32-143, or because it exceeds the decibel level restrictions provided in section 32-142. If a noise violates more than one of these provisions, the violation will be enforced under whichever provision is most applicable to the situation, as reasonably determined by the Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.10), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-142. - Restrictions on decibel levels. 
(a)  Maximum decibel levels. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit any of the following acts which are declared to be noise nuisances. If a noise is made on public and/or private property, which qualifies under more than one of the four categories enumerated in this section, the lowest maximum decibel level shall apply. 
(1)  The making of noise which exceeds 63 decibels during the daytime or 56 decibels during the nighttime in residential areas and all abutting public rights-of-way; 
(2)  The making of noise which exceeds 70 decibels during the daytime or 63 decibels during the nighttime on commercial or other business zoned property, as defined by the Zoning chapter; 
(3)  The making of noise which exceeds 72 decibels during the daytime or 65 decibels during the nighttime on industrial zoned property, as defined by the Zoning chapter; or 
(4)  The making of noise which exceeds 72 decibels during the daytime or 65 decibels during the nighttime on any public or private property which does not fit into any of the categories described in the foregoing subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section. 
(b)  Method of noise measurement. Whenever portions of this section prohibit noise over a certain decibel limit, measurement of said noise should be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association and using the A-weighted scale. The measuring instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. Calibration corrections shall be employed in meeting the response specifications prior to every noise sampling event. Prior to taking a measurement of the noise in question, the environment shall be observed to determine whether background noise is so close to the level of the sound being measured that a proper measurement is not possible. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise being measured. The microphone shall be screened from wind and water and otherwise used in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. Measurements of noise emanating from private property shall be taken from a distance point to be recorded in writing by the inspecting regulator, beyond the real property line of the property from which the noise is being generated. Measurements of noise being generated on public right-of-way or a public space shall be taken from a distance greater than or equal to 300 feet from the source of the noise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.30), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-143. - Certain construction noises prohibited without permit. 
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit during nighttime and/or on Christmas Day, New Year's Day, Easter Sunday, or Thanksgiving Day, the creation of noise in connection with construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work, or the operation of any tools or equipment used for any such work, including the operation of a machine that separates, gathers, grades, loads, or unloads sand, rock, concrete or gravel, without first obtaining a permit from the Director pursuant to section 32-144. Such noise is declared to be a public nuisance and does not have to exceed the specifications for sound levels contained in this article or disturb a particular person in order to constitute a violation of this article. The requirements of this article are independent of and in addition to any other permits, certificates of occupancy, zoning, or platting requirements or other requirements of the law, and the fact that a person or an entity has acquired any other such authorization from the City shall not exempt them from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.40), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-144. - Temporary permit procedure. 
(a)  Eligibility to apply for temporary permits. The following persons or entities may apply for a temporary permit to create or allow noise which would otherwise be prohibited by this article: 
(1)  A person or entity seeking a permit for noise-generating construction activities prohibited without such permit in section 32-143; 
(2)  A person or entity which has applied for a special event permit from the City and seeks to be temporarily allowed to use sound equipment creating noise which exceeds the decibel levels permitted by this article during the special event; and 
(3)  An outdoor music venue located in a nonresidential zoning district which seeks to use sound equipment outdoors temporarily but routinely creating noise which exceeds the decibel levels permitted by this article for temporary and publicly scheduled events. 
(b)  Application. A person seeking a permit under this article shall complete and file a written application for a permit with the Director on the form provided by the Director, and pay a fee to cover measuring device and administrative expenses of processing the application or such amended amount as may be established by ordinance. Such application shall be submitted at least 20 business days prior to the date on which the proposed noise will commence. An application for permit shall include: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a business, the application shall be filled out by the owner or duly authorized agent of the business and shall list the name, address, and telephone number of the business, the responsible owner of the business, and the operator of the business, if different; 
(2)  The nature and location of the noise source for which the application is made; 
(3)  The time during which the noise will be generated and the projected level of noise that will occur; 
(4)  A signed statement that the applicant has obtained a copy of this article and any related City administrative rules or guidelines, and agrees to comply with this article, any related rules provided, and the terms and conditions of a permit to be issued to the applicant; 
(5)  The reason for which the permit is requested, including the hardship that will result to the applicant, his client, or the public if the permit is not granted; and 
(6)  A description of noise control measures (sound man control board, screening, temporary housing, etc.) to be taken by or for the applicant to minimize migrating noise and the impacts occurring thereof, and the schedule under which said measures will be implemented. 
(c)  Restrictions on issuance of permit. No permit shall be approved unless the Director is satisfied, based upon the application and other proof provided by the applicant, that: 
(1)  Noise levels occurring during the period of the permitted variance will not constitute a danger to public health; 
(2)  Compliance with this article would impose an unreasonable hardship on the applicant or the public, without greater benefits to the public; and 
(3)  The applicant has fully complied with the application procedures. 
(d)  Considerations in determining whether to grant permit. In making the determination of whether to grant a permit, the Director shall consider: 
(1)  The character, degree, duration of any potential injury to, or interference with, the health, safety and general welfare of neighboring public and private citizens, or any interference with the continued reasonable use of property that may be caused or threatened to be caused; 
(2)  The value to the community of the activity for which the permitted variance is sought (charity, civic considerations); 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control measures at the time of noise creation; and 
(4)  Proximity to residences, public places and noise-sensitive areas at which reasonable persons would be disturbed by the temporarily increased noise. 
(e)  Other restrictions. 
(1)  The Director shall consider each application on a similar reasonable basis as that used for other similarly situated applicants and shall make each variance decision free from consideration of race, sex, national origin, religion, physically challenged condition, the content of speech, or any other reasonable and logical factors not provided for in this article; 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for the operation of sound equipment at nighttime from a motor vehicle or for a location within 100 feet of a residential or noise-sensitive area; and 
(3)  No permit shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of more than two violations of a regulation under this article within a five-year period, or there have been more than two convictions for violations of this article at the location for which the permit is sought within one year prior to the date on which the application is submitted. 
(f)  Issuance or denial of permit. 
(1)  The Director shall grant or deny the permit within ten business days of receiving the properly completed application. Another application for the same applicant or location may not be submitted for a period of 30 days following the previous denial of an application. 
(2)  If the Director determines a permit should be issued pursuant to the criteria established in this article, a written permit shall be issued which states the type of sound permitted, the location at which the sound will be permitted, the maximum decibel level to be allowed, the times at which the sound will be allowed to be produced, and the expiration date of the permit. 
(3)  The decibel limits on a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be set at no greater than ten decibels over the limits which would otherwise apply pursuant to section 32-142, unless the Director determines a different limit is required under the special circumstances. 
(g)  Time and frequency limits on permit. 
(1)  For an outdoor live or recorded music-generating establishment which uses sound equipment in a manner which produces sound audible beyond the real or leased property line of the property on which the sound equipment is operated, a permit shall not exceed one year in duration. A new permit application shall be required for a new permit to be issued for any subsequent year. Any such permit shall terminate upon change in the owner/tenant or operator of the establishment listed on the application and a new permit application by the new owner/tenant/operator will be required to obtain a new permit. 
(2)  A permit for unusual construction noise shall be issued for the expected duration of the noise for which the permit is issued. 
(3)  In all other cases, a permit shall be issued for a maximum period of 72 hours (with any specific hourly operational restrictions within the larger 72-hour period so noted) and no such permit shall be issued for the same location within 30 days of the date of expiration of the previous permit. 
(h)  Revocation of permit. The permit may be revoked by the Director if the terms of the permit are violated; if it is determined that there were material misrepresentations made in the permit application; or if there is a material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the Director in granting the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.50), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-145. - Appeal of denial or revocation of permit. 
(a)  If the Director denies or revokes a permit under this article, an applicant may appeal the Director's decision to the City Manager by filing a written statement of the decision being appealed and the grounds for the appeal with the City Manager, no later than the tenth business day after the date on which notice of the decision is delivered to the applicant or permit holder, or placed in the U.S. mail in a stamped envelope addressed to his last known address. The applicant or permit holder is responsible for making the appeal prior to a date which will allow reasonable time for the decision on the appeal to be made prior to the actual date on which the noise is proposed to commence. 
(b)  No later than the tenth day after receiving a request for an appeal, the City Manager shall consider the appeal and make a decision. 
(c)  The City Manager may sustain, reverse, or modify the action appealed. The City Manager's decision shall be based upon the criteria set forth in section 32-144 and is final, unless enjoined by State District Court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.60), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-146. - Disturbance of reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited noises. In addition to the other noise restrictions provided in this article, no person shall make, cause, suffer, allow, or permit unreasonably loud noises in such a manner, or with such volume, intensity, or duration, so as to disturb a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities. A noise for which the producer of the noise has a current and valid permit issued pursuant to section 32-144, or which otherwise does not exceed the decibel level restrictions in this section, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; however, a decibel level measurement by a City regulatory official shall not be required for the enforcement of this section. 
(b)  Included noises. This section is intended to apply to, but is not limited to, unreasonable noises in the form of: 
(1)  Barking dogs; 
(2)  Car or home alarms not ceased within 15 minutes or less, vehicle exhaust, engine braking systems, radios, stereos, cd players, mp3 players, boom boxes, musical instruments, and other devices which reproduce or amplify sound; 
(3)  The cries of peddlers, hawkers and vendors; 
(4)  Any noise during nighttime in a residential or noise-sensitive area which can be heard beyond the real property line of the premises from which the noise is originating; and 
(5)  Noise from the shooting of a gun or any legal fireworks, including such noise created at sports shooting ranges as defined in section 250.001 of the Texas Local Government Code (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.001), where said noise is audible in residential or noise-sensitive areas. 
(c)  Noise-producing vibrations from vehicles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit operation of a radio, tape or CD player, mp3 player or other electronic or mechanical sound-making device from a motor vehicle in a manner which emits sound audible to the human ear of a person with average and normal hearing, on a public right-of-way, street, or highway, at a distance of 30 or more feet from the motor vehicle, or which causes a person at that distance to be aware of a vibration accompanying the sound. It shall be legally presumed that the driver of any such vehicle is the controller and operator of the sound-making device. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.70), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-147. - Exemptions. 
The following acts and sounds shall be exempt from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  The generation of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of imminent public or private danger or an actual emergency; 
(2)  The generation of sound in the performance of emergency public work; 
(3)  Sirens, whistles, or bells, lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or any alarm systems used by government entities in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity, or imminent public danger; 
(4)  Engine braking systems for emergency response vehicles and when used by commercial vehicles in an emergency situation; 
(5)  Repairs and excavations of bridges, streets, or highways by the City, State, or federal government during the nighttime, when public welfare and convenience render it impractical to perform the work during daylight hours; 
(6)  Athletic events in a stadium, ball park, or on public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school athletic events; 
(7)  Law enforcement motor vehicles equipped with any communication device necessary in the performance of law enforcement duties, or emergency vehicles equipped with any communication device necessary in the performance of any emergency procedures; 
(8)  Noise made by a vehicular horn or other warning device required by State law; 
(9)  Sound produced by permitted parades and events sponsored and held by the City on public property for the general public, and pyrotechnic displays approved by the City Fire Prevention Inspector; 
(10)  An employee of a governmental entity engaged in the employee's official duty; or 
(11)  A person operating a bell for a religious activity. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.80), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 32-148. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Chief of Police and his designees will have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained herein. Nothing in this article shall prevent the Chief of Police or his designee from having the authority to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice, administrative stop order, or education. 
(b)  If a person's conduct would otherwise violate this article and consists of speech or communication delivered to others who have gathered to hear or observe speech or communication; or to others who have gathered to picket or otherwise express in a nonviolent manner, a position on social, economic, political or religious questions; the person who is in violation of this action shall be ordered to, and have the opportunity to apply for a permit, move, disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation, prior to arrest or a citation being issued. 
(c)  Violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for a citation to be issued by the Chief of Police or his designee. In the event the noise violating this article is not stopped following issuance of a citation, the Chief of Police or his designee may issue an administrative stop order to any person having possession or control over noise-generating property to immediately halt the making of any sound which exceeds the decibel levels prescribed in section 32-142. 
(d)  In the event a noise violation continues after the delivery of an administrative stop order, the Chief of Police or his designee may apply to any magistrate for an administrative search warrant for the purpose of entering private property to investigate and identify public or private noise nuisance producing devices which are violating this article and to investigate their owners or operators, and to temporarily seize such devices in the event the owner or operator of the offending noise-producing device has been convicted of a violation of this article in the previous 365 calendar days. Any noise-producing devices seized under this section shall be returned to any person requesting their return and presenting proof of ownership, following 24 hours after the seizure of the devices. Any disputed ownership of the seized property shall be resolved at a hearing before a magistrate of the City. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from exercising any other legal and/or equitable rights or remedies available under this article or by other laws. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-040, § 1(81.90), 4-8-2008)  
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Preemption of criminal offenses by state Penal Code, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; Concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003(b); municipal authority to regulate discharge of firearms in municipal limits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Spitting in public; public building defined. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to expectorate on the floors, walls or furniture of any public building located within the corporate limits of the City or to expectorate on any sidewalk within the corporate limits of the City. The term "public building" includes all church houses, schoolhouses, courthouses, store buildings, confectioneries, post office, garages, and any other buildings where the public is permitted to go in and out without restraint under certain regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1917, § 1)  
Sec. 34-2. - Discharge of firearm on public property. 
Any person who discharges any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind or discharges an air rifle or air pistol of any description by whatever name known that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets or any solid object at a velocity in excess of 300 feet per second on or across any public square, street or alley within 100 yards of any business house in the City, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1970, § 1)  
Sec. 34-3. - Discharge of firearm on private property. 
Any person who discharges any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind or who discharges an air rifle or air pistol of any description by whatever name known that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets or any solid object at a velocity in excess of 300 feet per second on, over or across any private property not within the ownership or control of the person discharging said weapon or person supervising the discharge of said weapon, or having permission from the person owning or controlling the property to discharge said weapon on, over or across shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1970, § 3)  
Sec. 34-4. - Prima facie evidence. 
For the purposes of this article all air rifles and air pistols of any description, by whatever name known, that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means discharge shots, pellets or any solid object shall be presumed to propel these shots, pellets or solid object at a velocity in excess of 300 feet per second and proof that such weapon is capable of it discharging a shot, pellet or solid object at any speed shall be prima facie evidence that it will discharge shots, pellets or any other solid object at a speed in excess of 300 feet per second. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1970, § 5)  
Sec. 34-5. - Confiscation of weapon possessed by minor. 
In the event a child under the age of 17 years shall be found to be in violation of this chapter, then the City Judge is authorized to confiscate the weapon used for a period of 30 days in lieu of assessing the fines herein set out. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1970, § 6)  
Secs. 34-6—34-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 34-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Felt tip marker means an indelible marker or similar implement with any size tip containing an ink that is not water soluble. 
Graffiti means any authorized inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any surface of public or private buildings, structures of other facility or upon any other property, regardless of its content or nature and regardless of the nature of the material of the structural component or property. 
Graffiti implement means any aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, or a paint stick or etching tool capable of scarring or otherwise defacing glass, metal, concrete or wood. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax epoxy, or other similar substances capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a visible mark, and that is not water soluble. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(3), § 2)  
Sec. 34-37. - Penalties. 
Violation of any of the provisions of section 34-38 shall be an offense and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. The Court shall have the discretion to provide other means of punishment which may include community service. In setting the penalties, due consideration will be given to the costs incurred by the property owner to remove the graffiti, the amount the visual prominence of the graffiti, and past history of the offender. In all cases, requiring removal of graffiti at the offender's expense shall be considered. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(3), § 5)  
Sec. 34-38. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, any graffiti implement in any public park, public school ground, public playground, public swimming pool, public recreational facility, any public right-of-way, or other public grounds in the City when the public facility is closed to the public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, for the purpose of defacing property, any graffiti implement while on private property not open to the public. The graffiti implement shall be presumed to be for the purpose of defacing property if it is in the holder's possession while the holder is on private property closed to the public, without permission from the owner or his lawful agent. 
(c)  It shall be an offense for the parent or legal guardian of a child under 17 years of age to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence allow the child to violate the provisions in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(3), § 3)  
Sec. 34-39. - Enforcement procedures. 
When an officer stops and detains a person after the officer has developed reasonable suspicion to believe the person is in violation of this article, said officer shall: 
(1)  Obtain and attempt to validate the name, age, address, and other information about the person; 
(2)  Obtain information on whether the person was defacing property or in possession of a graffiti implement; 
(3)  If the person was found to have defaced property, the officer will take appropriate action by arresting the individual or issuing a misdemeanor citation; 
(4)  If the person was found to be in possession of a graffiti implement, the officer will handle the evidence in accordance with the Police Department procedure "Impounding Property." 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(3), § 4)  
Sec. 34-40. - Remedial action. 
The City agrees that it may consider remedial measures aimed at attacking the graffiti problem, to include: 
(1)  Coordination of volunteer organizations which assist in graffiti removal. 
(2)  Providing information on probationer restitution services available to community-based organizations for graffiti removal. 
(3)  The City shall make every effort and use its available resources to promptly remove graffiti from City-owned property. Similarly, business owners and homeowners shall be encouraged to remove graffiti from their properties as soon as possible. The City will also consider use of lighting and shrubbery to discourage placement of graffiti on its buildings and structures. 
(4)  Establishing a paint bank within the street department from which community-based groups or individuals may obtain paint, materials and other anti-graffiti supplies needed to remove graffiti. Local businesses and other potential donors shall be encouraged to contribute resources to the paint bank. 
(5)  Establishment of a reward program for information concerning graffiti vandals. 
(Ord. of 1-10-1996(3), § 6)  
Secs. 34-41—34-68. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MINORS 
 
Sec. 34-69. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)  10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the next day; 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6.00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and 
(3)  8:00 a.m. until 3:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday on days that the school in which the minor is enrolled is in session. 
Direct route means the shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any commercial establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural, adoptive or stepparent of a minor; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age or older authorized by a natural, adoptive or stepparent, or by a guardian, to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, any streets, alleys, highways, sidewalks, plazas, buildings, or other place used by or accessible to the public including, but not limited to, the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shops, and parking lots adjacent to commercial establishments. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; 
(2)  Walk, run, idle, wander, stroll, or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any public place or the premises of any commercial establishment; or 
(3)  Fail to leave any public place or the premises of any commercial establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, employee or other person in control of the premises of any commercial establishment. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. of 12-8-1993, § 1; Ord. of 1-10-1996(1), § 1)  
Sec. 34-70. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code (V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08), as amended, the Municipal Court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 34-71 and shall refer the minor to Juvenile Court. 
(Ord. of 12-8-1993, § 5; Ord. of 1-10-1996(1), § 3)  
Sec. 34-71. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense under this article if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any commercial establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense under this article if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any commercial establishment within the City during curfew hours in violation of the curfew imposed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense under this article if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the commercial establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. of 12-8-1993, § 2)  
Sec. 34-72. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 34-71 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate or intrastate transportation or transportation for which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route; 
(4)  Engaged in a lawful employment activity, or going to or returning home from a lawful employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in a medical visit; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(9)  Married or has been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code (V.T.C.A., Family Code § 31.001 et seq.); 
(10)  Acting at the direction of a peace officer; or 
(11)  Remaining in any public place or on the premises of any commercial establishment during the scheduled vacation of or on a holiday observed by the school in which the minor is enrolled; or that the minor has graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission to be absent from school, or be in a public place, from an authorized school official. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 34-71(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the commercial establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. of 12-8-1993, § 3)  
Sec. 34-73. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ascertain the: 
(1)  Age of the offender; 
(2)  Name and address of the offender; 
(3)  Name and address of the offender's parent or guardian, if the offender is a minor; 
(4)  Name of the school in which the minor is enrolled, if the violation of this article occurs between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday on days that schools are in session; 
(5)  Reason for being in public. 
(b)  The police officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the police officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 34-72 is present. 
(c)  If the police officer determines that a citation is warranted, the officer shall issue to the offender a Municipal Court class C misdemeanor citation and submit a copy of the citation to the Police Department. 
(d)  If the police officer issues a citation to a minor, the officer shall order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route, unless the minor has violated the 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. curfew on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday on days that the school in which the minor is enrolled is in session. If a minor has violated the 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. curfew on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday on days that the school in which the minor is enrolled is in session, the police officer, in addition to the issuance of a citation, shall turn the minor over to the school's truant officer. 
(e)  If the police officer issues a citation to a minor or the owner, operator or any employee of a commercial establishment, the officer shall send a letter by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the parent or guardian of the minor advising of the fact that the minor was found in violation of this article and received a Municipal Court misdemeanor citation. 
(Ord. of 12-8-1993, § 4)  
Chapter 35 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish clear and unambiguous regulations pertaining to recreational vehicles and recreational vehicles parks in the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as per V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212 and to promote thereby an attractive community. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 1.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means any person authorized by the licensee of a recreational vehicle park to operate or maintain such park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Building Official means the legally designated inspection authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the Building Official for the use of a building, structure and/or land when it is determined by him that the building, structure, and/or land complies with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
City Manager means the City Manager of the City of Pearsall or his designee. 
City official means the legally designated head of a City department or his authorized representative when acting in an official capacity. 
Common access route means a private way which affords the principal means of access to individual sites or auxiliary buildings. When a common access route is used as emergency vehicles access, the materials and design shall meet the minimum standards established by the Director of Public Works. 
Director of Public Works means the legally designated department head of the City's Public Works Department or his authorized representative. 
Driveway means a minor entranceway of the common access route within the park into an off-street parking area serving no more than two sites. 
Fire Chief means the legally designated Chief of the Fire Department of the City or his authorized representative. 
Hard-surface road means an asphalt or concrete road meeting the approval of the Director of Public Works. 
Internal street means the same as "common access route." 
License means a written license issued by the Building Official permitting a person to operate and maintain a recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder. 
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Park means recreational vehicle park. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trusts partnership, association or corporation. 
Plot plan means graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed used locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to the adjoining and to the boundary of the property. 
Police Chief means the legally designated Chief of the Police Department of the City or his authorized representative. 
Private street means the same as "common access route." 
Recreational vehicle means a portable home designed as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational and vacation uses. Such homes shall not exceed eight feet in width and 46 feet in length and shall be classified as a recreational vehicle whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed, and whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground; and shall also include pickup campers, converted buses, self-powered motor homes, tent trailers, and analogous temporary housing and accessory buildings. 
Recreational vehicle means any of the following while in use as a residence: 
(1)  Travel trailer means vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding the state maximum. 
(2)  Motor homes means a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation. 
(3)  Dependent trailer means a trailer which is dependent upon a service building for toilet and lavatory facilities. 
(4)  Self-contained trailer means a trailer which can operate independent of connections to sewer, water, and electric systems. It contains a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower, and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and sewage-holding tanks located within the trailer. 
Recreational vehicle park means a contiguous parcel of land licensed or used in whole or in part, with or without charges, for the parking of recreational vehicles occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes for any length of time. 
Service building means a structure housing toilets, lavatories, and such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a recreational vehicle to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the park. 
Sewer service riser pipe means the portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each site. 
Site plan means the same as "plot plan." 
Space means a plot of ground within the park designed for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle together with such open space as required by this chapter. The term "space" shall also include the terms "lot," "stand" and "site." 
Tow vehicle means a vehicle used to tow a recreational vehicle or a vehicle being towed by a recreational vehicle. 
Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a recreational vehicle. 
Water riser pipe means the portion of the private water service system servicing a recreational vehicle park which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a space. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 2.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-3. - General parking prohibition; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person for any reason to park or place a recreational vehicle within the City for a period longer than 72 hours. The provisions of this chapter shall not, however, apply to: 
(1)  Locations where recreational vehicles are manufactured and/or sold or stored by the manufacturer or seller. 
(2)  Temporary offices or display units as approved by the City Manager after written request. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles stored on lots in residential areas of the City, provided the owner lives in a house on the same lot or on a vacant lot and provided the owner of the recreational vehicle lives in a house located on one of the adjoining lots. 
(4)  A recreational vehicle located on a space in a recreational vehicle park duly licensed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Locations where the City Manager has granted a request to temporarily place recreational vehicles. The request shall be in written form signed by the property owner requesting a specified period of time for the recreational vehicle to be present, and it shall also address how utilities will be supplied to the recreational vehicle if applicable. With the request there shall also be provided a site plan showing the proposed location of recreational vehicles and any other structures on the property. 
In any event, a recreational vehicle shall not be parked on any street or parkway for the purpose of storage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 3.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-4. - License. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a recreational vehicle park within the corporate limits of the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless such person shall first obtain a license therefor. 
(1)  License fees. 
a.  The annual license fee for each recreational vehicle park is non-refundable and will be retained by the City to cover the cost of inspection and studies of subject property. 
b.  There shall be a fee for transfer of license. 
c.  Where a recreational vehicle park is to be operated in conjunction with a manufactured home park, all fees and requirements apply. 
(2)  Application for license. 
a.  Application for recreational vehicle license shall be filed with Building Official of the City. 
1.  Upon receipt of the properly completed application, plot plan, if required, and review fee, the Building Official shall review the plans with the appropriate City departments to determine conformance with the standards set out herein, and any amendments thereto. 
2.  After review, the Building Official shall notify the applicant of any revisions required, in writing. 
3.  Approval. Within 45 days of the date of submission of the recreational vehicle park plan, the Director of Planning shall submit the plan with his recommendation and comments received from other City departments and agencies to the Planning Commission for consideration. The Planning Commission may approve the plan as submitted, amend and approve the plan as amended, or disapprove the plan. If the recreational vehicle park plan is approved, the Director of Planning shall retain one copy on file in the Planning Department and distribute one copy to the Director of Building Inspections and other departments/agencies appropriate. 
4.  All existing recreational vehicle home parks are grandfathered relative to subsection (2)a.3 of this section. This does not excuse compliance with any and all setback requirements, conditional use requirements including tiedowns, skirting and duration. Any additions to the existing mobile home park triggers the compliance requirements of this chapter. 
5.  Upon approval of the application by the Building Official and other appropriate City departments, a permit for the operation of a recreational vehicle park shall be issued to the applicant, which shall be valid until December 31 of that year, at which time, application for renewal shall be made for the next calendar year. 
b.  Applications shall be in writing signed by the applicant or a duly authorized officer or agent of applicant and shall contain at least the following: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The location and legal description of the recreational vehicle park; 
3.  A complete plan of the park drawn to scale; 
4.  Plans and specifications of all buildings and improvements constructed or to be constructed within the recreational vehicle park; and 
5.  Such further information as may be requested by the Planning and Zoning Commission to enable it to determine if the recreational vehicle park will comply with legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 4.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-5. - Location. 
Recreational vehicle parks may be located only in an area zoned for such use under the provisions of the City Zoning Ordinance. No person shall park or occupy a recreational vehicle on any lot or tract of land not within a zoning district which permits recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 5.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-6. - Recreational vehicle park plan. 
(a)  The recreational vehicle park shall conform to the following requirements. 
(1)  The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded and equipped to insure rapid drainage and to be free from stagnant pools of water. The condition of the soil, groundwater, drainage and topography shall be such that is shall not create a hazard to the property or the health and safety of the occupants. Said plans shall be approved by City Engineer. 
(2)  Each park shall provide recreational vehicle parking spaces and each such space shall be clearly defined. Twenty percent of the parking spaces shall be not less than 18 feet by 50 feet. There must be at least a ten-foot clearance of space between adjacent rows of parking spaces. 
(3)  The entrance to the park shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. 
(4)  Hard-surface private streets adequate to provide access to each recreational vehicle space shall be constructed and maintained in good condition by the licensee and the width of which shall be not less than 24 feet. 
(5)  The park shall comply with State and Federal standards for accessible for the mobility impaired. The applicant shall show proof of compliance. 
(6)  Streets within the recreational vehicle park shall be private streets and shall be maintained by the recreational vehicle park owner or licensee/agent. 
(b)  Recreational vehicle stands or pads shall: 
(1)  Be improved with compacted crushed road base material and asphalt or concrete adequate to support the weight of the recreational vehicle. 
(2)  Not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under the weight of the recreational vehicle due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure. 
(c)  Each park shall provide the following unisex toilet and shower facilities. 
(1)  Two toilets, lavatories or wash basins and shower or bathtub for every 100 sites with an additional one bathroom facility for each 100 sites or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Each toilet room provided for men shall have, in addition, one urinal stall. 
(3)  Each toilet room shall have a sewer dump-station outside. 
(4)  All toilets, basins, showers and bathtubs shall be placed in properly constructed buildings located not more than 300 feet from each recreational vehicle site. Such buildings shall be well lighted and ventilated at all times. Openings shall be screened with wire of not less than 14 meshes to the square inch and shall be constructed of such moisture-proof material as to permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning, scouring and washing. Floors shall be of concrete or some similar material and elevated not less than four inches above grade. Each room shall be provided with floor drainage. 
(5)  When unisex bathrooms are used where toilet, shower and lavatory are in one separate enclosed unit, at least one bathroom per ten spaces must be provided. 
(6)  All unisex bathrooms shall comply with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(d)  Each parking space or pad shall be equipped with water, sewer and electrical hookups which shall conform to all applicable codes or ordinances of the City. 
(e)  Hard-surface walkways not less than 36 inches wide shall be provided from the recreational vehicle spaces or from the streets, as the case may be to the service buildings. 
(f)  All street and walkways shall be lighted at night. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to ensure an average illumination level of not less than 0.2 footcandles. 
(g)  Service buildings. 
(1)  Service buildings shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating electrical, plumbing, bas and mechanical installations. 
(2)  All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 6.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-7. - Garbage receptacles. 
(a)  Each recreational vehicle park shall provide a minimum of two fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof dumpsters for the first 100 sites with the one additional dumpster for each 100 sites or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and cleaning around them. 
(c)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the recreational vehicle park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard. 
(d)  The dumpster shall be screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 7.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-8. - Fuel. 
(a)  Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual recreational vehicle spaces unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. 
(b)  Bottled bas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place. 
(c)  No cylinders containing bottled gas shall be located in a recreational vehicle or within five feet of a door thereof. 
(d)  State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil shall apply. 
(e)  All applicable provisions of the ordinances of the City regulating the use of liquefied gas must be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 8.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-9. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Every park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size and number and so located within the park as to satisfy the fire code and other applicable regulations of the City. 
(b)  No open fires shall be permitted, except that this shall not be construed to prevent barbecuing with charcoal in an approved pit or grill. 
(c)  All sites and any part of a recreational vehicle shall not exceed 150 feet from the hard-surface streets. 
(d)  Storage and handling of flammable liquids. In parks in which gasoline, fuel, oil, or other flammable liquids are stored or dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with the City fire code. 
(e)  Access to sites for firefighting. Approaches to all sites shall be kept for firefighting personnel and equipment. 
(f)  Firefighting instruction. The park owner or agent shall be responsible for the instruction of his staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of fire. 
(g)  Water supply facilities for Fire Department operations. 
(1)  Water supply facilities for Fire Department operations shall be connected to the City public water supply system. 
(2)  The park owner shall provide standard, City-approved fire hydrants located within 500 feet of all sites, measured along the path of travel using driveways and/or streets. When fire hydrants are required, the water mains and fire hydrants shall be dedicated to the City after construction of improvements is performed to the City engineering standards and approved by the Director of Public Works. The water mains and fire hydrants, when located on private property, shall be in a dedicated utility easements of the size set by the Director of Public Works adequate to service said lines and hydrants after all development has accrued. 
(h)  Dry vegetation. The park licensee or agent shall be responsible for maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 9.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-10. - Supervision. 
(a)  The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable with the licensee for the violation of any provision of the ordinance to which the licensee is subject. 
(b)  The licensee or agent shall operate the park in compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and its equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this ordinance and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under the ordinance. 
(d)  The licensee or agent shall maintain a register or park occupancy which shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of park residents; including background checks of each tenant of the Recreational Vehicle Park; 
(2)  License number of recreational vehicle and/or tow vehicle; 
(3)  Location of each recreational vehicle within the park by space or lot number, and 
(4)  Dates of arrival and departure. 
(e)  A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of each year and the older register is retired, but the old register shall be retained on the premises for at least three (3) years following the retirement. 
(f)  Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by an official of the City whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 10.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-11. - Inspection. 
(a)  The Building Official, Building Inspector, the Fire Chief, and the Police Chief are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The Building Official, Building Inspector, the Fire Chief, and the Police Chief shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  The Building Official, Building Inspector, the Fire Chief, and the Police Chief shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the park. 
(d)  Notices, hearings and orders. 
(1)  Notice of violation. Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the City shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
a.  Be in writing; 
b.  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
c.  Allow ten days for compliance; 
d.  Be served upon the licensee or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been served in person or sent by certified mail to his last known address; 
e.  Contain an outline of remedial action that, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
f.  After all procedures outlined above are exhausted, citations may be issued. 
If the City mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (d)(1) of this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(2)  Appeal from notice. Any person affected by any notice that has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter applicable to such park may request a hearing before the City Manager; provided that such person shall file within ten days after the day the notice was served, in the City Secretary's office, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds thereof. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council. The filing request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Issuance of order. After such hearing, the City Manager shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the notice of violation, which order shall be served by certified mail upon the petitioner. Any failure to comply with an order sustaining or modifying the finding of a violation shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation of the license of the park affected by the order. 
(4)  Order without notice. Whenever the City finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the designated official may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring the action to be taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, such order shall be effective immediately, but upon written petition to the City the person affected by the order shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsection (d)(3) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 11.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-12. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The City Manager may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  After such conviction, a new license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 12.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-13. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, except, however, where a different penalty has been established by State law for such offense, the penalty shall be that fixed by State law; and each and every day said violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 14.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-14. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any of the requirements of this chapter, if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Commission that any of the requirements, if complied with, would cause undue hardship on any applicant for a license hereunder or licensee hereunder, and that such requirements would not be for the best interest and general welfare of the City and the citizens affected by this chapter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may waive such requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 16.0, 9-20-2011)  
Sec. 35-15. - Provisional requirements as adopted by City Council on September 6, 2011. 
(a)  RV requirements outside of City limits. Recreational vehicles outside the City limits shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All water lines provided by the City are to meet TCEQ regulations for water line installations. 
(2)  Sewer systems are to meet all applicable standards and procedures. 
(3)  A six-foot wooden privacy fence is required. 
(4)  All plans must be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval. 
(5)  Thirty-foot setback spacing between RVs is required. 
(6)  Agreement that property owners will not exceed the number of hookups per TCEQ requirements and the City Engineer. 
(7)  Agreement by property owners to voluntary annexation. 
(8)  Agreement to be signed by City Attorney and property owners. 
(9)  Agreement that utilities may be deactivated, by the City, in the event of failure to comply with set requirements. 
(b)  RV requirements inside of City limits. Recreational vehicles inside the City limits shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All water lines provided by the City are to meet TCEQ regulations for water line installations. 
(2)  The sewer system is to meet all City requirements. 
(3)  A six-foot wooden privacy fence is required. 
(4)  All plans must be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval. 
(5)  Agreement that property owners will not exceed the number of hookups per TCEQ requirements and the City Engineer. 
(6)  Paved entry and exit. 
(7)  Noise ordinance to be abided by. 
(8)  Must comply with mobile home rules, regulations, and setbacks set forth in chapter 26. 
(9)  Must comply with all zoning and conditional use requirements. 
(10)  Agreement to be signed by the City Attorney and property owners. 
(11)  Agreement that utilities may be deactivated, by the City, in the event of failure to comply with set requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09-128, § 17.0, 9-20-2011)  
Chapter 36 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of home rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; alternative method for municipal street improvements and assessments, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 313.001 et seq.; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the City. 
Parade means any parade, march, demonstration, public assemblage, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park, alley, or plaza or other public thoroughfare in the City. 
Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 2)  
Sec. 36-20. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Parade Ordinance of the City of Pearsall." 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 1)  
Sec. 36-21. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 3)  
Sec. 36-22. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days before the proposed parade date. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
b.  If the parade is to be held for or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
c.  If the parade is to be held by or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file a writing from that other person showing authority to make the application; 
d.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
e.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
f.  The proposed route, the initial starting point and the disbanding area; 
g.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals; and description of the vehicles; 
h.  The time when such parade will start and terminate; 
i.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be used; 
j.  The location, by streets, of any assembly areas for such parade; 
k.  The time at which the units of the parade will arrive at the assembly area; 
l.  The interval of space to be maintained between the units of such parade, and the estimated time past a given point; 
m.  Any other information which the Chief of Police shall find necessary under the standards for issuance, hereinafter set forth in section 36-23. 
(3)  Late applications. The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown, may consider any application filed after the deadline prescribed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 4)  
Sec. 36-23. - Standards for issuance. 
The Chief of Police is instructed to uniformly treat each application in a just, fair, and nondiscriminatory manner bearing in mind that the time, place, duration and manner of use of the streets, parks and other public ways and places for parades shall be subordinate to the public safety, comfort and convenience, the maintenance of order and avoidance of congestion. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application, he finds that the: 
(1)  Conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic near its route; 
(2)  Conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the line of movement and the areas near there as to prevent normal police protection to the City; 
(3)  Conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the City other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas near there; 
(4)  Concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas near such assembly areas; 
(5)  Conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  Conduct of the parade is not likely to cause injury to persons or property, to result in or to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  Parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 5)  
Sec. 36-24. - Notice of denial. 
The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within ten days after filing thereof. If the Chief does not approve the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action stating the reasons for his denial of permit. Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the City Council. The Council shall hear same as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 6)  
Sec. 36-25. - Alternative permit. 
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 7)  
Sec. 36-26. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 8)  
Sec. 36-27. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 9)  
Sec. 36-28. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with, any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 10)  
Sec. 36-29. - Revocation of permit. 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in section 36-23. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1985(1), § 11)  
Chapter 38 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a way which extends only secondary means of access to abutting property; a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streams, streets, railroad rights-of-way, parks, etc., or a combination thereof. 
Building setback line means the line within a property defining the minimum permissable horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street right-of-way line. 
Commission means The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
Comprehensive general plan or general plan means a statement of public policy containing the goals and objectives of the community, the Capital Improvements Program, the Land Use Plan, the Major Thoroughfare Plan, the Community Facilities Plan, the subdivision and zoning regulations, and other development codes, ordinances, policies, and plans promulgated by the City Council for the quality and orderly growth of the community. 
Crosswalk way means a public right-of-way, six feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
Dead-end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
Easement means a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific use. 
Engineer means a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineer. 
Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved open space, and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed on record. When the context so requires, the term "lot" may mean any tract of land occupied, or to be occupied, by a building and its accessory buildings, and including such open spaces as are required by the Zoning chapter. 
Office. Any office being referred to in this chapter by title means the person employed or appointed by the City in that position, or his duly authorized representative. 
Pavement width means the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the face or curbs. 
Planner, Land or City, means a person having an occupation classified as city or land planning, capable of designing the proposed subdivision, or use of real estate, and capable of professionally drawing the proposals into map or plan form. 
Setback or building line means a line on a plat parallel, or nearly so, to either the street right-of-way or the property boundary in the case of any side and rear setback, indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected. 
Street means any public thoroughfare or right-of-way, dedicated to the public and not designated as an alley, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land: 
(1)  An arterial street primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the City. 
(2)  A collector street primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial areas. 
(3)  Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)  Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Structure means anything constructed, erected, or placed on the ground including, but without limitation to, the following: buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, mobile homes, and other similar items. 
Subdivider means any person or any agency thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision, as that term is defined herein. In any event, subdivider shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided. 
Subdivision means a division of a lot, tract or parcel of land situated within the corporate limits, or within the City's statutory extraterritorial jurisdiction, into two or more parts, lots or sites for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership or building development. The term "subdivision" includes resubdivision of land or lots which are partially for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of five acres or more and not involving any new street, alley, or easement of access. Lots of five acres or less are presumed to be for residential purposes unless the land is restricted to nonresidential uses on the final plat and all deeds and contracts for deeds. 
Surveyor means a licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by the State Statutes, to practice the profession of surveying. 
Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be constructed in accordance with the Zoning chapter, or applicable ordinances of the City, or in the absence of such ordinances, then in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 4)  
Sec. 38-2. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter within the corporate limits of the City shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $200.00. Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 20)  
Sec. 38-3. - Authority. 
This article is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, including particularly chapters 231, acts of the 40th Legislature, Regular Session, 1927, as heretofore or hereafter amended (compiled as article 974a, V.A.C.S.), and the provisions of section 4 of the Municipal Annexation Act as heretofore or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 38-4. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the orderly, safe, and healthful development of the area within the City and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction area surrounding the City, and to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. Such purpose is to be promoted by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit subdivision of lands for uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which, with reasonably anticipated improvements, will cause excessive increases in flood heights, volumes, or velocities. 
(2)  Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards by prohibiting the subdivision of unprotected flood hazard flood lands, requiring that flood hazard areas be delineated on the final plat, and areas not suitable for development be subject to deed restrictions. 
(3)  Guide, assist and expedite the developer in correct procedures to inform them of the general standards which shall be required. 
(4)  Protect the public interests by controlling the location, design, class and type of streets, sidewalks, utilities and essential services required. 
(5)  Provide for the public welfare and the essential areas required for educational, recreational, industrial and commercial purposes. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 2)  
Sec. 38-5. - Conformance to general plan; interpretation. 
(a)  Conformance to general plan. no plat, subdivision or land within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as determined by article 974a and 970a, V.A.C.S., shall be approved unless it conforms to the general plan of said City and its streets, alleys, easements, parks, playgrounds, and public utility facilities, including those which have been or may be laid out, and to the general plan for the extension of said City and of its roads, streets, alleys, easements, and public highways, regard being had for access to public utilities. 
(b)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 3)  
Sec. 38-6. - Policies and special provisions. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued by the City for the installation of septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision. Approval of any such installation is either a County or State function. 
(b)  No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been complied with in full. 
(c)  The City shall not repair, maintain, install, provide or accept for dedication to the public any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(d)  The City shall not sell or supply any water, sewerage, or natural gas service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(e)  The City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article, or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the City or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as such jurisdiction is determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this article. 
(f)  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, and the City Council shall pass a resolution reciting the fact that the provisions of subsections (a) to (d) of this section have not been complied with, the City Clerk shall, when directed by the City, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the City to be filed in the deed records of the county in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are later secured by the developer after the filing of such resolution, the City Clerk shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed records of such county stating that subsections (a) to (d) of this section have been complied with. 
(g)  Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of building, repair, plumbing, or electrical permits with respect to any lots or building tract, nor prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to, or abutting, any lot, in these instances: where the last recorded conveyance of such lot or tract prior to passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was by metes and bounds; or where a building was in existence on said lot prior to passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; or where such subdivision, whether by recorded plat or by actual occupancy and use, was in existence prior to passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 5(5-1)—(5-7))  
Sec. 38-7. - Land suitability. 
(a)  No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable for its intended use by the City Engineer for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, susceptibility to mudslides or earth slides, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities or any other feature harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or community. 
(b)  However, the Commission and the City Council may approve the preliminary and final plats if the subdivider improves the land consistent with the standards of this chapter and other applicable ordinances to make the area, in the opinion of the two bodies, suitable for its intended use. The two bodies may also approve the preliminary and final plats if the subdivider agrees to make suitable improvements and places a sum in escrow, pursuant to section 38-93, to guarantee performance. 
(c)  In determining the appropriateness of land subdivision at the site, the two bodies shall consider the objectives of this chapter; and: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to the increased flood heights, volumes, or velocities caused by subdivision fill, roads, and intended uses. Considerations will be given to any lot subdivision's increased runoff diversions or impoundment of flows. 
(2)  The danger that intended uses may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(3)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions under flood conditions. 
(4)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(5)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed subdivision and land uses. 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed uses with existing development and adjacent area development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed subdivision to the comprehensive general plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for emergency vehicles. 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at, to and from the site. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 5(5-8))  
Sec. 38-8. - Approval required. 
(a)  All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in building lots, and the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of the land fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, and plans and descriptions of all streets, alleys, or public ways intended to be deeded or dedicated for public use, or for the use or purchasers or owners of the land fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, which is not intended to be platted into lots or other designated tracts, or any addition or plan of streets or public ways located outside the City limits, within the County, and entirely or in part within the statutory extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its consideration with relation to the comprehensive general plan and its recommendation shall then be submitted to the City Council for its official consideration and action, and no such plat or replat or dedication or deed of street or public way shall be filed with the County Clerk as provided by law until such plat or replat or dedication or deed shall have endorsed on it the fact that it has first been submitted to the Planning Commission and to the City Council, and by said City Council duly approved. 
(b)  A preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for approval before the subdivider proceeds with the preparation of the final plat for record. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 5(5-9)  
Sec. 38-9. - Variances. 
(a)  The Commission and City Council may authorize a variance from this chapter when, in its collective opinion, undue hardships will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings required in subsection (b) of this section, the Commission and City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health. The City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted unless it is found: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions, including unique topography, affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the legal property rights of its owner; 
(3)  The purposes and intent of this chapter are observed; 
(4)  There is no increase in the flood hazard or flood damage potential either at the subject property, or upstream or downstream from the subject property; 
(5)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to the legal rights that other property owners enjoy in the area; and 
(6)  That the granting of the variance will not prevent the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such findings, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the City Council's meeting at which such variance is granted. A variance may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Financial hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not constitute undue hardship. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 6)  
Sec. 38-10. - Dedication of right-of-way width; variance. 
(a)  Dedication of right-of-way width (existing streets). 
(1)  Subdivisions adjacent to any existing State-maintained street, road or highway. The subdivider shall be required to dedicate on the plat 25 feet of right-of-way width adjacent to the land being platted. No additional pavement shall be required on existing streets where the dedications are required. 
(2)  Streets proposed on City Thoroughfare Plan. Where subdivisions are adjacent to a street, road or highway shown on the City Thoroughfare Plan, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate on the plat one-half of the right-of-way width (as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan) of the street, road or highway that is adjacent to the land being platted. The developer shall not be required to construct any portion of the street. 
(b)  Variance. 
(1)  Party who may appeal. Any subdivider who feels aggrieved by the implementation of the requirements of this section may file a written request for variance to the Planning Commission by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(2)  Planning Commission. Upon requiring a request, the variance shall be placed on the next available Planning Commission agenda. The Planning Commission may affirm the requirements of this section in whole or part or waive the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Criteria for review. The Planning Commission shall uphold this section if it finds the City Engineer has established by a preponderance of the evidence that a nexus exists between the exaction required by this section and the impact of the development and that such exaction is roughly proportional to that impact. Should the Planning Commission find that, based upon the above criteria, some exaction, less than that which is required by this section, is appropriate, the Planning Commission shall reduce the required dedication accordingly. Should the Planning Commission find that, based upon the above criteria, that a development shall have no impact on City infrastructure, the Planning Commission shall waive the requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11-01, §§ 1, 2, 11-18-2014)  
Secs. 38-11—38-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 
 
Sec. 38-37. - Preliminary conference. 
Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider, his planner, or representative, should consult with and present a proposed plan of subdivision to the Commission and City Staff for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications, and standards required by the City for the subdivision of land. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 7)  
Sec. 38-38. - Preliminary plat and accompanying data. 
(a)  General. The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat by a surveyor or engineer in accordance with this article; plat may be prepared in conjunction with a land planner. 
(b)  Time for filing and copies required. The subdivider shall file six blue or black line copies of the plat together with a reproducible copy of the original, with the City Engineer, at least 30 days prior to the date at which formal application for the preliminary plat approval is made to the Commission. 
(c)  Filing fees. Such plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee as determined by resolution by the City Council. No action by the Commission and the City Council shall be valid until the filing fee has been paid. This fee shall not be refunded should the subdivider fail to make formal application for preliminary plat approval or should the plat be finally disapproved by the City Council. 
(d)  Formal application. Formal application for preliminary plat approval shall be made by the subdivider in writing to the Commission at an official public meeting. 
(e)  Form and content. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one inch. When more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. The plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the subdivider, record of owner of land to be subdivided, engineer and/or surveyor preparing the map, and name and address of the designer of the plat. 
(2)  Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision currently located within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(3)  Names and general land use of contiguous subdivisions, and the owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land, and a statement with appropriate references as to whether or not contiguous properties are platted and how they are used. 
(4)  Description, by metes and bounds, of the subdivision boundaries. 
(5)  Primary survey control points locations shall be shown. Descriptions and ties to such control points from which all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers, and similar data are referred shall be shown. Such control point designations shall meet all requirements of the appropriate State Statutes. 
(6)  Subdivision boundary lines should be indicated by heavy lines, and the acreage of the subdivision shown. 
(7)  Existing conditions as follows: 
a.  The exact location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. 
b.  The exact location, dimensions, description, and flow line of existing watercourses and drainage structures within the subdivision or on contiguous tracts. 
c.  Zoning district classification (if there is more than one classification, the dividing lines should be shown) on land to be subdivided and on adjoining lands. 
d.  Flood hazard areas. 
(8)  The exact location, dimensions, description, and name of all proposed streets, street grades and cross sections, alleys, drainage structures, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements, or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision. 
(9)  Date of preparation, actual and graphic scale of plat, and north arrow. 
(10)  Topographic information shall include contour lines on a basis of five vertical feet in terrain with a slope of two percent or more, and on a basis of one vertical foot in terrain with a slope of less than two percent. 
(11)  Preliminary plan of any required onsite waste disposal systems, including disposal sites for lands subject to flooding or sanitary sewers with grade, pipe size, and points of discharge. 
(12)  Proposed fill or other structure elevating techniques, levees, channel modifications, and other methods to overcome flood or erosion-related hazards. 
(13)  Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for open space or recreation use. 
(14)  Draft of proposed restrictive covenants, if any, to be imposed and areas subject to special restrictions. 
(15)  A number or letter to identify each lot or site on each block. 
(16)  Building setback lines on fronts of all lots and sites. Side and any rear yard building setback lines, street intersections and crosswalk ways. 
(17)  Vicinity sketch or map, at some appropriate scale, which shall show existing subdivisions, street easements, rights-of-way, parks and public facilities of water, and possible storm sewer, water, gas, electric and sanitary sewer connections by owners. 
(f)  Processing of preliminary plat. 
(1)  The City Staff, as specified hereafter, shall check the preliminary plat as to its conformity with adopted General Plan, major street plan, land use plan, zoning districts, and the standards and specifications set forth herein or referred to herein, or to other pertinent policies and standards of the City. 
(2)  Pertinent copies of the preliminary plat data shall be submitted to the City Engineer, and he shall check the same for conformity with standards and specifications contained or referred to herein. The City Engineer, Planning Director or Commission may require the applicant to submit additional topographic information, detailed plans for proposed uses and other information to determine possible flood or erosion hazards, the effect of the subdivision uses upon flood flows, and the adequacy of proposed flood protection measures. The City Engineer, Planning Director, or Commission may require the applicant to submit additional topographic information, detailed plans for proposed uses and other information to determine possible flood or erosion hazards; the effect of the subdivision uses upon flood flows and the adequacy of proposed flood protection measures. The City Engineer, Planning Director or Commission may consult with expert persons or agencies for technical assistance and advice. 
(3)  Mandatory referral. All proposed preliminary plats and subdivisions of land within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be submitted by the developer to the Commission for referral review, and comment by the various governmental departments and the Independent School District, and utility service companies. 
(4)  The City Engineer and/or Planning Director shall return the preliminary plat and accompanying data to the Commission with his recommendations as to modifications, additions, or alterations of such plat data. 
(5)  In addition, as a minimum, the following checks of the preliminary plat shall be made by: 
a.  The Engineering Department: 
1.  Drainage. 
2.  Street layout and proposed street grades. 
3.  Type of paving. 
4.  Boundary lines. 
5.  Monuments and benchmarks. 
6.  Location and size of alleys. 
7.  Availability of adequate water and sewer mains to the subdivision. 
8.  Water system layout and fire hydrant locations. 
9.  Sanitary sewer easements. 
b.  The Building Inspector: Occupancy regulations and requirements. 
c.  The Zoning Administrators: 
1.  Building lines and setback requirements. 
2.  Zoning requirements and regulations. 
d.  The Tax Department: 
1.  Lot and block numbers. 
2.  Street numbering layout. 
3.  Street names. 
(6)  Within 30 days after the preliminary plat is formally filed with the City Engineer, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council to approve; disapprove the preliminary plat; or conditionally approve it with modifications. 
(7)  The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendations to the City Council at its next regular meeting in such a timeframe that permits the City Council to receive the recommendations at least ten days before said meeting. 
(8)  The City Council shall approve or disapprove any preliminary plat submitted to it within 15 days from the date of submission. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute final acceptance of the final plat. 
(9)  Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall be deemed an expression of general approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer, and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final more detailed or recorded plat. 
(10)  Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for no more than six months until the final plat is filed for approval and unless reviewed by the Planning Commission in the light of new or significant information which would necessitate a revision of the preliminary plat. If the Planning Commission should deem changes in a preliminary plat as necessary, it shall so inform the subdivider in writing. 
(11)  If no development has occurred which would affect the proposed plat within six months of the effective approval of the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission may, with concurrence of the City Council and upon the application of the subdivider, extend the approval for an additional six months. At the end of this six months extension, the preliminary approval is revoked in writing by the City to the subdivider. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 8)  
Sec. 38-39. - Final plat. 
(a)  Form and content. 
(1)  The final plat and accompanying data shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved or conditionally approved by the Commission and the City Council, incorporating any and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions recommended by the Commission and the City Council. 
(2)  The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to one inch. Where more than one sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. 
(3)  The final plat shall be submitted in an original and four copies and shall contain all of the features required for preliminary plats in section 38-38, and it shall be accompanied by site improvement data bearing the seal of an engineer or a registered public surveyor. 
(4)  The final plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee per plat. No action by the Commission and the City Council shall be valid until the filing fee has been paid. This fee shall not be refunded should the subdivider fail to make formal application for final plat approval or should the plat be disapproved by the Commission and the City Council. 
(5)  In addition to the various requirements for the preliminary plat, the final plat shall also include the following: 
a.  The exact location, dimensions, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public right-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii, area, and central angles, degree of curvature, tangent distance and length of all curves where appropriate. 
b.  The exact location, dimensions, description and name of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, other public areas, reservation, easements, or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii, area and central angles, degree of curvature where appropriate. 
c.  Regulatory flood elevations, boundaries of floodprone areas, building sites, including waste disposal areas for floodprone lands, fills, flood or erosion protective works, and areas subject to special deed restrictions. 
(6)  The final plat shall also include the following: 
a.  The owner's acknowledgement: 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I (We), the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the ___________ addition of the City of Pearsall and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements, and public places thereon shown for the purpose of consideration therein stated. Given under my hand and seal of office this the ___ day of ________, 20___. 
	_____
NOTARY PUBLIC 
	_____ COUNTY, TEXAS 
 
This owner's acknowledgement may be omitted if there is also filed with the plat a dedication deed adopting such plat as a part thereof, executed by said owner in recordable form, and incorporating therein all of the pertinent provisions of such owner's acknowledgement. 
b.  Certification by the Chairman of the Planning Commission: 
I, the undersigned, Chairman of the Planning Commission of the City of Pearsall, hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of this City, wherein my approval is required. 
_____
DATE 	_____
CHAIRMAN, PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
c.  Certification of the Surveyor responsible for surveying the subdivision area, attesting to its accuracy: 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I, the undersigned, a (registered professional engineer/public surveyor) in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey on the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
(Engineer's or Surveyor's Seal) 	________ 
Date 

_____
Registered Professional Engineer or 
Registered Public Surveyor 	
 
d.  Certification by the Engineer (or Registered Public Surveyor) responsible for the preparation of the final plat and supporting data, attesting to its accuracy: 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I, the undersigned, a registered professional engineer (or a registered public surveyor) in the State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering consideration has been given this plat. 
(Engineer's Seal 
   or 
Surveyor's Seal) 	_____
Registered Professional Engineer 
Registered Public Surveyor 
 
e.  Certification by the Planner responsible for the preparation of the subdivision plan and supporting data, attesting to its conformance to the general plan, as amended: 
State of Texas 
County of _______ 
I, the undersigned, a professional land or city planner in the State of Texas, hereby certify that proper planning consideration has been given the proposed subdivision plan and its constituent parts, and that it conforms with the City's general plan. 
_____
Professional Planner 	________ 
Date 
 
(b)  Processing of final plat. 
(1)  If desired by the subdivider and approved by the Commission, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop; however, such portion shall conform to all the requirements of this article. 
(2)  As soon as possible after the subdivider is notified of the approval of the preliminary plat, he or his engineer shall submit to the Commission at an official public meeting the final plat of the subdivision or portion thereof. 
(3)  No final plat will be considered unless the preliminary plat has been submitted and approved; however, if an approved plat has been duly recorded and the subdivider wishes to increase the size of the lots by combining one lot with a portion of the adjacent lot in such manner that no portion of a lot remains smaller than the original lots, an additional preliminary plat will not be necessary. 
(4)  Within 15 days after the final plat is formally filed, the Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of such plat to the City Council. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the plat within 15 days from the date of submission of the plat to it. 
(5)  If the final plat is disapproved, the Commission shall inform the subdivider in writing of the reasons at the time such action was taken. 
(6)  After the final plat has been finally approved, the Commission shall cause the final plat to be recorded with the County Clerk. The Commission shall also cause the check or checks final plat was filed for approval to be delivered with the final plat to the County Clerk. 
(7)  Approval of the final plat by the Commission shall not constitute the acceptance by the public of the dedication of any roads, drainageways, floodways, public way or other ground unless the Commission specifically agrees to such acceptance. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 9; Ord. of 8-30-2004)  
Secs. 38-40—38-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 38-67. - Compliance required. 
No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the Commission, and no completed improvements shall be accepted by the City unless they conform to the following standards and specifications: 
(1)  General. 
a.  Conformity with comprehensive general plan. The subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive general plan of the City and parts thereof. 
b.  Provision for future subdivisions. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow for the opening of future streets. 
c.  Reserve strips prohibited. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use. 
(2)  Building site improvements. 
a.  Subdivision approval. No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if proposed subdivision development in an established flood hazard area will individually or collectively, significantly increase flood flows, heights, or damages. 
b.  Building sites not permitted in flood hazard areas. Building sites, residences, motels, resorts, and similar uses for human occupation shall not be permitted in established flood hazard areas. 
c.  Building sites outside of flood hazard areas. Building sites for structures other than residences outside of established flood hazard areas shall ordinarily be filled as provided in the City's codes and ordinances controlling such activities. The City Council may, after consultation and after study by the Planning Commission, allow subdivision of areas for commercial and industrial use within an established flood hazard area if the subdivider protects the areas to an elevation equal to that of land nearest above the regulatory flood protection. 
d.  Limited development. When the City Council determines, based on study by the Planning Commission, that only part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall require that the method of development be consistent with its determination. 
e.  Deed restrictions. When the subdivider does not intend to develop the plat himself, and the City Engineer determines that limitations are required to ensure safe development, the City Council may require the subdivider to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on the face of the final recorded plat. 
f.  Floor level of buildings. Floor level of the buildings are to be a minimum of 12 inches above the top of the nearest curb and gutter, the grade of which to be approved by the City. 
(3)  Streets. 
a.  Street layout. 
1.  Adequate and paved streets shall be provided by the subdivider and the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of each shall conform to the comprehensive general plan of the City and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood. 
2.  There shall be at least 100 feet of straight street between reverse curves. 
b.  Relation to adjoining street system. Where necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued, and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith. 
c.  Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provisions for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas. 
d.  Street jags. Street jags with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited. 
e.  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly as right angles as practicable giving due regard to terrain, topography, site distances, and safety. No intersecting street shall be platted with the angle included between adjoining street lines less than 75 degrees, nor more than 105 degrees. 
f.  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as short stubs to permit future expansion. 
g.  Culs-de-sac. In general, culs-de-sac shall not exceed 500 feet in length, and shall have a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter (R.O.W.) with a pavement diameter of 80 feet in residential areas, and shall have a turnaround not less than 200 feet in diameter (R.O.W.) with a pavement diameter of 180 feet in commercial and industrial areas. 
h.  Streets on comprehensive general plan. Where a subdivision includes a street as shown on the major streets plan of the City, that street shall be platted of the approximate location shown on the plan. The right-of-way shall be equal to or greater than that indicated on the Comprehensive Plan for Streets. 
i.  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by fast and through traffic. 
j.  Pavement widths and rights-of-way of thoroughfares. 
1.  Major and secondary thoroughfares shall have right-of-way widths and pavement widths as shown in typical street cross sections of the major streets plan. The City Council, after receiving recommendations from the Commission, may require a minimum right-of-way width of not more than 100 feet in those cases where such additional width is considered advisable in the opinion of Legislative Body. 
2.  Collector streets shall have a right-of-way and a pavement width as specified in the City's major streets plan. 
3.  Residential streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet and a minimum paved width of 33 feet. 
k.  Pavement widths and rights-of-way of streets forming boundary. Pavement widths and rights-of-way of streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision (adjacent) shall be as follows: 
1.  Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half-street that does not conform to subsection (3)j of this section, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make the full right-of-way width conform to subsection (3)j of this section, and there shall be paved so much of the right-of-way as to make the full pavement width comply with subsection (3)j of this section. Before any pavement is laid to widen existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut back two feet to ensure an adequate subbase and pavement joint. 
2.  No half-streets will be permitted in new subdivision plats. 
l.  Curbs and gutters. Curbs shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior streets, and on the subdivision side of all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. 
m.  Street construction. Materials and workmanship shall conform with City standards for comparable construction. 
n.  Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets, unless the new streets are a continuation of or in alignment with existing streets, in which case names of existing streets shall be used. Street signs that conform to City standards shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider. 
o.  Street patterns. Streets shall be platted with appropriate regard to natural and topographic features so as to lend themselves to attractive treatment. 
p.  Determining compliance. The City Engineer and Commission may require, where necessary, profiles and elevations of streets to determine compliance with this requirement. 
(4)  Alleys. 
a.  Width and paving. Alleys shall be provided at the rear of all lots intended to be used for business purposes and may be provided in residential areas, shall generally be parallel to the street, shall not be less than 20 feet wide and shall be paved in business areas under City engineering standards. The right-of-way for alleys shall be dedicated to the public. 
b.  Intersecting alleys or utility easements. Where two alleys or utility easements intersect, or where an alley or utility easement turns at a right angle, a cutoff of not less than ten feet from the normal intersection of the property or easement line shall be provided along each property or easement line. 
c.  Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted. 
d.  Alleys which do not connect on a straight course. If alleys are not themselves straight within each block, or if the same do not connection a straight course with the alleys or adjoining blocks, then all necessary easements shall be provided for the placing of guy wires in order to support poles set on curving or deviating rights-of-way of alleys. 
(5)  Sidewalks. 
a.  Expense of installation. Sidewalks shall be installed, at the expense of the subdividers. 
b.  Required when lot improved. No sidewalk is required until a lot is improved, but at the time such improvements are constructed, a sidewalk complying with the provisions hereof shall be provided at the front of such lot, and also along the street side of corner lots. 
c.  Width material requirement. All sidewalks shall be not less than four feet in width and shall be of concrete, stone, or masonry construction. 
d.  Parallel to street. Sidewalks shall parallel the street, insofar as possible. 
e.  Uniformity. As site conditions vary, sidewalks may be placed immediately adjacent to the street and next to the curb, when the street is paved, or at the property line (providing a place for street landscaping), at the option of the subdivider; but all sidewalks in a subdivision shall be uniform in this respect. 
f.  Additional sidewalks. Additional sidewalks shall be provided as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission in commercial, industrial, public, and multifamily areas; and such additional sidewalks as the subdivider may desire shall be permitted. 
(6)  Water installation. 
a.  Water supply and distribution. 
1.  All subdivisions shall be provided with a water distribution system approved by the City Engineer and be under the supervision and control of ___________. 
2.  All water systems located in floodprone areas, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed to above the flood protection elevations. 
3.  If there is an existing public water supply system on or near the subdivision, the City may require the subdivider to connect to this system. 
4.  Water mains shall not be less than six inches in diameter in residential areas and eight inches in commercial and industrial areas. 
b.  Fire hydrants. Standard fire hydrants shall be installed as part of the water distribution system per specifications of the City Engineer and of the State Board of Insurance. 
(7)  Sewer facilities and waste disposal. 
a.  Connection approval. All subdivisions shall be connected to a sewage collection and disposal system approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  Proposal of separate sanitary sewage disposal system. If a separate sanitary sewage disposal system is proposed, it must be approved in writing by the State Health Department and the State Water Quality Board prior to approval of the final plat by the City and such written approval presented to the City Engineer. 
c.  Prohibition of installation. The City Engineer may prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems where such systems will not function due to high groundwater, flooding or unsuitable soil characteristics. Such action by the City Engineer shall be based on the review and findings of the City and/or County Health Officer. The City may require that the subdivider note on the face of the plat and in any deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in designated areas. 
d.  Engineer may prescribe waste disposal methods. The City Engineer may prescribe adequate methods for waste disposal. If a sanitary sewer system is located on or near the proposed subdivision, the City shall require the subdivider to provide sewage facilities to connect to this system where practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the subdivider in connecting to the system. 
e.  Sanitary sewer size. The minimum size of sanitary sewer shall be six inches in diameter. 
f.  Pipe regulation. Pipe shall be vitrified clay pipe. 
(8)  Utility lines and easements. 
a.  Lines to be installed before street paved. All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before the street or alley is paved. When it is necessary that utility lines pass under the street or alley pavement, they shall be extended to a point at least three feet beyond the edge of the pavement. 
b.  Minimum height. Overhead utility lines crossing alleys shall be a minimum of 15 feet in height. 
c.  Width requirement of easements. Except where alleys of not less than 20 feet in width are provided, easements not less than ten feet in width shall be retained on each side of rear lot lines. Where necessary, easements not less than ten feet in width, on each side of side lot lines shall be retained for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, open drains, gas lines, or other utilities. Such easements may be required across parts of lots other than as described in this subsection upon recommendations of the City Engineer. Where the proposed platted area adjoins an unplatted area, the fully alley or easement width may be required along the rear of lots adjoining the unplatted area. 
(9)  Monuments and corner markers. 
a.  All block corners, angle points and points of curves, and all corners of boundary lines of subdivisions shall be marked with a one-half inch steel rod, two feet in length, set in the center of a concrete monument six inches in diameter and 36 inches deep, with the top flush with the finished ground surface. 
b.  Where, due to topographic conditions, permanent structures or other conditions, the view is obstructed between any two adjacent monuments, intermediate monuments shall be so set as to ensure a clear view between adjacent monuments. 
c.  Intermediate property, corner markers, consisting of a one-half inch steel rod or three-quarter inch pipe, three feet in length shall be driven flush with the ground surface to mark the corners of all lots. 
(10)  Drainage. 
a.  Easement. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse, plus additional width to accommodate future needs. 
b.  Drainage facilities. 
1.  Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed as specified by the City Engineer. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system shall ensure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings and onsite waste disposal sites. 
2.  Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. The City Engineer may require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. 
3.  The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
4.  Storm sewers shall be constructed with reinforced concrete pipe. 
c.  Drainage cost sharing. 
1.  Plans and specifications for the improvements referenced in this section shall meet the approval of the City Engineering Department. 
2.  If it is determined that additional drainage facilities in the form of storm sewers within the subdivision are necessary, the developer shall prepare, with the approval of the City Engineering Department, plans and specifications to be used by him in correcting the drainage. All such work necessary to be done under such plans and specifications shall be done at the sole expense of the developer. 
3.  Storm sewers required to provide drainage from the point where stormwater emanates from the subdivision to an adequate drainage point along existing streets, may, at its discretion, be provided by the City. In the event that the storm drain construction is so great as to be prohibitive for either the subdivider or the City, all areas affected by such drainage shall be omitted from the development. The developers may, at their option, either provide the necessary storm drainage outside of the subdivision, in the event the City is unable to do so, or by specific agreement, provide same upon a basis of refund over a period of time agreeable to the City. 
(11)  Lots. Access to each lot shall be adequate relative to the existing or proposed public street on which it will front. 
(12)  Blocks. Block length shall not exceed 1,000 feet, nor shall they be less than 500 feet. 
(13)  Crosswalk ways. 
a.  Dedication for pedestrians. Crosswalk rights-of-way six feet in width shall be dedicated where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to provide pedestrian circulation or access to schools, playground, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities, or to provide pedestrian circulation within the subdivision. 
b.  Width requirement. Crosswalk ways shall be provided with a concrete sidewalk at least five feet wide. 
(14)  Parks and other public use. 
a.  Acreage dedicated. One acre of land, or a prorate part thereof, shall be dedicated to the public for parks for each 200 dwelling units, with the number of dwelling units calculated on the following basis: 
1.  In the A-O and R-1 districts, each lot shall be considered one dwelling unit; duplexes shall be considered two units. 
2.  In the R-2 district, one acre shall be considered 20 dwelling units. 
b.  Cash payment in lieu of dedication. In lieu of dedication of land, at the discretion of the City and when such land dedication would not be in conformity with the comprehensive general plan, the subdivider shall make a cash payment to the City in the amount of equivalent value. Equivalent value is defined as the appraised value of the land or the cost of the land, whichever is greater. Such cash payment to be deposited by the City in a restricted account, to be used only for purchase of park land to serve the subdivision. 
c.  Special conditions. 
1.  Play areas within an apartment complex shall not be credited toward public land use as a park, unless each is in excess of one acre in area. 
2.  Drainage easements may be classed as a part of a park if the channel is constructed in accordance with City engineering standards, and there is park land not less than 200 feet in width adjacent to and outside of the channel. 
3.  Each park must be located adjacent to a public street. 
4.  The term "parks," as used in this article, is defined as playgrounds or playfields where they are located by plan or requirements in the comprehensive general plan. 
d.  Time limit of reserved land. Land shown as reserved, on the comprehensive general plan for a major recreational center, reservation, school site, park, or other public use, shall be reserved for a period of one year from the date the plat is filed for record, for purchase by the interested governmental authority at land appraisal value at the time of purchase. 
(15)  Conditions attached to plat approval. The City Engineer may attach conditions including, but not limited to, the following to the approval of plats for areas subject to development problems in flood hazard areas: 
a.  Construction and modification of sewage, water supply and drainage facilities to meet the standards of this article and to promote the health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  Requirements for construction or channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective devices. 
c.  Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions may include flood-proofing of intended uses, subject to the individual approval of the City Engineer and Commission at the time such uses are constructed. 
1.  Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement. 
2.  Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters of similar methods of construction. 
3.  Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures. 
4.  Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls. 
5.  Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation. 
6.  Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures. 
7.  Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of floodwaters. 
8.  Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage system for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood pressures. 
9.  Construction to resist rupture of collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris. 
10.  Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent back-up of sewage and stormwaters into the buildings or structures. Gravity draining of basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices. 
11.  Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical appliances in a manner which will ensure they are not subject to flooding and to provide protection from inundation by the regulatory flood. 
12.  Location of any structural storage facilities for chemicals explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids or other toxic materials which could be hazardous to public health, safety and welfare in a manner which will ensure that the facilities are situated at elevations above the height safety and welfare in a manner which will ensure that the facilities are situated at elevations above the height associated with the regulatory protection elevation or are adequately flood-proofed to prevent flotation of storage containers, or damage to storage containers, or damage to storage containers which could result in the escape of toxic materials into floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 10)  
Secs. 38-68—38-92. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 38-93. - Guarantee of performance. 
(a)  Construction of improvements prior to final plat recordation. If the subdivider chooses to construct the required improvements prior to the recording of the final plat, all such construction shall be inspected while in progress by the City, and must be approved upon completion by the City Engineer or his duly authorized representative. A certificate by such officer stating that the construction conforms to the specifications and standards contained in or referred to herein must be presented to the Commission prior to approval of the final plat for recordation. 
(b)  Security in lieu of construction. If the subdivider chooses to file security in lieu of completing construction prior to final plat approval for recordation, he may utilize one of the following methods of posting security. If the subdivider chooses to file security, the plat shall not be approved for recordation unless the subdivider has done one of the following: 
(1)  Performance bond. Has filed with the Planning Commission a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State and acceptable to the City and on the from provided by the City in an amount equal to the cost of the improvements, shall be within the time as estimated and approved by the City Engineer. The performance bond shall be approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney. 
(2)  Trust agreement. Has placed on deposit in a bank or trust company in the name of the City and approved by the City, in a trust account a sum of money equal to the estimated cost of all site improvements required by this article, the cost and time of completion as approved by the City Engineering Department. Selection of the trustee shall be executed on the form provided by the City and approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney. Periodic withdrawals may be made from the trust account for a progressive payment of installation cost. The amounts of such withdrawals shall be based upon progress work estimates and approved by the City Engineering Department. All such withdrawals shall be approved by the trustee. 
(3)  Unconditional guarantee from local banks, or local federally insured savings and loan associations or other financial institutions as approved by the City. Has filed with the Commission a letter, on the form provided by the City, signed by the principal officer of a local bank or local federally insured savings and loan association or other financial institution, acceptable to the City, agreeing to pay the City on demand, a stipulated sum of money to apply to the estimated cost of installation of all improvements for which the subdivider or developer is responsible under this article. The guaranteed payment sum shall be the estimated costs and scheduling as approved by the City Engineering Department. The letter shall state the name of the subdivisions and shall list the improvements for which the subdivider or developer is required to provide. 
(c)  Guarantee of materials and workmanship. The subdivider, or developer, shall require guarantee of materials and workmanship of his construction contractors, with whom he contracts for furnishing materials and installing the improvements, required under this section, and shall himself be responsible for guaranteeing that all materials and workmanship in connection with such improvements are free of defects for a period of one year after acceptance of the improvements by the City Engineer. 
(d)  Acceptance or rejection of construction. If one of the three types of security referenced in subsection (b) of this section is filed by the subdivider under subsection (b) of this section, the City Engineer shall inspect such improvements upon completion of construction. After final inspection he shall notify the subdivider and the City Attorney in writing as to his acceptance or rejection of the construction. He shall reject such construction only if it fails to comply with the standards and specifications contained or referred to herein. If he rejects such construction the City Attorney shall on direction of the City Council proceed to enforce the guarantees provided in this article. 
(e)  Extension of time. Where good cause exists, the City Engineer may extend the time period for completion under subsection (b) of this section. Such extension of time shall be reported to the Commission and recorded in the minutes. No such extension shall be granted unless security as provided in subsection (b) of this section has been provided by the subdivider covering the extended period of time. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 11)  
Sec. 38-94. - Responsibility for payment of off-site/on-site installation costs. 
Water and sewer installations necessary to provide adequate and appropriate service to subdivisions developed under the terms of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or to subdivisions or additions, or any part thereof, platted and approved pursuant to Ordinance No. _____, or any other former ordinance, but as to which water or sewer installations have not been made at the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be constructed by the City, or under its direction and supervision, but the subdivider shall deposit with the City Clerk, prior to the beginning of such utility construction, cash to defray the cost of such construction, as follows: 
(1)  All deposits shall be paid in cash, and shall be paid into such special or general fund as the Legislative Body may from time to time determine. Such payments shall not be considered as a trust fund, but rather a contribution to construction of the City's public utility systems. 
(2)  Upon completion of the system and acceptance by the City, the installation becomes the property of the City to operate and maintain. 
(3)  Contributions to construction of: 
a.  Off-site water lines. The subdividers's contribution to the cost of the off-site water service to the subdivision shall be an amount equal to the installed cost, including all labor, ditching, engineering and material, of line, fire hydrants, valves, fittings, and other appurtenances, necessary to furnish water service to the subdivision; provided, however, that if any part of said water line is required to be larger than that necessary to serve the subdivision, in order to provide the service deemed necessary by the City, within the subdivision or elsewhere in the City water system, the City may, providing funds are available, pay for the pipe in excess of the size required of the developer. 
b.  Off-site sewer lines. The subdivider's contribution to the cost of off-site sewer service to the subdivision shall be equal to the installed cost, including all labor, ditching, engineering, and material, of lines, lift stations, manholes, and appurtenances necessary to furnish sewer service to the subdivision; provided, however, that if any part of said sewer lines is required to be larger than necessary to serve the subdivision, in order to provide the service deemed necessary by the City, within the subdivision or elsewhere in the City sewer system, the City may, providing funds are available, pay for the pipe in excess of the size required of the developer. 
(4)  Responsibility for payment for installation cost of: 
a.  Streets. The City may pay, providing funds are available, for street right-of-way in excess of 60-foot width and for street paving width in excess of 33 feet, except where such extra widths are in commercial developments, or where they are not required by the City. 
b.  Bridges. The City may participate, providing funds are available, in the extra cost of large drainage structures on principal streets shown on the major thoroughfare plan. 
c.  Water and sewer taps. In addition to the water and sewer main extensions, a tap charge will be required for both water and sewer in the amount set by the City Council in ordinance No. _____. These amounts are to be paid by the developer at the time of the application for the tap. In addition to these amounts, a meter deposit shall be required. 
d.  Street lights. The subdivider shall select and install the type of street light, pole, and luminaire of a design recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the Planning Commission. 
e.  Street signs. Street signs and markers, in accordance with standards adopted by the City required at each intersection within the subdivision and at street entrances into the subdivision. An advance deposit in an amount equal to the actual cost of the signs proper will be made by the developer at the time the utility agreement is completed. The subdivider will provide posts for the markers and make the installations as the subdivision progresses, with all signs in place by the time the subdivision is open for use. 
f.  Temporary water service. The City may furnish temporary water service to houses under construction. Temporary water service may be provided upon application at any desired location. The developer shall be required, upon application for such temporary service, to make a meter deposit before such service is provided and, upon requesting a disconnect of the temporary service, he shall be refunded the deposit less the amount of water used. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 12)  
Sec. 38-95. - Where subdivision is unit of a larger tract. 
Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a large tract owned by the subdivider, which is intended to be subsequently subdivided as additional units of the same subdivision, the preliminary and final plats shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area, showing the tentative proposal, layout of streets, blocks, drainage, water, sewerage, and other improvements for such areas. The overall layout, if approved by the Commission and City Council shall attach to and file with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the City. Thereafter, plats of subsequent units of such subdivision shall conform to such approved overall layout, unless changed by the Planning Commission. It may change such approved overall layout only when it finds: 
(1)  That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will hinder the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or will be injurious to other property in the area. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 13)  
Sec. 38-96. - Authority of the City Manager. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate, or to have promulgated, and to file for public record and use: rules, regulations, standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location, and arrangement of streets, curbs, street lights, street signs, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements, gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply, and water distribution systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, monuments, criteria for drainage easement requirements, drainage facilities, and cross walkways, but all such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. He may amend the same from time to time, provided that an amendment must be appropriately approved by the City Council. No such rules, regulations, standards, and specifications shall conflict with this article or any other ordinance of the City. All such improvements shall be constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the subdivider in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards, and specifications. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 14)  
Sec. 38-97. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on previous flood records. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside flood hazard areas or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. In no case shall responsibility or liability arise from the design or operation of subdivision drainage facilities dedicated to the City, if the City has not accepted in writing the dedication and agreed to maintain and operate the facilities. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 15)  
Sec. 38-98. - Compliance. 
No land shall hereafter be subdivided or used without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations including zoning, official maps, health codes, and other regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 16)  
Sec. 38-99. - Withholding improvements. 
The City will withhold all City improvements of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of water and sewer services, the platting of which has not been approved by the City, in which the construction of required improvements does not comply with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 17)  
Sec. 38-100. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(Ord. of 9-8-1976, § 18)  
Chapter 40 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.; home-rule municipal authority to levy special or general property taxes for lawful purposes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 40-1—40-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 
 
Sec. 40-19. - Delinquent taxes shall incur additional penalty. 
All ad valorem taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection, said penalty to be in the amount of 15 percent of the total taxes, penalty and interest due the City, which fee shall be an authorized collection expense. 
(Ord. of 4-21-1982) 
State Law reference— Attorneys representing taxing units, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30; imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.01.  
Sec. 40-20. - Tax rate. 
There is hereby levied and there be collected for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2017, upon all the real, personal and mixed property within the corporate limits of the City, except so much thereof as may be exempt by the Constitution or laws of the State of a total of $89.1/100 of a dollar on each $100.00 of 100 percent of market valuation on all of said property, which said total tax here now levied as aforesaid, is respectively as follows: 
(1)  An ad valorem tax of and at the rate of only $74.971/100 of a dollar on each $100.00 of assessed valuation of said taxable property is hereby levied for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2017, for general City use and support of the municipal government of the City, which tax, when collected, shall be appropriated to and deposited in and for the General Fund of the City. 
(2)  An ad valorem tax, of and at the rate of only $14.129/100 of a dollar on each $100.00 of assessed valuation of said taxable property is hereby levied for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2017, for the interest and sinking fund to retire the principal and interest of the bonded indebtedness of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09-03, § 1, 9-29-2017)  
Sec. 40-21. - Collection of taxes. 
The City authorizes its tax assessor-collector or his designee to assess and collect all the taxes of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09-03, § 2, 9-29-2017)  
Sec. 40-22. - Cumulative clause. 
The provisions of sections 40-20 and 40-21 shall be cumulative of all other ordinances dealing with the same subject and any other ordinance in direct conflict with said sections is herewith repealed and sections 40-20 and 40-21 shall supersede any provision in conflict herewith. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09-03, § 3, 9-29-2017)  
Secs. 40-23—40-41. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 40-42. - Tax imposed. 
The taxes authorized by the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act (V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq.) are hereby imposed upon the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of, gas and electricity for residential use. 
(Ord. of 3-14-1979, § 1) 
State Law reference— Exemption of taxes imposed by a municipality under this chapter for the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use where ordinance adopted the tax on or after October 1, 1979, or ordinance adopted the tax before October 1, 1979, but failed to exempt the residential use of gas and electricity before May 1, 1979 and tax was not reimposed, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105.  
Secs. 40-43—40-72. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to impose a hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 40-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the price of, or value received for, the right to use a sleeping room, bed, or dormitory space or other sleeping facility in a hotel, and includes the price of conveniences customarily provided in connection with sleeping accommodations, including mattresses, sheets, bedspreads, pillows, pillow cases, bed frames, air conditioning, electricity, lighting, water, soap, towels, wash cloths, toilet tissue, shower or bath facilities, lavatory, chairs, trash receptacles, plus any other goods or services which are not ordinarily subject to sales tax. The consideration paid for a sleeping room or facility shall not include the price of food served, nor the price of personal services rendered to the occupant which are unrelated to cleaning and readying a room for occupancy, nor any sales tax, nor occupancy tax assessed by other governmental agencies, provided that these charges are stated separately on the folio or invoice of the occupant. Charges not stated separately shall be presumed to be part of the consideration paid for occupancy of a sleeping room or sleeping facility, and shall be taxed under this article. 
Finance Director means the Finance Director of the City, designated by the City Council to enforce and administer this article, or the Director's designated representative. 
Hotel means any building or complex of buildings, trailer, converted railroad Pullman car, or any other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term "hotel" shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, trailer houses, trailer motels, parked railroad Pullman cars used for sleeping accommodations and not involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory where bed space is rented, apartments not occupied by permanent residents, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term "hotel" does not include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, or a dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution. 
Occupancy means the use or possession of, or the exclusive right to the use or possession of a sleeping room or sleeping facility in a hotel. 
Occupant means any individual, corporation, governmental agency, partnership, or association that has paid a consideration for the exclusive right to use a sleeping facility in a hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has occupied or has paid for the exclusive right to occupy a particular sleeping room or sleeping facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days, however, one change of sleeping rooms or facility during the first 30 days of occupancy in the hotel shall not terminate the status of the permanent resident. Any person who does not fully prepay for the first 30 days is not a permanent resident during the first 30 days of occupancy. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period means the regular calendar months of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Tax means the hotel occupancy tax levied in this article pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
Tourism means the guidance or management of tourists. 
Tourist means an individual who travels from the individual's residence to a different municipality, county, state or country for pleasure, recreation, education or culture. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 1)  
Sec. 40-74. - Penalties. 
(a)  Offenses defined. A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Fails to collect the tax; 
(2)  Fails to file a report as required by this article; 
(3)  Fails to pay the Director the tax when payment is due; 
(4)  Files a false report; or 
(5)  Fails to comply with section 40-83(a) when purchasing a hotel. 
(b)  Violation of article. A violation of any of the requirements of this article shall constitute a class C misdemeanor crime, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(c)  Forfeit collection fee. If any person fails to timely file a full and complete report as required herein or fails to timely remit the tax required under this article when the report and payment is due, he shall forfeit his right to the one percent reimbursement authorized in section 40-76(b). 
(d)  Date of first penalty. In addition, he shall pay five percent of the unremitted delinquent tax as a late penalty if the report is not submitted or the tax is not remitted by the last day of the calendar month in which they are due, provided that the penalty shall never be less than $5.00. 
(e)  Monthly penalty. After the first calendar month of delinquency, he shall pay an additional five percent of the unremitted tax on the first day of each delinquent month; provided that the penalty shall never be less than $5.00. 
(f)  Interest on delinquent balance. Delinquent taxes shall accrue interest on the first day of each month at the annual rate of 12 percent per annum. 
(g)  Delinquency notice. The auditor or the Finance Director shall mail a delinquency notice to the hotel manager, operator, or person in control, and in said notice, shall give a date certain for the filing of criminal complaint for failure to report or remit collected tax revenues, or for failure to do any other specified act required by this article. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 11)  
Sec. 40-75. - Tax authorized, tax rate, exceptions to tax. 
(a)  Authorization. There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room or sleeping facility furnished by any hotel where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day. 
(b)  Tax rate. The tax should be equal to four percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of the sleeping room or sleeping facility to the hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other government agencies. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  There shall be no tax on the cost of or consideration paid for occupancy of a hotel sleeping room or sleeping facility priced at less than $2.00 per day. 
(2)  The cost of or consideration paid for a hotel room or facility not ordinarily used for sleeping, such as a meeting room, is not subject to this tax. 
(3)  The cost of or consideration paid for a sleeping room or facility occupied by a permanent resident is not subject to this tax. 
(4)  The statutory exemptions and rights to refund for government entities appearing under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.006 are applicable to the taxes imposed under this article, and are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set out. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 2; Ord. of 1-25-1996, § 1)  
Sec. 40-76. - Collection, payment to City, fee for collection. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed under this article and pay same to the Finance Director with the report required hereinafter. 
(b)  The persons required to file a report under this article may deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due to the City on the monthly report, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one percent of the amount of the timely remitted tax due, as shown in timely submitted reports, provided there are no delinquencies for any prior reporting period, and provided that the report is submitted and the tax remitted on or before the 20th day following the end of each quarterly period. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 3)  
Sec. 40-77. - Reports. 
(a)  Every person required to collect the tax by section 40-76 shall file a report with the Finance Director or his designated representative showing the consideration paid for all rooms or sleeping space occupancies in the preceding calendar month, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other useful and relevant information as the Finance Director may require. 
(b)  Timely reports must be submitted so as to arrive at the Office of the Finance Director by the 20th day of the month following the end of each quarterly period. 
(c)  Reports shall include gross sleeping room revenues, gross exempt sleeping room revenues, City occupancy tax collected, and net occupancy tax due the City. It shall also include the signature of the hotel's local manager or person in control of business operations at the reporting hotel, who shall sign a statement that the report is accurate to the best of his knowledge and belief. 
(d)  The report and the tax remittance shall be for each quarterly period requested by a hotel business manager or operator and approved by the Finance Director. 
(e)  The Finance Director shall impose a daily or weekly collection/reporting period, and shall provide for daily or weekly pick up of reports and tax collections, whenever he has reason to believe that the tax revenues will not be remitted in the normal course of business, such as an impending bankruptcy or business closing, or the maintenance of unauditable record. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 4)  
Sec. 40-78. - Availability of records. 
Each person required to collect the tax must make records available for inspection by the Finance Director or his designated representative, at the hotel where the tax is collected. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 5)  
Sec. 40-79. - Rules and regulations. 
The Finance Director is authorized to issue rules and regulations necessary to effectuate the full intent and purpose of this article concerning the information required on reports, the collection/reporting periods, audits, the retention of records at the hotel, the forcible seizure of records for auditing purposes, the imposition of a daily or weekly collection/reporting period, the referral of delinquent reports and/or collections to the legal department for purpose of enjoining continued operation of a hotel, the filing of criminal complaints for violations of this article, and the acceptance of a surety bond in lieu of enjoining a hotel from doing business. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 6)  
Sec. 40-80. - Use of tax proceeds. 
(a)  The revenues of the hotel occupancy tax levied by this article shall be used at the discretion of the City Council for the purpose of advertising and encouraging the growth of tourist and convention activity in the City. The funds are to be dispersed at the direction of the City Council. 
(b)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in enhancing and promoting tourism and the convention and hotel industry. The City Council may retain a percentage of the amount, collected under this article, for administrative fees to be deposited in a separate fund of the City. 
(c)  The governing body of a municipality, by contract, may delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the tax. 
(d)  Disposition of the revenues collected from the hotel tax shall follow the statute's uses. Revenue from the municipal hotel occupancy tax may not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the municipality. The revenue may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both; 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourist and convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, painting, architecture, design and allied fields, sculpture, radio, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, tape and sound recording, television and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourist and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums; at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourist, convention delegates, or other visitors to the municipality. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 7)  
Sec. 40-81. - Suit to enjoin hotel operations. 
The Finance Director shall refer any hotel occupancy tax account that has a delinquent balance older than 60 days to the City Attorney for the purpose of filing a suit to enjoin the hotel owner, operator, manager, and other persons in control from operating any hotel in the City until the tax is paid and/or the report filed. This remedy shall be in addition to the remedy of a collection suit and in addition to the Municipal Court criminal complaint that may be filed for each violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 8)  
Sec. 40-82. - Surety bond in lieu of injunction suit. 
The Finance Director shall not refer a delinquent account to the City Attorney for the purpose of enjoining the hotel operators from doing business in the City. If the owner, manager, operator, or other persons in control provides an acceptable surety bond in an amount equal to the City hotel occupancy tax collected by the subject hotel in the six best net revenue months of the 12 full calendar months immediately prior to the acquisition of the bond, said bond to ensure payment for a one-year period, and be updated and approved by the Finance Director annually if said hotel operators desire to continue such protection from business closing during a period of delinquency. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 9)  
Sec. 40-83. - Tax collection on termination of business. 
(a)  If a person who is liable for the payment of an amount under this article is the owner of the hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount due until the seller provides a receipt from the Director showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may request that the Director issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The Director shall issue the certificate or statement within 60 days after receiving the request or within 60 days after the day on which the records of the former owner of the hotel are made available for audit, whichever period expires later. In either event, the Director shall issue the certificate or statement within 90 days after the date of receiving the request. 
(d)  If the Director fails to mail the certificate or statement within the applicable period provided by subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. 
(e)  The period of limitation during which the Director may assess tax against the purchaser, under this section is four years from the date when the former owner of the hotel sells the hotel or when a determination is made against the former owner, whichever event occurs later. At any time within three years after a deficiency determination against the purchaser has become due and payable, the City Attorney may bring an action in a district court of the County or a court of any other state of the United States in the name of the City to collect the delinquent amounts together with penalties and interest. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 10)  
Sec. 40-84. - Tampering with government records. 
The auditor of hotel tax records which are created and maintained at the hotel business shall report any evidence of false entry in or false alteration of said records to the Finance Director, who shall make the determination of whether or not to file a criminal charge against the person in control of said records, pursuant to Texas Penal Code, section 37.10, entitled "Tampering with Government Records" (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 37.10), after consultation and advice of the City Attorney. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1995, § 12)  
Secs. 40-85—40-111. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Telephone company tax exemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 301.004; telecommunications tax exemption and repeal, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. 
 
Sec. 40-112. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the City. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or where other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210 is as authorized under that section. 
(c)  The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the City for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the State. 
(d)  The City Manager or designee shall forward to the Comptroller of the State, by U.S. registered or certified mail, a copy of this article along with a copy of the minutes of the City Council's vote and discussion on this article. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1987, § 1)  
Sec. 40-113. - Cumulative effect. 
This article shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the City, and this article shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve as an offset to, be in lieu of, or in any way reduce, any amount payable to the City pursuant to any franchise, street use ordinance, charter provision, statute, or without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable by any provider of telecommunications service; it being the express intent hereof that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation hereby. 
(Ord. of 4-8-1987, § 2)  
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Adoption of State Law. 
(a)  The Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq., are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein. 
(b)  All definitions contained in the State act, as referred to in subsection (a) of this section, shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.  
Sec. 42-2. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate, or park any vehicle known by the term of "bicycle" in or upon the sidewalks in the City. 
(Ord. of 3-27-1950, § 1)  
Sec. 42-3. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  All traffic control devices, including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the City, shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(b)  The City Council shall, from time to time, designate the locations for placement of any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking applicable thereto, as permitted under State law and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, motor or otherwise, to disobey the instructions of any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking applicable thereto, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Ord. of 4-11-1979; Ord. of 4-3-2003, § 1)  
Sec. 42-4. - No Parking zones. 
The City Council shall, from time to time, designate the location of No Parking zones, as permitted under State law, and authorize the erection of applicable signs.  
Sec. 42-5. - Speed limits. 
The City Council shall, from time to time, designate speed zones, as permitted under State law, and authorize the erection of applicable signs.  
Sec. 42-6. - Truck routes. 
The City Council shall, from time to time, designate truck routes, as permitted under State law, and authorize the erection of applicable signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-04, § I, 10-10-2017)  
Secs. 42-7—42-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKING OF COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 42-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial van means any enclosed vehicle with a motor used commercially to transport people or property, to include the size that would make parking along City streets inappropriate. 
Public street means any street, highway, road, right-of-way, avenue, lane, alley, public way, bridges, viaducts, tunnels, public place, underpasses, overpasses and causeway in the City dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Recreational vehicle means one that is commonly known as an RV vehicle which is a motor home which is a self-contained vehicle, designed for human habitation, and with its own motive power. 
Semi-trailer means a vehicle without motive power that is designed, or used with a motor vehicle, so some of its weight and the weight of its load rests on or is carried by the motor vehicle. 
Semi-truck/trailer means any vehicle or combination truck/trailer that has at least three axles used for cargo and is of the type commonly used for commercial transport purposes. 
Trailer means a vehicle without motive power that is: 
(1)  Designed or used to carry property and/or passengers on its own structure exclusively; and 
(2)  Drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck-tractor means a motor vehicle: 
(1)  Designed and used primarily to draw another vehicle; but 
(2)  Not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the other vehicle and its load. 
Truck-tractor and semi-trailer means a truck-tractor and semi-trailer as a combination of a truck-tractor and semi-trailer. 
Vehicle means a device in, on, or by which a person and/or property is or may be transported or drawn on a public street or public highway. The term "vehicle" includes a motor vehicle, bus, recreational vehicle, truck-tractor, semi-trailer, truck-tractor and semi-trailer, or a trailer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-027, § I, 4-10-2007)  
Sec. 42-30. - Parking prohibited. 
(a)  Semi-truck/trailers and commercial vans. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public road right-of-way, street, alley or municipal property a semi-truck/trailer combination, semi-truck trailer, or commercial van except for the commercial delivery or loading of cargo, and for such purpose the parking or standing shall be limited to the period of time of actual loading or unloading. 
(b)  Boats, trailers, tractors, and recreation vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public road right-of-way, street, alley, or municipal property any boat, trailer, tractor, or recreation vehicle. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles, motor homes and travel trailers. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public road right-of-way, street, alley, or municipal property a recreational vehicle, RV, motor home or travel trailer with a tow vehicle attached, without first obtaining a permit allowing the temporary parking of such a vehicle. 
(1)  The permit will be issued to City residents only upon application at the City office. The permit will allow the parking of a motor home, or travel trailer with a tow vehicle attached, only on a public road right-of-way, street, or alley that is contiguous to, and in front of, the property owned by the City resident making the application for the permit. The permit will be limited to a total of 30 full or partial days per year to use at the discretion of the applicant, not to exceed ten consecutive days in duration at one location per permit. The permit must be displayed in the front window of the motor home or tow vehicle of the travel trailer while such vehicle is parked. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public road right-of-way, street, alley, or municipal property a travel trailer without an operative tow vehicle attached. 
(d)  Parking limited to 72 hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave standing upon any public road right-of-way within the City for more than 72 hours, any vehicle not covered in subsections (a) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Obstruction prohibited. An unobstructed width not less than 18 feet of the roadway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such roadway. 
(f)  Exceptions. The City Manager or designee may approve exceptions to the parking prohibitions of this article for road construction or maintenance, public safety emergencies, and special events. 
(g)  Public safety officer authorized to move or cause removal of vehicle. Whenever any City public safety officer finds a vehicle in violation of this article, such officer is hereby authorized to move the vehicle or cause the vehicle to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety, at the vehicle owner's expense of towing and storage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04-027, § II, 4-10-2007)  
Secs. 42-31—42-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTERS 
 
Sec. 42-49. - General regulations. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Neighborhood electric vehicle and motor-assisted scooter mean as assigned by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.301, as amended. 
(b)  A neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated by a properly licensed or permitted driver only on a street or highway for which the posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less, unless the operator is a peace officer. A neighborhood electric vehicle may cross a road or street at an intersection where that intersecting road or street has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour. 
(c)  A person may not operate a motor-assisted scooter on any alley, street or highway within the City except, that a person 12 years of age or older, who obtains a City-issued scooter permit, may operate a motor-assisted scooter on residential streets that are 27 feet or less in width and posted with a maximum speed limit of 35 miles per hour. A motor-assisted scooter may cross a road or street at an intersection where that intersecting road or street has a speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour. 
(d)  A person younger than 12 years of age may not operate a motor-assisted scooter on any street or highway, but may operate a motor-assisted scooter on public sidewalks. 
(e)  A person may not operate a motor-assisted scooter on any path or trail within the City except on paths and trails set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles. 
(f)  A person 12 years of age or older, other than a person who obtains a valid motor vehicle driver's license, may not operate a motor-assisted scooter on certain residential streets as described in this section within the City, unless such person obtains and has in his immediate possession a motor-assisted scooter permit issued by the Police Department. A person younger than 12 years of age operating only on public sidewalks may, but is not required to obtain a motor-assisted scooter permit. A person required to obtain a motor-assisted scooter permit shall have in the person's immediate possession while operating a motor-assisted scooter, a motor-assisted scooter permit, and shall display the permit on the demand of a magistrate, court officer or peace officer. 
(g)  The Police Department shall administer to all applicants for a motor-assisted scooter permit, a safety course relating to the traffic laws applicable to the operation of motor-assisted scooters. All motor-assisted scooter operators 12 years and older, not already possessing a valid motor vehicle driver's license, must complete the safety course to obtain the permit. Any violation of this subsection may result in denial or suspension of a scooter permit, and possible fine. 
(h)  Any person who operates or rides on (passenger) a motor-assisted scooter on certain residential City streets as described in this section shall wear a protective helmet when such motor-assisted-scooter is in operation and when any other neighborhood electric vehicle is operated on a public street. For the purposes of this subsection a protective helmet means properly fitted headgear that is not structurally damaged and that conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial Foundation or any state or federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets at the time of the manufacture of the helmet. 
(i)  It is an offense for any person 18 years or older to cause, suffer or permit another person less than 18 years old within their care, custody or control, to operate a motor-assisted scooter on any alley, sidewalk or highway within the City, in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06-041, § I, 6-10-2008)  
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Exclusive original jurisdiction of municipality over electric utility rates, operations and services within the municipal territory, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 33.001 et seq.; municipal authority regarding utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq., Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 44-1—44-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 44-19—44-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE 
 
Sec. 44-40. - Director of Public Works. 
(a)  There shall be appointed by the City Manager of the City a Director of Public Works, who shall be administrative officer of the Water Works System. The Director of Public Works of the City shall have general supervision over all employees of the Water Works System and shall be responsible for all property, machinery, and equipment used in, or connected with, the Water Works System including, but not limited to, all pump houses, engines, pumps, reservoirs, stand pipes, elevated tanks, pipe lines, fire hydrants, wrenches, testing equipment and all water inventory. 
(b)  He shall make frequent trips of inspection, as may be necessary from time to time, over all pipe lines and all other property used in or connected with the Water Works System, and shall direct repairs deemed necessary and consistent with his duties. 
(c)  He shall also report all violations of this article to the Manager or his designated representative and the Manager shall forthwith proceed to prosecute offenders as set forth in this article or any amendment hereto. 
(d)  He shall also control the water supply and at all times ensure the sufficiency thereof, and shall except in cases of emergency, notify the City Manager or his designated representative, whenever he learns of the necessity to shut off the water from any line of the system for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, connections, etc. 
(e)  In the performance of his duties as required by this section, the Director shall be subject at all times to the ordinance from which this article is derived and the rules and regulations of the City. He shall serve for such term and receive such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 1)  
Sec. 44-41. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to do, commit or assist in committing or doing, any of the following things or acts within the corporate limits of the City: 
(1)  To open or close any fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the Water Works System or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shut offs thereof, without the permission of the Director of Public Works, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the Fire Department. 
(2)  To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure, or wantonly force open any gate, or door, or in any manner or form whatsoever destroy, injure of deface any part of any engine house, reservoir standpipe, elevated tank, buildings, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs or fixtures or property appertaining to the Water Works System. 
(3)  To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps, on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of the Water Works System, except by permission of the Director of Public Works, the City Manager or his designated representative. 
(4)  To place any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within three feet of any fire hydrant. 
(5)  To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangements for the purpose of procuring water for himself or others from private connection or premises contrary to the City regulation or this article. 
(6)  To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipe, cock, valve, or other apparatus pertaining to the Water Works System, or to turn on or off without authority the water in any street hydrant or other water fixtures, or to hitch or tie an animal thereto. 
(7)  To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the Water Works System or to turn off or on the use of water of said System without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(8)  To cover or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box. 
(9)  To remove any water meter that has been placed by the City or to in any manner change, interfere with or tamper with any water meter; providing that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the City when acting in their official capacity; except to effect repairs in an emergency (e.g., home owner, plumbing); or 
(10)  To turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly charge or for the violation of any rule or ordinance governing the Water Works System. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 2; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 2)  
Sec. 44-42. - Connection. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the mains or pipes of the Water Works System without first making application to the City, stating fully the several and various uses for which water is requested, giving the name of the owner of the property, the number of the lot and block, name of the street and house of the service address. Upon payment of the tapping fee, the Director shall make or have made, the necessary connections and furnish a cast iron meter box and curb cock, the cost of which is included in the tapping fee, and every premises connected with any water main, or being supplied with any water from the City Water Works, shall have a separate service connection meter. If the application is approved by the Director a permit will be issued. All fees and charges shall be paid for at amounts and rates fixed by this article or by resolutions of the City Council. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 3)  
Sec. 44-43. - Temporary disconnect. 
Whenever a person wishes to temporarily discontinue the use of water supplies from the Water Works System he must give notice thereof to the City. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 4; Ord. of 8-30-2004, § 4)  
Sec. 44-44. - Duty to report leaks or waste. 
It shall be the duty of all employees of the City to report to the Director of Public Works, any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their attention, and any violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 5)  
Sec. 44-45. - Meter. 
All water meters shall be set by employees of the City. If the meter gets out of order and fails to operate and register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption, as shown by the meter when it was in order. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 6)  
Sec. 44-46. - Separate connection and meter. 
Each consumer of water living in a separate house must have a separate connection and meter for each house. Except, that where a residence is not within reach of a City water main, arrangements may be made, at the option of the City, to secure water from another user of City water, in which case, the minimum monthly charge shall be made for each additional residence taking water through such meter. The regular minimum, the additional minimum and all water used over the minimum by such consumer shall be charged to the customer having the meter. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 7)  
Sec. 44-47. - Payment due. 
All charges for water service furnished or rendered by the City Water Works Department shall be due and payable in accordance with this article and this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 10)  
Sec. 44-48. - Plumbing regulations. 
(a)  There shall be a cut-off valve six inches from the water meter on the house side to control all water in the building. Each commode shall be controlled with a stop above the floor. 
(b)  To prevent the possibility of back siphonage, every outlet, opening, or termination of any hot or cold water piping, including every faucet, stopcock, ball cock, valve, or similar appliance through which water is discharged, shall be not less than three-quarter inch above the level at which the fixtures would overflow on the floor. 
(c)  Water heaters shall not be installed in bedrooms, bathrooms, or attic, or in closets opening into same. If the water heater is set in a closet not prohibited by this section, the closet shall be vented at the bottom of the door or wall with either holes or grill to give at least 30 square inches of ventilation. The heater vent which is usually located at the top of the heater will be vented to the outside of the house. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(2), § 12)  
Sec. 44-49. - City Manager to impose methods and fees. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to impose methods and fees as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1990, § 1)  
Sec. 44-50. - New service. 
(a)  Connect fee. A new service connect fee shall be assessed for every customer who makes application for new services and this fee shall be collected prior to services being connected. The new service connect fee shall be assessed for any customer transferring services to another location within the utility service area for services at the new location, and this fee shall be collected prior to services being transferred. 
(b)  Application. The City shall require any new customer or any present customer transferring services to a new location to sign a new service application prior to the services being connected. A customer whose signature appears on an application for service connect shall be responsible for any balance due on the service account regardless of who benefits from the use of such service. Each account shall remain active until such time as the account balance is paid and the account is closed by the customer whose signature appears on the application. 
(c)  Method for disconnect. The City shall require any customer closing a utility service account or transferring services to another location to sign, before a witness of the utilities office, the authorization to disconnect service at the current location before an order for disconnect is issued. A customer unable to sign the authorization before a witness of the utilities office shall be mailed, or on the customer's request, delivered, a form authorizing a service disconnect. The City shall accept such authorization only if it is signed in the presence of a notary public and returned to the utilities office. 
(d)  New service deposit fee. Deposits shall be required for all new services and shall be collected prior to services being connected. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1990, § 2)  
Sec. 44-51. - Methods, penalties and fees for billing. 
(a)  Billing for services. 
(1)  All charges for services furnished or rendered by the City shall be due and payable upon receipt. Each customer has 17 days to present to the City the balance due on the account without being assessed a late penalty. After the 17th day, delinquent accounts shall be assessed a five percent late penalty that is in addition to the balance owed. 
(2)  Every reasonable care shall be exercised in the proper delivery and mailing of utility bills and notices of disconnect; however, failure of a customer to receive a bill or notice shall not relieve the customer of the responsibility for payment of service charges within the prescribed period nor exempt the customer from any discount forfeiture for delinquency in the payment thereof. 
(3)  Utility customers that receive utility assistance payments for the billed months from the Community Service Agency will not be assessed the late penalty fee. 
(b)  Partial payment. Partial payments shall be accepted until the cut-off date. Once the cut-off date has passed, partial payments will not be accepted. Charges for water, sewer, gas and garbage collection services provided by the City shall be due and payable concurrently. Payment for one service only would be considered a partial payment and shall not be accepted as such. 
(c)  Disconnection for failure to pay. Accounts that remain unpaid 25 days after charges are due and payable shall be designated on a listing ordering disconnects for failure to pay, and such orders for disconnect shall be executed by designated employees of the City. The City reserves the right to disconnect and discontinue all utility services provided by the City to any premise for which an account is delinquent without further notice, and same shall not be reconnected and no additional service furnished until all delinquent accounts and charges are paid in full. 
(d)  Payment extensions. 
(1)  A customer unable to present the balance due in an account within 25 days may apply for an extension to avoid service interruption. The customer shall demonstrate by application to the City that an unusual financial condition exists to necessitate such an extension. An extension that is granted shall automatically become a payment agreement. An application for extension shall be accompanied by 20 percent of the amount of the bill and shall include the ten percent late penalty. 
(2)  An approved extension agreement shall allow ten days for the customer to present the account balance in full. No extension shall be granted after 5:00 p.m. on the business day preceding the scheduled date for disconnect orders to be issued, and no further extensions shall be granted during the same billing cycle. Failure to comply with an extension agreement shall cause service interruption to the address on the account, and the customer shall be subject to all methods and fees relevant to disconnects for failure to pay. 
(3)  Customers shall be allowed two extensions per calendar year, subject to the considerations outlined in this section. 
(e)  NSF checks. Any checks found to be without sufficient funds will be charged a fee. After two such offenses the customer will be prohibited from making any further payment with checks. From then onward, the customer shall pay exclusively in cash or C.O.D. 
(f)  Method for reconnection. Collection fees shall be assessed to every customer on the disconnect list on the date service is scheduled to be disconnected. The collection fee is in addition to the reconnect fee that shall be charged if the account is disconnected. Services shall be reconnected only upon receipt of all applicable charges and fees. 
(g)  Disconnection and prorated utility bills. Customers who are disconnecting utility services shall be charged the full month of garbage service if the request is after the reading date for the month. A customer service account shall be charged a pro-rated charge depending on the day; or the billing period after the reading date. The customer's gas and water bills shall be based on usage. If the customer's bills does not meet the minimum base rate amount, the customer shall be charged a pro-rated scale according to the day of the billing period. Garbage service will not be prorated but will be charged the full amount to the customer. 
(Ord. of 9-11-1990, § 3; Ord. of 12-13-2000, § 1; Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 1)  
Secs. 44-52—44-83. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CROSS CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 44-84. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health means any conditions, devices or practice which, in the judgment of the Department of Public Works, may create a danger to the health and well being of the potable water consumers. 
Plumbing means a plumbing type cross connection that is not properly protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
Pollution means an actual or potential threat to the physical facilities of the public water supply which, although not dangerous to health, would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
System means an actual or potential threat which may cause severe damage to the physical facilities of the public potable water supply system or which may have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 1)  
Sec. 44-85. - Misdemeanor. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to bypass or remove a backflow prevention assembly without the approval of the Department. 
(b)  Each separate act or omission, which constitutes a violation, and each day's violation of a continuing nature, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The maximum fine for each offense hereof shall be $2,000.00. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 9)  
Sec. 44-86. - Customer service inspections. 
A customer service inspection certification shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to new construction or any existing service when the City has reason to believe that cross connections or other unacceptable plumbing practices exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition has been made to the private plumbing facilities. 
(1)  Individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection certification. 
a.  Plumbing Inspectors and Water Supply Protection Specialists licensed by the State Board of Plumbing Examiners. 
b.  Certified Waterworks Operators and members of other related professional groups who have completed a training course and passed an examination administered by the Commission or its designated agent. 
c.  Licensed Plumbers, at the discretion of the water purveyor, may perform customer service inspections on single-family residential services. 
(2)  As unacceptable plumbing practices are discovered, they shall be promptly eliminated to prevent possible contamination of the water supplied by the public water system. The existence of a serious threat to the integrity of the public water supply shall be considered sufficient grounds for immediate termination of water service. Service can be restored only when the source of potential contamination no longer exists, or until sufficient additional safeguards have been taken. 
(3)  Copies of properly completed inspection certifications must be kept on file by the water purveyor and made available, upon request, for Commission review. These certifications shall be retained for a minimum of ten years and shall certify the following: 
a.  No direct connection between the public water supply and a potential source of contamination exist. Potential sources of contamination are isolated from the public water system by an air-gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly in accordance with state plumbing regulation. Additionally, all pressure relief valve and thermal expansion devices are in compliance with state plumbing codes. 
b.  No cross connection between the public drinking water supply and a private water source (e.g., wells) exists. Where an actual air-gap is maintained between the private and public water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by the recognized backflow prevention assembly tester. See 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 290.44(4). 
c.  No connection exists which would allow the return of water used for condensing, cooling, or industrial process back to the public water supply. 
d.  No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than eight percent lead exists in private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1998. 
e.  No solder or flux, which contains more than 0.2 percent lead, exists in private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 2)  
Sec. 44-87. - Interconnection. 
No physical connection between the distribution system of the public drinking water supply shall be permitted unless the other water supply is of safe, sanitary quality and the City approves the interconnection. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 3)  
Sec. 44-88. - Backflow prevention required. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be utilized or installed at every service connection to a customer's water system when the City Water Department (Water Department or Department) determines the potable water supplied by the public potable water system may be subject to contamination, pollution or other deterioration in sanitary quality by conditions within the customer's water system. 
(b)  The backflow prevention assembly to be utilized or installed shall be the determination by the Water Department. The method required by the Department shall be sufficient to protect against the potential degree of hazard, as determined by the Department, to the public potable water supply from the customer's water system. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 4)  
Sec. 44-89. - Backflow prevention assemblies approved. 
(a)  A backflow prevention assembly shall be any assembly or other means designed to prevent backflow. The following are the recognized backflow prevention methods, which the Department requires: 
(1)  Air-gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the opening of any pipe or faucet supplying portable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of said tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An air-gap should be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less than one inch. 
(2)  Reduced pressure assembly (RP). An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly (DC). An assembly composed of two independently acting approved check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located text cocks. 
(4)  Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB). An assembly containing an independently operating located check valve and an independently operated, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valve located at each end of the assembly. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies required for specified activities: 
(1)  Animal clinics/grooming shops: RP. 
(2)  Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained: RP. 
(3)  Automotive repair with steam cleaner, acid cleaning equipment, or solvent facilities: RP. 
(4)  Auxiliary water systems: RP. 
(5)  Bottling plants: RP. 
(6)  Breweries: RP. 
(7)  Buildings greater than three stories or greater than 34 feet in height from curb level: DC. 
(8)  Buildings with house pumps/or potable storage tank: DC. 
(9)  Buildings with landscape fountains, ponds, baptismal tanks: RP or Air-gap. 
(10)  Buildings with sewage ejectors: RP. 
(11)  Canaries, packing houses, reduction plants: RP. 
(12)  Car wash facilities: RP. 
(13)  Centralized heating and air-conditioning plants: RP. 
(14)  Chemical plants: RP. 
(15)  Chemically treated potable or non-potable water systems: RP. 
(16)  Civil works (Government owned or operated facilities not open for inspection by the Department): RP. 
(17)  Commercial laundries: RP. 
(18)  Dairies and cold storage plants: RP. 
(19)  Dye works: RP. 
(20)  Film processing laboratories: RP. 
(21)  Schools and colleges: RP. 
(22)  Holding tank disposal stations: RP. 
(23)  Hospitals and mortuaries: RP. 
(24)  Medical and dental buildings, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes engaged in diagnosis, care or treatment of human illness: RP. 
(25)  Irrigation systems (not to include single-family detached residences): 
a.  Premises having separate systems used in elevated areas or with drip irrigation: RP. 
b.  Premises having nonpotable water piping (lawn sprinklers) two inches and smaller: PVB. 
(26)  Manufacturing, processing, and fabrication plants using toxic or nontoxic materials: RP. 
(27)  Laboratories using toxic materials: RP. 
(28)  Mobile home parks: DC. 
(29)  Multiple services, interconnected: DC. 
(30)  Oil/gas production facilities: RP. 
(31)  Paper and paper production plants: RP. 
(32)  Portable insecticide and herbicide spray tanks: RP or Air-gap. 
(33)  Power Plants: RP. 
(34)  Restricted, classified, or other closed facilities: RP. 
(35)  Sand and gravel plants: RP. 
(36)  Shopping centers: DC. 
(37)  Car wash facilities: An approved air-gap or a reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection to any premises where a car wash facility is operated or maintained. In addition, where a domestic water system is on the property and supplied by a single service connection an approved air-gap or a reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the industrial line at the point of takeoff from the domestic line. Most automatic car washes utilize a recirculating system as well as soap or wash aspirating system. Coin-operated car washes shall provide backflow protection with installation of a reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly or an air-gap. 
(c)  When two or more of the activities listed in subsection (b) of this section are conducted on the same premises and served by the same service connection, the most restrictive backflow prevention method required for any of the activities conducted on the premises shall be required to be utilized or installed at the service connection. The order of the most restrictive backflow prevention methods shall be as follows: 
(1)  Air-gap (most restrictive). 
(2)  Reduced pressure principal assembly (RP). 
(3)  Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB). 
(4)  Double check valve assembly (DC) (least restrictive). 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 5)  
Sec. 44-90. - Backflow assembly installation requirements; location. 
(a)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the customer, at the customer's expense and in compliance with the standards and specifications adopted by the City at the service connection. The assembly shall be installed, tested, and maintained by the owner. The signed and dated original inspection form must be submitted to the City within five working days of the test. 
(b)  The assembly shall be in an accessible location approved by the Department. A reduced pressure principal assembly and pressure vacuum breaker assembly shall be installed above ground. A double check valve assembly may be installed, at the service customer's option, below ground in a vault with standard specifications established by the City. 
(c)  When a customer desires a continuous water supply, two or more backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed to one another at the service connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing of the backflow prevention assemblies. When backflow prevention assemblies are installed parallel to one another, the sum of the areas of the diameters of the assemblies shall be at least equal to the area of the diameter of the service connection. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 7)  
Sec. 44-91. - Discontinuance of water service. 
(a)  If the Department discovers that a customer has not installed a required backflow prevention assembly, that a backflow prevention assembly has been improperly tested or maintained, bypassed or removed, or that an unprotected cross connection exists in the customer's water system, the water service to that service connection shall be disconnected if the situation is not remedied within the time specified in the notice sent to the customer as required by this section. The service shall not be restored until the condition is remedied. 
(b)  Prior to disconnecting any water service because a condition set forth in subsection (a) of this section exists, the Department shall send a notice to the customer that the condition must be remedied within 45 days after mailing of the notice by the City. If such condition is not remedied within said 45-day period, the City shall send a second notice, by certified mail, to the customer notifying the customer that water service will be disconnected in 15 days if the condition is not remedied within such time period. 
(c)  The City may disconnect, without notice, water service to any customer when the Department discovers that the customer's water system is contaminating the public water supply. 
(Ord. of 6-11-2002, § 8)  
Secs. 44-92—44-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 44-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approving Authority means the City Manager or designee. 
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees centigrade. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called the house lateral and house connection. 
City Manager means the City Manager or designee. 
COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooling and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial waste into the city's sewerage system or wastewater facility. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the City. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries storm and surface water and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
Suspended solids (SS) means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely, removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap means a device designed to skim settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or order in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or adorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the State Department of Water Resources; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means a combination of the water carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any City-owned facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 1; Ord. No. 2019-10-1 , § 2, 10-15-2019)  
Sec. 44-112. - Penalty. 
In addition to proceeding under authority of section 1-13, the City is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 23)  
Sec. 44-113. - Failure to pay. 
In addition to sanctions provided for by this division, the City is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the City for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 24)  
Sec. 44-114. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
The City may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 25)  
Sec. 44-115. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 2)  
Sec. 44-116. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease, or oils whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperature between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees centigrade); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, an exerting and excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Approving Authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 44-115(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substance, shall conform to concentration limits established by the Approving Authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by State, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 3)  
Sec. 44-117. - Hazardous metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are: 
Metal 	Not To Exceed 
	Average 	Daily Composite 	Grab Sample 
Arsenic 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 
Barium 	1.0 	2.0 	4.0 
Cadmium 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Chromium 	0.5 	1.0 	5.0 
Copper 	0.5 	1.0 	2.0 
Lead 	0.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Manganese 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Mercury 	0.005 	0.005 	0.01 
Nickel 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Selenium 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Silver 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Zinc 	1.0 	2.0 	6.0 
 
Note— These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority of V.T.C.A., Water Code §§ 5.127, 5.132 - HAZARDOUS METALS and in accordance with rules established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality) 
(c)  No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without approval from the Approving Authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited hazardous materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Uranium; 
(7)  Rhenium; 
(8)  Strontium; 
(9)  Tellerium; 
(10)  Herbicides; 
(11)  Fungicides; and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 4)  
Sec. 44-118. - Particulate size. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimensions are prohibited. 
(b)  The Approving Authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 5)  
Sec. 44-119. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage; or 
(5)  Make any new connections from inflow sources. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act (V.T.C.A., Water Code, § 21.001 et seq.) and other statutes, the Approving Authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 6)  
Sec. 44-120. - Temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 7)  
Sec. 44-121. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the Approving Authority. 
(b)  The Approving Authority may establish, in compliance with applicable State and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 8)  
Sec. 44-122. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment process of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The Approving Authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes. 
(2)  Cinders. 
(3)  Sand. 
(4)  Mud. 
(5)  Straw. 
(6)  Shavings. 
(7)  Metal. 
(8)  Glass. 
(9)  Rags. 
(10)  Feathers. 
(11)  Tar. 
(12)  Plastics. 
(13)  Wood. 
(14)  Underground garbage. 
(15)  Whole blood. 
(16)  Paunch manure. 
(17)  Hair and fleshings. 
(18)  Entrails. 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(20)  Slops. 
(21)  Chemical residues. 
(22)  Paint residues. 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(g)  No person may collect, dispose, or discharge industrial waste into a wastewater facility unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  A person seeking to collect, dispose, or discharge industrial waste into a wastewater facility must obtain a permit from the Approving Authority; 
(2)  The industrial waste must not contain any chemical, hazardous, toxic, or otherwise prohibited materials under this chapter; 
(3)  Must pay the required industrial waste charge as provided under section 44-129; and 
(4)  The industrial waste must be transported at no cost to the City to a wastewater facility designated by the Approving Authority. 
(h)  A non-transferable permit allowing a person to collect, dispose, or discharge industrial waste into a wastewater facility may be issued by the Approving Authority if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The applicant must complete an application provided by the Approving Authority; 
(2)  Submit with the application a copy of the application's current registration issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, pursuant to 30 TAC § 312.142, to collect and transport liquid waste; 
(3)  Submit with the application a copy of the state registration license receipt issued to each vehicle that applicant wants to register under this permit; 
(4)  Submit with the application proof that the applicant's vehicles which will be registered under this permit are insured in at least the minimum amounts as required by state law, or under self-insured as provided by state law to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operation of each vehicle; and 
(5)  Submit payment for permit fee. 
(i)  An applicant who has been denied a permit to collect, dispose, or discharge industrial waste into a wastewater facility may submit a written appeal within 30 days to the City Council, and shall have the opportunity to present evidence and oral argument during a regular City Council meeting following the 30-day appeal period. In the event that an applicant files an appeal, the Approving Authority shall prepare and submit to the City Council a written report outlining its reasons for denying the requested permit. 
(j)  The City Council shall set a permit fee for each registered vehicle. 
(k)  The Approving Authority shall number the permits consecutively, and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger the business name, state regulatory authority registration number and the regulatory authority's permit number. 
(l)  The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt, or a copy, in the vehicle at all times. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 9; Ord. No. 2019-10-01, § 2, 10-15-2019)  
Sec. 44-123. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the Approving Authority, the public sanitary sewer system regulations shall apply to all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property or into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(c)  The Approving Authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, State and local governments. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 10)  
Sec. 44-124. - Approving Authority. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public nuisance, the Approving Authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The Approving Authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The Approving Authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The Approving Authority has the sole discretion to suspend or terminate, without notice, the collection, disposal, or discharge of industrial waste by authorized third parties under section 44-122 of this chapter, as amended, at any wastewater facility, when such suspension or termination is for the protection, health, or safety of the general public and public facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 11; Ord. No. 2019-10-01 , § 3, 10-15-2019)  
Sec. 44-125. - Approving Authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the Approving Authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effect operating condition at his own expense. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 12)  
Sec. 44-126. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in amounts that will impede or stop the flow in the public sewers; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the Approving Authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the Approving Authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 13)  
Sec. 44-127. - Requirement for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the Approving Authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste; 
(3)  Install safety equipment and facilities (e.g., ventilation, steps) where needed; and 
(4)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 14)  
Sec. 44-128. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH and oil and grease.) 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this division shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the Approving Authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The Approving Authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be sampled for flow BOD, TSS and pH at least annually. 
(e)  The City may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 15)  
Sec. 44-129. - User charge system. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the City wastewater collection and/or disposal system, including the wastewater treatment plant, shall pay a charge designated by the Approving Authority and approved by the City Council. 
(b)  When discharges of any waste into the City system are approved by the Approving Authority, the City or its authorized representatives shall enter into an arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the City; 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as established in subsection (e) of this section; 
(3)  Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
(4)  A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and 
(5)  Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by City inspectors prior to sewer use. 
(c)  Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular sewer bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges which are attributable to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system. 
(d)  The City will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly. 
(e)  User charge rates. There shall be a charge for sanitary sewer service in the City for each month. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 16; Ord. of 6-13-2001, § I; Ord. No. 2019-10-01 , § 4, 10-15-2019)  
Sec. 44-130. - Continuation. 
A person discharging wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived may continue without penalty so long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge without permission of the Approving Authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the waste at least six months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived; 
(3)  Complies with section 44-131. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 17)  
Sec. 44-131. - Condition. 
(a)  The City may grant permission to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of section 44-130 provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within 120 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived on forms supplied by the Approving Authority; 
(2)  Secures approval by the Approving Authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when required; 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities, if required; 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the City; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point, when requested by the City, subject to the provisions of this division and approval of the Approving Authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 18)  
Sec. 44-132. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The City Manager or designee and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of person to maintain safe conditions, the City shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to their property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person and growing out of the conduct of the City employees conducting sampling operation. 
(d)  The City Manager or designee and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the City holds a negotiated easement for the purpose of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metal surgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 19)  
Sec. 44-133. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The City may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer, potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the City that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a wastewater, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the City's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the City as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the Approving Authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repairs a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of sections 44-115 through 44-122. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the City shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from its wastes. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 20)  
Sec. 44-134. - Notice. 
Except as provided under amended subsection 44-124(d), the City shall serve persons discharging in violation of this division with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 21; Ord. No. 2019-10-01 , § 5, 10-15-2019)  
Sec. 44-135. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this division beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Ord. of 7-16-1986, § 22)  
Secs. 44-136—44-153. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER USE REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 44-154. - Drought contingency plan. 
The City of Pearsall, Texas, drought contingency plan attached to the ordinance from which this division was derived and which is on file in the City offices and incorporated herein for all intents and purposes, and made part hereof for all purposes be, and the same is hereby, adopted as the official policy of the City. 
(Ord. of 9-13-2000, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-2011)  
Sec. 44-155. - Implementation. 
The Mayor and the City Council hereby designates the City Manager to implement the applicable provisions of the drought contingency plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08-01, § 1, 8-11-2015)  
Sec. 44-156. - City Manager designated. 
The Mayor and the City Council designates and authorizes the City Manager to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in the drought contingency plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08-01, § 2, 8-11-2015)  
Sec. 44-157. - Enforcement. 
The Mayor and the City Council hereby designates and authorizes the following City personnel to enforce and to issue citations for violations of the applicable provisions of the drought contingency plan: 
(1)  City Manager. 
(2)  City Code Enforcement Officers. 
(3)  Public Works Director. 
(4)  Water system supervisors. 
(5)  Water system assistants to supervisors. 
(6)  City Police Department law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08-01, § 3, 8-11-2015)  
Sec. 44-158. - Sole authority. 
The Mayor and City Council shall retain their sole authority to modify the drought contingency plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08-01, § 4, 8-11-2015)  
Secs. 44-159—44-176. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WELL PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 44-177. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Wells means the water wells owned and operated by the City, which are more specifically identified and described in exhibit A attached and made a part of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2003, § 2)  
Sec. 44-178. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for the uses and the construction of facilities in or on land within 150 feet of the wells in order to promote sanitary conditions in and around such wells, to secure all such land from pollution hazards, and to enable the City to comply with all applicable State and local regulations. 
(b)  The objective of this article is to prevent certain uses and the construction of facilities in or on land surrounding the wells, which might create a danger of pollution to the water produced from such wells. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2003, § 1)  
Sec. 44-179. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are prohibited within the designated areas of land surrounding the wells: 
(1)  Construction and/or operation of underground petroleum and/or chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission pipelines, stock pens, feedlots, dump grounds, privies, cesspools, septic tanks, sewage treatment drainfields, absorption beds, evapotranspiration beds, improperly constructed water wells of any depth, and all other construction or operation that could create an unsanitary condition is prohibited within, upon, or across all areas of land within a 150-foot radius of the wells. For the purposes of this article, improperly constructed water wells are those wells that do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a public of the wells. 
(2)  Construction of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers, and cemeteries is specifically prohibited within, upon, or across any area of land within a 50-foot radius of the wells. 
(3)  Construction of homes or buildings upon any area of land within a 150-foot radius of the wells is permitted, provided the restrictions described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section are met. 
(4)  Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited by this article; provided, however, livestock shall not be allowed within a 50-foot radius of the wells. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2003, § 3)  
Sec. 44-180. - Right of entry. 
City employees, or authorized representatives of the City, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to immediately enter upon any premises located within a 150-foot radius of any well to conduct any inspection or observation necessary to enforce this article. 
(Ord. of 4-28-2003, § 4)  
Secs. 44-181—44-201. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GAS SERVICE 
 
Sec. 44-202. - Director of Public Works. 
(a)  There shall be appointed by the City Manager a Director of Public Works, who shall be the administrative officer of the gas distribution system. The Director of Public Works shall have general supervision over all employees of the gas distribution system and shall be responsible for all property, machinery, and equipment used in, or connected with, the gas distribution system, including, but not limited to, gas station apparatus pipe lines, meters, wrenches, testing equipment and all gas inventory. He shall make frequent trips of inspection, as may be necessary from time to time, over all pipe lines and all other property used in or connected with the gas distribution system, and shall direct repairs deemed necessary and consistent with his duties. 
(b)  He shall also report all violations of this article to the City Manager or his designated representative and the City Manager shall forthwith proceed to prosecute offenders as set forth in this article or any amendment hereto. He shall also control the gas pressure supply and at all times ensure the sufficiency thereof and shall, except in cases of emergency, notify the City Manager or his designated representative, whenever he learns of the necessity to shut off the gas from any line of the system for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, connections, etc. The Director shall inspect and reinspect all such house piping, appliances, fixtures, and apparatus and the installation, construction, alteration or repair thereof whenever and as often as he shall deem it necessary in order to minimize danger of fires and accidents or injuries to persons or property; and the said City Plumbing Inspector and his assistants are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to cause enforcement thereof to be such as not to cause fire or accidents or injury to life or property. 
(c)  In the performance of his duties as required by this section, the Director shall be subject at all times to the ordinance from which this article is derived and the rules and regulations of the City. He shall serve for such term and receive such compensation as may be fixed by the City Manager. 
(d)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to do, commit, or assist in committing or doing, any of the following things or acts within the corporate limits of the City: 
(1)  Opening and closing valves or stopcocks. To open or close any valve or stopcock connected to the gas distribution system of the City without the permission of the Director of Public Works, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the Fire Department. 
(2)  Injuring, destroying, etc., property of the gas distribution system. To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure, or wantonly force open any valve gate or stopcock, or in any way whatsoever injure or destroy any of the buildings, appurtenances, fences, fixtures or property pertaining to the gas distribution system. 
(3)  To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangements for the purpose of procuring gas for himself or others from private connection on premises contrary to the City regulations or ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  To interfere with or injure any reservoir, cock, valve, or other apparatus pertaining to the gas distribution system, or to turn on or off without authority the gas in any street valve or other gas fixtures, or to hitch or tie an animal thereto. 
(5)  To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the gas distribution system, or to turn off or on the use of the gas of said system without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(6)  To remove any gas meter that has been placed by the City or in any manner change, interfere with or tamper with any gas meter, providing that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the City when acting in their official capacity; except to effect repairs in an emergency (e.g., home owner, plumbing). 
(7)  To turn on the gas supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly charge or for the violation of any rule or ordinance governing the gas distribution system. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 2)  
Sec. 44-203. - Tapping fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the mains or pipes of the gas distribution system of the City without first making application to the City, stating fully the several and various uses for which gas is requested, and upon the payment of the tapping fee, the Director shall make, or have made, the necessary connections and furnish a cut-off valve, meter and meter couplings, the cost of which is included in the tapping fee, and every premises connected with any gas main or being supplied with any gas from the gas distribution system shall have a separate service connection. All fees and charges shall be paid for at amounts and rates fixed by this article or by resolution of the City Manager. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 3)  
Sec. 44-204. - Gas leaks. 
It shall be the duty of all employees of the City to report to the Director of Public Works, any leaks or unnecessary waste of gas that may come to their attention, and any violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 6)  
Sec. 44-205. - Meter. 
All gas meters shall be set by employees of the City. If the meter gets out of order and fails to operate and register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption, as shown by the meter when it was in order. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 7)  
Sec. 44-206. - Minimum monthly charge. 
Each consumer of gas living in a separate house must have a separate connection and meter for each house. Except, that where a residence is not within reach of the City gas main, arrangements may be made, at the option of the City, to secure gas from another user of City gas, in which case, the minimum monthly charge shall be made for each additional residence taking gas through such meter. The regular minimum, the additional minimum and all gas used over the minimum by such consumer shall be charged to the customer having the meter. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 8)  
Sec. 44-207. - No refund. 
None of the tap fees or one-time rental fees as herein provided shall be refundable to the consumer upon termination of the gas service. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 12)  
Sec. 44-208. - Pipe extension. 
For each service connection tap on noncommercial, permanent, single-family dwellings within the corporate limits of the City constructed in accordance with the City housing code, the gas distribution system shall furnish, if necessary, 200 feet of pipe extension, or pipe extension to the service connection property line, whichever is less, at no charge to the consumer. If more than 200 feet of pipe extension are necessary, the customer will pay for the difference at actual cost. Any customer desiring gas service outside the City limits will be required to furnish all pipe materials and labor needed. The construction of gas mains and service lines shall be exercised only by City personnel and under no circumstances shall a private citizen handle repairs and/or construction of gas mains and service lines. An exception to this case shall be only when a private contractor has a written contract with the City. The customers desiring gas service outside the City limits shall comply with all of the rules and regulations herein provided or the service will not be extended. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 13)  
Sec. 44-209. - Standards. 
That hereafter all pipes placed for the convenience of natural gas in any house, residence, building or structure in the City or connected to the gas distribution system shall meet the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act (49 USC 60101) and Safety Rules and Regulations of the Railroad Commission of Texas Gas Utilities Division (16 Tex. Admin. Code § 8.1 et seq.). 
(1)  Steel pipe. All pipe used for the installation, extension, alteration, or repair of any gas piping shall be new, standard weight wrought iron black steel, or galvanized steel, free from splits, internal obstructions, or other defects. Burred ends shall be reamed to the full bore of the pipe. 
(2)  Thermoplastic pipe shall be ASTM specification D2513 "Standard Specification for Thermoplastic Gas Pressure pipe, tubing and fittings." 
(3)  All materials, fittings, valves and methods of installation of all natural gas lines in the City must also conform to the specifications mentioned in chapter 22 of the City plumbing code as passed by the City Council on May 11, 1967. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 14)  
Sec. 44-210. - Inspections. 
Permits, fees and inspections regarding installation of natural gas piping and fittings shall be as set out in chapter 19 of the City plumbing code. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 15)  
Sec. 44-211. - Turn off for inspection. 
Whenever any alterations or repairs are made in any line or gas pipe leading from the meter to any house, residence or structure or any fitting therein, except setting stoves or lights and necessary fittings, the gas shall be turned off, and shall not be again turned on until inspected as provided in section 44-210 and approved. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 16)  
Sec. 44-212. - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for anyone not having a permit from the City Plumbing Inspector to turn gas on or off at, or to interfere in any way with, the meter or regulator. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 17)  
Sec. 44-213. - Plumbing regulations. 
(a)  After all pipes placed for the conveyance of natural gas in any house, residence, building or structure in the City shall be of sizes as follows, for houses of five rooms or less: 
(1)  Main line to meter: one inch. 
(2)  Meter to small boiler or furnace: not less than 1¼ inch. 
(3)  Meter to first opening, three fires or less: one inch. 
(4)  Meter to first opening, more than three fires: one inch. 
(5)  First to second opening: one inch. 
(6)  Second to fourth opening: three-quarter inch. 
(b)  For houses of five to ten rooms the pipe from main line to meter small be 1½ inch. 
(c)  All fittings used in any such houses, buildings, or structure, shall be of safe design, all pipes shall be wrought iron and all fittings malleable iron, brass or bronze and shall be free from defects. Every connection of pipe and fittings shall be made by the joining by means of thread or iron pipe, brass, or bronze fittings. All space heaters must be connected with Fire Underwriters approved connections. 
(d)  Bushings must not be used. 
(e)  Three-way valves are not permitted in any case. 
(f)  Unions or running thread shall not be used on concealed gas piping, either in original installations or repair. 
(g)  When necessary to connect two sizes of pipe, a reducing coupling shall be used. 
(h)  All branch outlet pipes shall be taken from top or sides of main supply lines and never from below. 
(i)  No paint, cement, preparation of dope of any kind shall be used on said pipe or fittings to close cracks, openings or defects, except pure white lead shall be used on the threads of every joint connected, or other approved thread lubricants. 
(j)  Ranges, hot plates, etc., used in hotels, restaurants, and hamburger stands, where gas is used for fuel, must be provided with canopies properly vented into brick, tile, or metal flues extending to open air at least two feet above the roof. 
(k)  Vents to gas appliances, concealed inside of partitions, under floors or enclosed in any manner so that the said vent pipes are in contact with wood, shall be air tight, and shall be made of at least No. 22 gauge galvanized iron, and properly covered with asbestos paper. 
(l)  Vent pipes in attics may connect with a flue; or extend through the roof to open air at least two feet above the roof, and terminate with a screened cap. Such vent pipes in attics and above roof shall be of at least No. 22 gauge galvanized iron; exposed vent pipes in rooms of at least No. 26 gauge galvanized or black iron. 
(m)  Wood partitions through which vent pipes pass must be protected by a thimble with a proper air space, except that no vent pipe shall pass through any closet or pantry used for the storage of clothing household goods, or any combustible material. 
(n)  Water heaters and gas appliances having pilot burners must be provided with down draft devices above the fixture in the vent, near the appliances. 
(o)  Plumbers and gas fitters stopping vents in walls or in attics will be subject to the penalty as specified in section 1-13. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 18)  
Sec. 44-214. - Test. 
When the fitter has completed the system of piping and has all branch and bracket extensions and heater openings firmly and permanently fastened, he shall test the piping and if found tight shall make application for test with the City Plumbing Inspector. The Plumbing Inspector, or one of his assistants, will call and inspect the piping and witness the test, and if he finds the piping tight and the sizes and work in accordance with the provisions of this article then the City Plumbing Inspector or such assistant will deliver the meter connect fitting. 
(Ord. of 7-25-1983(1), § 19)  
Secs. 44-215—44-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 44-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Pearsall as a governmental entity and utility purvey or that locates, installs, owns, operates, repairs, replaces, adjusts, relocates, maintains and/or removes utility facilities. 
Person means any individual, partnership, joint venture, firm, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or developer/subdivider that installs Utility Facilities and then conveys ownership of such facilities to the City or other Public Utility. 
Public utility means any person, firm, mutual and cooperative association, partnership, corporation, river authority, cooperative corporation, water or sewer supply corporation, or any general law or special act district that locates, installs, owns, operates, repairs, replaces, adjusts, relocates, maintains and/or removes utility facilities in order to provide utility service and which is granted a franchise by the City to provide such service within the municipal boundaries of the City. 
Public way means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible utility uses located within the municipal boundaries of the City. 
Utility facilities means water transmission mains and distribution lines, and related facilities; waste water collection lines and transmission mains, and related facilities; stormwater collection and transmission lines; conduits and related facilities; electric transmission and distribution lines, and related facilities; telephone lines and related facilities; gas distribution mains, lines and related facilities; cable television lines and related facilities; telegraph and telecommunications lines and related facilities; and any other utility system facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 1)  
Sec. 44-242. - Permitted location of utility facilities. 
All utility facilities, whether installed by a public utility, the City and/or any person, shall be installed in the nonpaved portion of a public way. Current operating utility facilities not located in the nonpaved portion of a public way do not have to be moved unless the City requests the public utility and/or any person to move such utility facilities. The location of any utility facilities in a public way not currently existing, shall be subject to the City's approval. All future utility facilities that are installed for the first time or alternatively are being replaced and/or relocated shall be installed in the nonpaved portion of a public way. The City may, in its discretion, approve an alternative location within the public way. It shall be the obligation of the public utility, and/or any person to provide the necessary unpaved right-of-way within the public way prior to the installation, replacement and relocation of utility facilities. All such utility facilities installed or erected shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper surface and subsurface use of the public way and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any such public way. No such public utility shall have the right to locate, install, own, operate, repair, replace, adjust, relocate, maintain and/or remove utility facilities within the municipal boundaries of the City unless it has obtained a franchise from the City to locate, install, own, operate, repair, replace adjust, relocate, maintain and/or remove such utility facilities and obtained all other necessary licenses, permits and authorizations as may be required in order to carry on its respective utility service. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 2)  
Sec. 44-243. - Utility facilities under streets, avenues or alleys. 
All utility facilities approved by the City to pass, or cross under, a street, avenue or alley shall be installed at the proper depth and location before the street, avenue or alley is paved. If the street, avenue or alley is already paved, the utility facilities shall be installed only after boring under the street, avenue or alley, unless otherwise authorized by the City. When it is deemed necessary by the City that utility facilities pass, or cross under, any street, avenue or alley pavement, they shall be extended to a point at least three feet beyond the edge of the pavement to allow protection and access of same. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 3)  
Sec. 44-244. - Height of overhead utility facilities. 
Overhead utility facilities crossing an alley shall be a minimum of 15 feet in height. Overhead utility facilities crossing a street shall be a minimum of 25 feet in height. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 4)  
Sec. 44-245. - Easements required within subdivided platted area. 
Except where alleys, not less than 20 feet in width, are provided by a developer/owner, easements, not less than ten feet in width, shall be retained on every rear lot line when platting and subdividing real property within the municipal boundaries and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, so as to create at least a ten-foot, and in cases of abutting properties, a cumulative 20-foot permanent easement between the rear of lots. Where additionally necessary to accommodate utility facilities' placements, easements, not less than ten feet in width, on either or both sides of side lot lines shall be retained for utility facilities. Such permanent easements may be required across the interior parts of lots, other than as described above upon recommendation of the City Engineer. Where the proposed platted area adjoins another unplatted area, a full 20-foot alley or 20-foot permanent easement width may be required along the rear of lots adjoining the unplatted area. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 5)  
Sec. 44-246. - Restoration of public way. 
If during the course of the location, installation, operation, repair, replacement adjustment, maintenance, relocation and/or removal of utility facilities, there occurs a disturbance of any public way by a public utility, the City and/or any other person, such public utility, City and/or person shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to or better than the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance to the satisfaction of the City and for a period of one year from the date the public way is disturbed. No public way shall be encumbered for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 6)  
Sec. 44-247. - Relocation of public utility's facilities at request of City. 
(a)  Upon its receipt of reasonable advance written notice, not to be less than 30 days, a public utility and/or any person shall, at its own nonreimbursable expense, and subject to the provisions of section 44-242, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property, including utility facilities, of the public utility and/or any person, when lawfully required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, street widening, straightening or abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of the street grade, installation of other utility facilities, or any other types of structures or improvements by the City. The failure of the City to give proper notice shall not excuse the public utility and/or any person from protecting, supporting, temporarily disconnecting, relocating or removing any utility facilities of the public utility and/or any person's nonreimbursable expense. In the case of an emergency, the City can request that the public utility and/or any person protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove its utility facilities, and the public utility and/or any person shall immediately protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove the utility facilities. If the public utility and/or any person fails to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its utility facilities after being requested to do so by the City as a result of an emergency, the City may protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove the utility facilities of a public utility and/or any person, and seek its reasonable costs from the public utility and/or any person. 
(b)  If a public utility and/or any person intends to lawfully abandon its property, it shall notify the City of such intent to lawfully abandon and allow the City a reasonable time to consider the consequences of a potential abandonment. If the City allows the abandonment, the public utility and/or any person shall immediately remove all such utility facilities at its own nonreimbursable expense and indemnify and hold harmless the City from any claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suites of liability of any character, type or description including expenses of litigation, court costs and attorney's fees arising from the removal of such utility facilities. The City has the right to request such utility facilities not be removed so that the City may use these utility facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 7)  
Sec. 44-248. - Relocation of utility facilities. 
A public utility and/or any person shall not perform any construction or repair which impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic without giving the City written notice ten business days prior to commencement of the project. If emergency repairs require immediate attention, the public utility and/or any person shall attempt to provide notice to the City, and should limit its repairs to those necessary to protect public safety. The notice shall state the length of the project, the construction or repair to be performed, and the area, if any, where traffic will be impaired. If the public utility and/or any person intends to construct new facilities it must obtain a permit from the City in addition to any other necessary permits. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 8)  
Sec. 44-249. - Overhead utility adjustments at request of third party. 
A public utility, any person or the City shall, after receipt of a written request from any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise, lower, shield or de-energize its overhead utility facilities to permit the moving of such building, provided the expense of such temporary raising, lowering, shielding or de-energizing of such overhead utility facilities is paid by such person including, if required by the public utility, any person or the City, making such payment or a deposit in advance; and the public utility or City is given not less than ten business days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary overhead utility facilities' adjustments. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 9)  
Sec. 44-250. - Trimming of trees and shrubbery. 
The City, a public utility and/or any other person shall have the right to trim trees or other natural growth to prevent such trees or other natural growth from coming into contact with its utility facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 10)  
Sec. 44-251. - Use of utility facilities by City. 
Subject to any applicable State or federal regulations or tariffs and local franchise agreements, the City shall have the right to make additional use, for any lawful public purpose, of any utility facilities controlled or maintained exclusively by, or for, a public utility and/or any person in any public way, provided that such use by the City does not interfere with a current or future use by the public utility and/or any person; and the City may be required to pay a reasonable rental fee, or otherwise reasonably compensate the public utility and/or any person, for the use of such utility facilities, with such rental fee or other compensation to be agreed upon by the City, the public utility and/or any person. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 11)  
Sec. 44-252. - Safe requirements. 
(a)  Location, installation, operation, repair, replacement, adjustment, relocation, maintenance, and/or removal of any utility facilities by any public utility, the City, and or any other person, shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial compliance with applicable federal, State and local regulations and any utility facilities shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the City's municipal boundaries. A public utility, the City and/or any other person shall locate, install, operate, repair, replace, adjust, relocate, maintain and/or remove its utility facilities in accordance with the most recent requirements of the applicable water, waste water, electric, gas, telephone, telegraph, cable television, or other industry standards and codes, as may be amended, and of the City, and any future codes and amendments thereto adopted by the City or other regulatory agencies, in such manner that they will not interfere or conflict with any other utility facilities located, installed, owned, operated and maintained by the City, any person, or any public utility, serving customers within the municipal boundaries of the City. 
(b)  A public utility, any person, and the City shall at all times keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all utility facilities in, over, under, along, upon or across a public way in the City, wherever situated or located. A public utility and/or any person shall maintain a force of one or more regional utility coordination agents or employees at all times and shall have sufficient additional operational employees to provide timely, safe, adequate, and proper services for the location, installation, operation, repair, replacement, adjustment, relocation, maintenance and/or removal of its utility facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 12)  
Sec. 44-253. - Overhead and underground construction. 
In those areas within the City's municipal boundaries where the utility facilities of any public utility and/or any person consist of both overhead and underground facilities, unless otherwise provided by any ordinance, the public utility and/or any person are encouraged by the City, but shall have the sole discretion subject to section 44-242, to locate, install, own, operate, and maintain any of its utility facilities under ground within the nonpaved portion of the public way, including the right to repair, replace adjust, relocate, and/or subsequently remove such utility facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 13)  
Sec. 44-254. - Relocation of utility facilities to accommodate collateral improvements. 
A public utility and/or any person shall comply with any City requirements to adjust the existing or proposed location of any of utility facilities because of collateral improvements which exist, or which are being installed, in, over, under, along, upon or across a public way, or if the City determines it necessary to reroute any of such utility facilities, the required extra work to adjust, remove, replace or repair such utility facilities to accommodate such collateral improvements shall be done by the public utility and/or any person at its own nonreimbursable cost. Collateral improvements are defined as public works including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Streets, curbs and gutters; 
(2)  Sanitary sewer lines and manholes; 
(3)  Drainage facilities including, but not limited to, storm sewers, drains, ditches and concrete-lined channels; 
(4)  Bridges, culverts and headwalls; 
(5)  Overhead electric, telephone, telegraph and cable television wires, poles and appurtenances thereto; 
(6)  Underground gas, electric, telephone, telegraph and cable television facilities and appurtenances thereto; and 
(7)  Changes to rights-of-way, grades and alignments of established streets, sidewalks, alleys, terraces and parkways. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 14)  
Sec. 44-255. - Compliance with City's subdivisions regulations. 
Any individual, partnership, joint venture, firm, association, joint stock company, trust or corporation that is platting and subdividing land for additions to the City shall additionally comply with all other requirements for providing and location of utilities as outlined in the Subdivisions chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 15)  
Sec. 44-256. - Authority of the City Manager. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to implement the provisions of this article and ensure that such provisions are enforced. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 16)  
Sec. 44-257. - Enforcement. 
The City shall have all rights afforded to it at law or in equity including, but not limited to, injunctive or mandamus relief, to enforce the provisions of this article. The City Attorney or other attorney designated by the City is authorized to initiate all necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-13-1994, § 17)  
Chapter 46 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
 
Sec. 46-19. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in City Municipal Court or County Court, shall be fined not to exceed $200.00. Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any of these provisions shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-43), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-20. - Chief of Police designated Director of Public Safety; administration. 
The Chief of Police is hereby designated for the purposes of this article as the Director of Public Safety, and in the administration of the duties hereinafter assigned to him as such Director of Public Safety, the Chief of Police shall be assisted by such employees and officers of the City as he may require. The Chief of Police may adopt and promulgate rules necessary for the administration of, and procedures under this article, not inconsistent with the terms of the article, and in the exercise of this power of the Chief of Police as such Director, may prescribe forms for all papers to be used in connection with the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-20), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-21. - Permit required. 
Any taxi or taxicab service to be operated as a nonexclusive franchise within the City limits shall obtain a permit from the City for the safe and regulated operation of each vehicle as a taxi or taxicab for use of public streets and rights-of-ways within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-21), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-22. - Application for permit; qualification; issuance; complaints and revocation. 
(a)  No permit to operate a taxicab shall be issued by the City until the Director of Public Safety shall, after a hearing duly had, declare by certificate that the public convenience and necessity requires the proposed taxicab service for which application for permit is made. In determining whether the public convenience and necessity requires that a permit be issued for such taxicabs for which application may be made, the Director of Public Safety shall take into consideration: 
(1)  Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require such proposed or such additional taxicab service within the City; 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant; 
(3)  The number, kind, type of equipment, and color scheme to be used by such applicant; 
(4)  Any increased traffic congestion on the streets of the City which may result, and whether the safe use of the public streets, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be unduly endangered by the granting of such additional permit; 
(5)  Such other relevant facts as the Director of Public Safety may deem advisable and necessary which may throw light on the public necessity and convenience. 
(b)  Any applicant for a taxicab permit under these provisions shall make proper application therefore on blanks to be furnished by the Director of Public Safety, and immediately upon filing of such application, the Director shall cause a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place in the City Hall to be designated by the Director, and said notice shall set out the facts that the certain application has been filed for a taxicab permit; the name of the applicant; the kind of equipment; and all other pertinent data from said application which said Director may deem necessary. Said posting of such notice shall constitute a notice to all holders of the existing taxicab permits that a public hearing will be held at a public place in the City to be designated by the Director of Public Safety in said notice. A designated time shall be given in the notice. Said designated time shall be not less than five days nor more than 15 days after the date of the first publication of posting of said notice. Said notice shall remain posted until the day of said hearing. All holders of existing taxicab permits, or any other citizen, shall thereupon be entitled to file any complaints or protests that said party may see fit. At the time of the holding of the investigation and hearing with reference to whether the public convenience and necessity requires the operation of such additional vehicles covered in the application, the Director of Public Safety, or some city officer designated by the Director, shall consider all of the complaints and protests, and in conducting the hearing shall have the right to call such witnesses as he shall see fit. During all such hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the public convenience and necessity requires such operation of the vehicles for which said application has been made. 
(c)  If the Director of Public Safety finds from his investigation and hearing, or from an investigation and hearing under his direction and supervision, that the public convenience and necessity justifies the operation of the vehicle or vehicles for which license is desired, the Director shall notify the applicant of such finding. Within five days thereafter, the applicant shall furnish to the Director, any and all relevant information which may be required, and if the Director then finds that the applicant is the owner or lessee of, and intends to become the bona fide operator of, the vehicle or vehicles for which a permit is desired, the Director shall require such applicant to furnish a policy of insurance as herein provided. If the Director shall further find that such policy of insurance has been filed and that the vehicle or vehicles and applicant comply with, all relevant ordinances of the City, and all of the rules and regulations established by the City Council, and by the Director of Public Safety, more effectively to carry out the purposes and intent of said ordinances, the Director of Public Safety shall issue his written certificate to the tax assessor and collector, certifying that the public convenience and necessity requires the operation of said taxicab or taxicabs, or any less number thereof, which the applicant desires and proposes to operate, and that said applicant is entitled to have said vehicle or vehicles issued a permit as taxicabs, upon complying with all of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If the Director of Public Safety finds from such investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity does not justify the operation of the vehicle for which license is desired, the Director shall forthwith notify the applicant of such finding. 
(e)  After the Director of Public Safety has made his finding and has declared the same, either the applicant for said permit or the opponent to said permit shall have the right to appeal to the City Council within ten days. Said appeal shall be perfected by letter addressed to the Mayor and City Council, stating that an appeal from the decision of the Director is desired to the City Council as a whole. The City Council, as soon as practical after receiving said notice of appeal from the finding of the Director, shall grant the appellant a hearing and, after the hearing of said appeal, shall modify, sustain or reverse the findings made by the Director, and shall certify his decision to the Director for observance. If no appeal is taken from the finding made by the Director within the time provided above, the decision of said Director shall be final. 
(f)  Upon a complaint filed by any person with the Director, upon his own notice, the Director, after five days' notice of the ground of said complaint to the owner or operator of any taxicab against whom the complaint is made, may hear evidence with reference to such complaint, and after such hearing, the Director may revoke or suspend the permit of such owner or operator for good cause shown. 
(g)  After the Director has heard the complaint for the revocation or suspension of the license of any owner or operator of a taxicab, the Director shall make findings and declare the same, and either the owner or operator of such taxicab, or the complainant, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council within ten days. Said appeal shall be perfected by letter addressed to the Mayor and City Council, stating that an appeal from the ruling of the Director is desired to the City Council as a whole. If an appeal from the decision of the Director is perfected as provided in this subsection, the decision of the Director shall be suspended until passed upon by the City Council. Upon receiving such appeal, the City Council, as soon as practical thereafter, shall hear such appeal and shall either sustain, modify or reverse the decision of the Director. If no appeal is taken from the ruling of the Director within the time as provided in this subsection, said ruling of the Director of Public Safety shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-22), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-23. - Non-transferability of permit. 
No permit issued under the terms of this article shall be transferred to any other person, nor shall such permit be used for the operation of any other vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-25), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-24. - Insurance. 
The owner or operator of each vehicle operated as a taxi or taxicab within the City shall be required to maintain at least the minimum amount of $500,000.00 combined single limits each occurrence of commercial general public liability insurance and at least the minimum amount of $100,000.00 combined single limits each occurrence of comprehensive business automotive liability insurance, or at the minimum coverages required by the State for commercial passenger vehicles for hire operated upon the public streets and highways of the State, or at such other minimum coverages as may be required by the State for vehicles operated as a taxi or taxicab upon the public streets and highways of the State, whichever coverage amounts are greater. In addition, the owner or operator of each vehicle operated as a taxi or taxicab within the City shall also be required to maintain personal injury protection (PIP) insurance providing for minimum coverage of $10,000.00 per person. Annually renewable insurance certificates evidencing proper and current coverages shall be filed with the Director at least annually. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-26), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-25. - Payment of ad valorem taxes. 
After the Director of Public Safety has issued his certificate to the tax assessor and collector as provided for in section 46-22, and before the permit or renewal of the permit to operate a taxicab shall be issued, said tax assessor and collector shall examine the tax records and ascertain whether the ad valorem taxes assessed by the City against the vehicle and other equipment to be used in the business of the applicant have been fully paid. If said ad valorem taxes have not been paid, the tax assessor and collector shall refuse to issue the permit, or renewal thereof, until all of said ad valorem taxes have been paid. If said ad valorem taxes have been paid, the tax assessor and collector shall issue to said applicant a permit or renewal thereof for each and every vehicle as shown by the certificate, as provided for in section 46-22, filed with him by the Director of Public Safety, to operate such vehicle over the streets of the City as a taxicab, upon the payment by said applicant of the permit and inspection fees provided for in this article. In no event shall a permit be issued without the certificate of public convenience and necessity having been issued for same, and if any permit is issued without said certificate of public convenience and necessity, said permit shall be void and of no effect. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-27), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-26. - Nonpayment of taxes; revocation of permit for delinquency. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner or every taxicab operator within the City to render for ad valorem taxes to the City, all vehicles or other equipment used in such business, and a failure to render for and pay such ad valorem taxes to the City, before said taxes become delinquent, shall operate as a revocation of any permit authorizing the operation of any such taxicab over the public streets of the City. 
(b)  No permit or renewal thereof authorizing the operation of any taxicabs on the streets of the City shall ever be issued if any delinquent taxes are due to the City on any taxicab for which said permit or license or renewal thereof is sought, or if the owner thereof has failed to render same for ad valorem taxation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-28), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-27. - Operation by persons other than permit holder prohibited. 
No taxicab for which a permit shall have been issued shall be operated by anyone except the holder of such permit, or any employee of such holder. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-29), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-28. - Chauffeur's license required. 
Any operator of a taxi or taxicab as herein set forth shall be required to have a valid State chauffeur's license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-30), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-29. - Requirements for taxicab driver's license. 
(a)  Every person driving a taxicab must be licensed as such and each applicant for a driver's license shall: 
(1)  Be 18 years of age or over; 
(2)  Be of sound physique, with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab; and as evidence of such physical condition, said applicant shall present the certificate of a reputable physician practicing in the State; 
(3)  Be able to speak, read and write the English language; 
(4)  Be clean of dress and person, and not be addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics; 
(5)  Fill out upon a blank form, to be provided by the Director, a statement giving their full name, residence and place of residence for five years previous to moving to their present address; age, race, height, and color of eyes and hair; place of birth; length of time they have resided in the City; whether a citizen of the United States; places of previous employment; whether married or single; whether they have ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor; whether they have previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and if so, when and where; whether their license has ever been revoked and for what cause; which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the Director as a permanent record; 
(6)  Show by said application that they have registered their fingerprints for purposes of identification with the Chief of Police; 
(7)  Pay a one-time fee to the City upon making any such application, and, before any such license is finally issued, pay an additional amount to defray the City's cost in physically making the operator's license, but if such license is not issued, said applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of the initial fee paid on filing his application. 
(b)  The applicant for such license under the provisions of this section shall be examined by a person designated by the Director as to his knowledge of the provisions of this article, the traffic regulations, and the geography of the City. The result of the examination shall be reported in writing to the Director and, if unsatisfactory, such applicant shall be refused a license. Each such applicant must demonstrate his skill and ability to handle his vehicle safely by driving it through a crowded section of the City accompanied by some officer or agent of the City authorized by the Director. 
(c)  Each applicant for such license must file with his application two recent photographs of themselves, of the size designated by the Director, and one of which may be easily attached to his license, when issued; the other shall be filed with the application. The photograph shall be so attached to the license that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without probability of detection. Each licensed driver shall, upon demand of a license inspector, police, Director, or a passenger, exhibit their license and photograph for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-31), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-30. - Identification light and lettering on vehicle. 
Each vehicle used as a taxi or taxicab as provided in this article shall have a lighted sign which shall read "Taxi" on the top and front of said vehicle. Said lighted sign to be on when said taxi or taxicab shall be in operation during hours after dark, and said light to be off if not for hire during hours after daylight. Each vehicle used as a taxi or taxicab as set forth in this article shall be required to have its commercial name on each side of said vehicle in letters of a bold type, not less than 2½ inches high. Each vehicle used as a taxi or taxicab under the terms of this article shall also display the permit number of such cab on either side of said vehicle, below its commercial name. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-32), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-31. - Gross receipts tax. 
Each operator of a taxi or taxicab within the City under the provisions of this article shall pay to the City two percent of the gross receipts per year paid to said taxi operator by passengers for hire. Each owner or operator hereunder shall report such gross receipts to the City on a calendar quarter basis, such reports being due in the Office of the City Manager no later than ten days after the close of each quarter, to wit on April 10, July 10, October 10, and January 10, and any amounts due under said gross receipts tax shall be due and payable to the City within ten days after the due date of such report. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-33), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-32. - Fares. 
Each owner or operator of a taxi or taxicab shall charge certain rates for operation within the City for 24-hour-a-day service. Such rates shall be based on distance and waiting time, and a minimum charge shall apply for each trip. A gas surcharge may also be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-34), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-33. - Inspection of taxicabs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety to inspect, or cause to be inspected, every taxicab for which a permit has been issued under the provisions of this article at least once each six months, for the purpose of determining whether such vehicle is in a safe condition to be operated as a taxicab; and upon notifying the owner or operator of such taxicab or automobile for hire, said owner of said vehicles shall submit such vehicle to the Director, or to a person designated by the Director, for inspection of said vehicle at the time and place specified by the Director. If the Director or the person appointed by him to inspect said vehicle, finds the taxicab to be in safe condition, the Director, or such inspector may paste a paper seal of a type and design adopted by the Director on some portion of the vehicle stating the date said vehicle was inspected, and that the vehicle was approved by each inspector. The Director may adopt a seal of a different color for each quarter or three-month period of each calendar year. No taxicab shall be operated in the City without the approval seal of the Director, or his inspector, being attached thereto, whenever such seal has been adopted and used by the Director. 
(b)  If the Director, or the inspector appointed by him, finds the taxicab to be in a defective condition and is unsafe to be used as a taxicab, the Director shall order said vehicle not to be used as a taxicab until such defect is remedied. After the owner of the vehicle has remedied such defect, he shall again offer such vehicle for inspection, and if the Director or his inspector shall find said vehicle to be safe for public use, the Director shall approve same. If such vehicle is still in a defective condition, the Director shall order same not to be used until the vehicle passes inspection. No taxicab found to be unsafe by the Director or his inspector shall be operated over the streets of the City. Nothing herein shall prevent the Director from inspecting or causing to be inspected any taxicab at any time the Director sees fit, and upon finding such vehicle to be in a defective condition, the Director shall order its use as a taxicab discontinued until such vehicle is approved; but no additional fee for such inspection shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-35), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-34. - Taximeters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, driving or in charge of any taxicab to operate or drive such taxicab unless such taxicab is equipped with a taximeter, and such taximeter is used to determine the fare to be charged, and no other or different fare for any trip shall be charged than the fare recorded on the reading face of such taximeter. No other rates or methods of measuring the distance or time charges shall be allowed, except by taximeter as herein provided. 
(b)  Every taxicab shall have affixed thereto a taximeter of a size and design approved by the Director of Public Safety and such taximeter shall conform to the following specifications: 
(1)  The taximeter shall be a mechanical or electronic instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically or electronically calculated for distance traveled, for waiting time, if any, and upon which such charge or charges shall be indicated by means of clearly legible figures which are electrically lighted each time the taximeter flag is thrown from non-earning to earning position. 
(2)  Every taximeter must register upon visual counters the following items: 
a.  Total miles on the taxicab; 
b.  Paid miles; 
c.  Number of units; 
d.  Number of trips. 
(3)  Each taximeter must be furnished with a tamperproof switch and system of electrical distribution so that when the taximeter flag is in the "high" or nonearning position, the cursing light or lights will be automatically lighted, between sunset and sunrise, and when the taximeter flag is on "mileage" or "time," both of which are earning positions, an amber telltale light of the top light will be automatically lighted, and will be visible from all directions at all times. 
(c)  Measurement of distance shall be made by a routinely calibrated and accurate taximeter of the vehicle operating as a taxicab; provided, such taximeter shall have been inspected and tested for accuracy, and shall be in good working order at the time such rate or fare is charged. Inspections and tests shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Safety or his designate, in accordance with the weights and measures laws of the State. 
(d)  No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter, while carrying a passenger, or while under employment, shall display the signal affixed to such taximeter in such position as to denote such vehicle is not employed, or in such position as to denote that the taxicab is employed at a rate of fare different from that which the use of the taxicab legally justifies, under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the driver to call the attention of passengers to the amount registered on the taximeter, and the taximeter flag shall not be changed to "vacant" position until after the fare is paid. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-36), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-35. - Articles left in taxicabs. 
(a)  All drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the Police Department, or to authorized agents of their companies, all property left in such vehicles by passengers, and whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  When articles left in taxicabs have been delivered to the Office of the Chief of Police, he shall make an entry of the fact in a book provided for that purpose and shall keep all such articles for not less than one year until claimed by the owner, or as the City Council may otherwise authorize. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-37), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-36. - Receipt to be issued upon demand; right of driver to request advance payment; travel by most direct route; posting of permit and rates. 
(a)  If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same, at the time of such payment, a receipt therefore in legible type or writing, containing the name of the owner, the City permit number, the driver's license number, the State license number of the vehicle, and any items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid, and the date of payment. 
(b)  Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand an estimated payment of a projected large legal fare (e.g., out of the City) in advance and may refuse employment unless such fare is prepaid; but no driver of the taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon their request, anywhere in the City, unless such taxicab has been previously engaged or unable to perform. No driver of a taxicab shall carry any other person than the passenger first employed in the taxicab, without the consent of such passenger. 
(c)  Any driver employed to carry a passenger to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that would carry such passenger safely and expeditiously to the selected destination. 
(d)  There shall be posted in a conspicuous place, in a frame with a transparent cover, on the inside of each taxicab, the permit or certificate issued to such taxicab owner by the City, and a card showing the rates charged by said taxicab. The card shall be posted in a place easily observed and read by any passenger riding in said taxicab. If any owner, driver, licensee or operator of any taxicab shall refuse to convey passengers or items at the rates specified on the rate card displayed in said taxicab, or shall demand or receive an amount in excess of the rates displayed on said card, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this article after having hired the same, and any person who shall hire any vehicle herein defined, with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired, shall be guilty of a theft of services misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-38), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-37. - Time of continuous operation limited. 
No operator, driver or chauffeur of any taxicab shall operate any such motor vehicle for more than 12 hours in any one 24-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-39), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-38. - Parcel carriers prohibited from accepting passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined in this article, who is engaged in the business of delivering parcels or packages, to carry or offer to carry passengers, whether such passenger is carried, or an offer is made to carry such passenger for compensation, or free of charge; provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to individuals or business firms conducting a free delivery service as an adjunct or supplement to the main business of such individual or firm. However, it shall be lawful for a taxi or taxicab driver to deliver parcels or packages with or without a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-40), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-39. - Seeking and soliciting patrons prohibited. 
(a)  No driver shall cruise and openly solicit or hail prospective passengers at any time, and whenever a taxicab is unoccupied, the driver shall proceed at once by the most direct route to a City-designated taxicab standing zone and/or the garage or terminal where the vehicle is housed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of any taxicab, or for any other person, to seek or solicit patrons or passengers for any such taxicab by word or by sign, directly or indirectly, while driving any such taxicab over, through or upon any public street or public place in the City, or while same is parked on any public street or alley of the City, or repeatedly or persistently to drive any taxicab through, over or on any public streets or places of the City, except in response to calls by patrons for said taxicab, or while actually transporting passengers therein. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-41), 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 46-40. - Unlawful to solicit passengers at depots. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of any taxicab, or for any other person working in concert with such driver at any passenger depot, or upon any passenger depot platform, or upon any sidewalk or street in front of any depot of any transit bus or railroad company within the City, to solicit or cry out for passengers or to promote a stay at any particular hotel or other place, or to solicit, call to, or request any person to become passengers on condition that they stay at, visit, or use any particular hotel, bus, railroad depot or any other place within or without the City. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04-039, § 1(80-42), 4-8-2008)  
Chapter 48 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority to establish building lines, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.131 et seq.; zoning and restriction discrimination against community homes prohibited, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 123.003. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 48-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Furthermore, words used in the present tense include the future; the term "building" includes the term "structure"; the term "lot" includes the term "plot." The term "used for" includes the meaning "designed for" or "intended for." In the case of dispute over the definitions of terms used in this chapter, the City Council shall provide definitions which shall be added to this chapter by amendment. 
Accessory building or use means a subordinate building having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building; or a use customarily incident to the main use of the property. A building housing an accessory use is considered an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a wall in common with the main building, or is under an extension of the main roof and designed as an integral part of the main building. 
Agriculture means the planting, cultivating and harvesting of crops such as grains, fibers, hay and vegetables commonly grown in the County. The raising and feeding of livestock and poultry shall be considered an agricultural venture if the area in which the livestock or poultry is kept is ten acres or more in area, provided that this definition shall not include feed lots or poultry farms. 
Alley means a minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street; it is also public space or way, 20 feet or less in width, which has been dedicated or deeded for public use. 
Apartment, apartment house or apartment building means a building arranged, intended or designed for more than two families, and shall include flats and other multifamily dwellings. 
Billboard means a sign advertising products not made, sold, used or served on the premises displaying such sign, or a sign having a height greater than 12 feet or a width greater than 18 feet, including supports. 
Block means a parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Board means the Board of Adjustment of the City. 
Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel, where lodging or meals for five or more persons are served for compensation. 
Buildable area means the maximum amount of allowable space of a lot upon which a structure or building may be erected, after meeting the coverage, yard and other requirements of this chapter. 
Building means an enclosed structural unit, anchored to a permanent foundation, and having exterior or party walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of persons, animals or property. 
Building area means the total area of a lot enclosed by a line formed by the outside surface of all walls at the foundation line of a structure when placed on a lot. 
Building, height of, means the vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat floor; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridges for a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided, however, that where the building is set back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building. 
Building line means a line behind which all building must be built, such line generally being parallel to the front lot line. 
Building lot means a tract of land which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is intended by its owner or developer to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. It shall front upon a dedicated street. 
Building, principal, means a principal building is one in which a main use of the lot, on which it is located, is conducted. 
Carport means a structure with a wall on one or more sides, covered with a roof and constructed specifically for the storage of one or more automobiles. 
Cluster housing means any dwelling units arranged according to an approved site plan in a configuration which may depart from the conventional zoning district lot or yard requirements. A cluster housing development shall be considered a single use occupying a single lot for zoning purposes. 
Commercial recreation means any building designed for, or occupied by, bowling alleys, health clubs, swimming pools, indoor golf, ice skating, billiards, indoor and outdoor theaters, and other similar recreational activities operated as commercial enterprise. 
Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
Community recreational facilities means any parks, playgrounds and community buildings owned and/or operated by the City or other governmental agency, country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement. 
Conditional use means a use which may be permitted in a district subject to meeting certain conditions or procedures set forth in this chapter. 
Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Court means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building and which is bounded on two sides by a building. 
Curb level means the level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been established, the City staff shall establish such curb or its equivalent for the purpose of this chapter. 
Customary home occupation means a use conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling, employing only the inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy and does not change the character thereof. 
Day nursery means an agency, organization or individual providing daytime care for more than six children not related by blood or marriage to, or not the legal wards or foster children of, the attendant adult. 
District means a zoning district, which is a part of the City, wherein the regulations of this chapter are uniform. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential occupancy including, but not limited to, single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, community house, boardinghouses or lodginghouses, apartment houses, apartment hotels and mobile homes, but not including hotels, motels, or recreation house trailers. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a building or portion thereof, arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by three or more families including, but not limited to, apartment houses, row houses, tenements and apartment hotels. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a building arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by two families. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons. 
Eating and drinking places means a retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of prepared food and drinks for consumption on the premises. 
Enclosed building means a building surrounded by four or more walls and a roof. 
Enclosed storage means an area surrounded by a solid fence or wall to a height of eight or more feet which effectively screens the contents from view and protects from the spread of fire and vandalism. 
Exterior side yard means a yard which faces or parallels a side street. 
Family means one or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than five living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit on a nonprofit, cost-sharing basis. 
Farm means an area of two or more contiguous acres, used for the growing of the usual farm products (such as vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain) and their storage, as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, sheep, chickens and swine, on a limited basis, and including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of such accessory use shall be secondary to that of normal activities, and provided further that it does not include the commercial raising or pen feeding of animals, or the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals, and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law. 
Frontage means all the property abutting on one side of a street between two intersecting streets, measured along the street line. 
Garage, detached or private, means an accessory building for storage only for motor vehicles. 
Ground coverage ratio means the percentage of lot area allowed to be included within the outside lines of the exterior walls of all buildings located on a lot. 
Height means the vertical distance from the highest point on a structure to the average ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural elements intersect the ground. 
Height of yard or court means the vertical distance from the lowest level of such yard or court to the highest point of any boundary wall. 
Home occupation means a commercial use customarily carried on in the home by members of the occupant family without structural alterations in the principal building or any of its rooms; without the installation of machinery or additional equipment of additional persons; without the use of a sign to advertise the occupations; and which does not cause the generation of other than normal noise, and pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
Industry, heavy, means an establishment engaged in the manufacture, processing, assembly, packaging, compounding and/or treatment of raw materials. 
Industry, light, means an establishment engaged in the manufacture, processing, assembly, packaging, compounding, and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material, but not including those establishments wherein the manufacture or processing is incidental and essential to an enterprise in which all merchandise is sold at retail on the premises. 
Loading space means an off-street space for the parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
Lot means a tract or parcel of land which is occupied by one building or use and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to it, and having frontage on a dedicated street. 
Lot, corner, means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets. 
Lot depth means the horizontal distance between front and back property lines, measured at the center of the front building line. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot line, front, means the boundary of a building lot which is also the line of any existing or dedicated street. Upon corner lots, either street line may be selected as the front lot line provided a front and rear yard are established adjacent and opposite, respectively, to the front lot line. 
Lot line, rear, means the boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line, except that in the case of uncertainty the City staff shall determine the rear line. 
Lot line, side, means any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering an alley or place, or a side street line. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the Office of the County Clerk of Frio County, Texas. 
Lot, through, means a lot other than a corner lot, with frontage on two streets. On a through lot both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side property lines, measured at the center of the side building line. 
Lots in separate ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived means a lot whose boundary lines, along their entire length, touched lands under other ownership as shown by plat or deed recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Frio County, Texas, on or before the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Manufactured housing means any structure fabricated at one site and transported to, or erected at, another site and designed exclusively for residential occupancy. Housing in this category includes prefabricated and modular dwelling and mobile homes. 
Mobile home means any vehicle or similar portable structure mounted or designed for mounting on wheels, used or intended for use for dwelling purposes, including structural additions, except parked and unoccupied camping type trailers. Any such vehicle or structure shall be deemed to be a mobile home whether or not the wheels have been removed therefrom and whether or not the vehicle or structure is resting upon a temporary or permanent foundation. 
Modular home means a structure or building module which is a minimum of 20 feet wide and manufactured at a location other than the location where it is installed and used as a residence, transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, to be used as a permanent dwelling when installed and placed upon a permanent foundation system. 
Motel means a building or group of buildings which contains living or sleeping accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy, and has individual entrances from outside the building to serve each such living or sleeping unit. 
Nonconforming building means any building, or part thereof, which does not, by reason of design, use or dimension, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. It is a legal nonconforming building if established prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Nonconforming lot means any lot, or part thereof, which does not, by reason of design, use or dimension, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. It is a legal nonconforming lot if it is established prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Nonconforming use means any use, or part thereof, which does not, by reason of design, use or dimension, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. It is a legal nonconforming use if it is established prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Officer, referred to in this chapter by title, means the person employed or appointed by the City, of that position, or his duly authorized representative. 
Parking space means a paved area of at least 200 square feet, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile, having a paved driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. A parking space shall not occupy any public land. In a cluster housing development, a parking space may immediately abut a private drive which serves as a primary means of access. 
Pasturage means fallow land used primarily for the grazing of animal stock. 
Paved areas means an area surfaced with asphalt, concrete or similar all-weather surface, not including gravel. 
Permitted use means a use specifically allowed in one or more of the various districts without the necessity of obtaining a conditional use permit. 
Place means an open, unoccupied space, other than a street or alley, permanently established or dedicated as the principal means of access to property abutting thereon. 
Place of worship means any building or structure which is principally used for worship or other similar religious activity including, but not limited to, churches, temples, synagogues and tabernacles. 
Planning and Zoning Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
Planting screen means a vegetative row of upright growing evergreen plants at least 30 inches high and no more than 48 inches apart, center to center, when planted, and designed specifically to provide maximum opacity from the ground to a height of six feet in four years. 
Private recreational amenities means any recreational, social and multipurpose uses within a subdivision or other residential development which are operated and maintained by a property owner association or other designated management agency for the benefit and enjoyment of members and their guests. Typical uses include clubhouses, tennis courts, playgrounds and swimming pools. 
Public use means any use controlled by the City, County, State, federal or any other governmental entity. 
Residential use means any use consisting principally of dwelling units. 
School means any public elementary and secondary school and/or private school with an equivalent curriculum. 
Service floor area means the total floor area of a building exclusive of stairways, restrooms, storage rooms, hallways or other areas which are not regularly used by inhabitants, visitors, employees, clients, customers, patients or patrons in the normal, everyday use of the building. 
Setback means the required horizontal distance between a structure and a lot line. 
Sign means any device or surface on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures or symbols are painted, printed, stamped, raised, projected or in any manner outlined or attached and used for advertising purposes. 
Story means that part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor above or, if there is no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of a floor and the ceiling next above. A top-story attic is a half-story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is a half-story when between 50 and 75 percent of its exterior walls are exposed to outside light and air entirely above grade and which exterior walls contain windows or doors permitting the entrance of daylight and outside air. 
Street means any public thoroughfare, space or right-of-way which affords principal means of vehicular access to property abutting thereon and which has been dedicated for use as a roadway. 
Street line means the dividing line between the street and the abutting property. 
Structural alteration means any alteration involving a change in or addition to the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to signs and excepting utility poles, fences and retaining walls. 
Temporary building means an enclosed building, the use of which is incidental to construction work on the premises, which shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
Townhouse or rowhouse means one of a group of no less than four attached dwelling units, each located on a separate lot. 
Trailer or mobile home court or park means land used, or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy as set forth in this chapter. 
Trailer house or mobile home means any structure used for living or sleeping purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, and which has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place. 
Variance means relief from or variation of the provisions of these regulations, other than use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of property, as distinct from rezoning, as further set out hereinafter in powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment. 
Yard means an open space of grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. Where lots abut a street that is designated a thoroughfare on the City map, all yards abutting said street shall be measured from a line one-half the proposed right-of-way width from the centerline, or from the lot line, whichever provides the greater setback. 
Yard, front, means a yard across the full width of the lot from the front line of the main building to the front line of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means a yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building and the side lot lines. 
Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending entirely from the front yard to the rear yard. 
Zoning Administrator means a member of the City staff, appointed by the City Manager, who has the duty of administering this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall have department head status. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 4; Ord. of 9-10-1997, § 1)  
Sec. 48-2. - Title; purpose. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Pearsall, Texas, Zoning Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of lessening confusion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and abutting traffic ways; to avoid undue concentration of populations; to facilitate the economic and adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 1)  
Sec. 48-3. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)  Created. An agency of the City Council is hereby created, which shall be known as the City of Pearsall Planning and Zoning Commission, and such Commission shall consist of five members who are residents and taxpayers of the City. 
(b)  Terms of appointment. The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve for a two-year term; however, a member shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed by the City Council. Furthermore, each member is removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(c)  Vacancies. As the term of office of each member terminates, the City Council shall appoint another member to fill such vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same procedure as the original appointment. 
(d)  Commission may establish its own rules. The Commission may establish its own rules as to the attendance of its members at its meetings and, in furtherance of such, the Commission may, by a majority vote and subject to final approval by the City Council, expel any member who, in the opinion of the Commission, misses an unreasonable number of meetings. 
(e)  Parliamentary procedure; Chairman; meetings. The Commission is hereby empowered to establish its own Parliamentary procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with the law applicable to the Commission or the following: 
(1)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members of the entire membership of the Commission and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by a majority of those present. 
(2)  Chairperson of the Commission. The Chairperson of the Commission shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Commission and remain as such until the expiration of his term. The Chairperson shall be entitled to vote upon any question, but shall have no veto power. 
(3)  Meetings. The regular meeting date of the Commission shall be the first Monday of each month, unless otherwise as may be changed or amended to a different date. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Commission may deem necessary. Meetings shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept, and shall be treated as public record. 
(f)  Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Make, amend, extend and/or add to the Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City. 
(2)  Study plans and plats of proposed subdivisions and shall, within legal limits, recommend that such subdivisions meet with all the standards and requirements as set forth in the Subdivisions chapter. 
(3)  Draft and recommend to the City Council for its action, an official map of the City and recommend proposed changes in such map. 
(4)  Make and recommend to the City Council for its action, plans for the clearance and rebuilding of slum districts and blighted areas which may develop within the City. 
(5)  Make and recommend to the City Council for its action, zoning plans and recommend changes in such plan (e.g., zoning changes; conditional use permit). 
(6)  Make and recommend to the City Council for its action, highway/street facilities and proposed extensions thereof. 
(7)  Review and recommend to the City Council for its action, alterations to existing building, plumbing, electrical and related codes. 
(8)  Draft and recommend to the City Council for its action, recommendations for annexation to the City. 
(9)  Meet not less than once each month, with meetings to be held at City Hall, unless notice of change of meeting place is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(10)  Perform such other functions as may be duly delegated to it from time to time by the City Council, provided, however, that such functions do not conflict with any applicable State law. 
(g)  Commission declared to be adjunct to City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby declared to be an adjunct to the City Council. All administrative personnel are hereby authorized and directed to cooperate with and assist the Commission at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 2)  
Sec. 48-4. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, or any statute, local ordinance or regulations, except that if this chapter imposes a greater restriction or higher standard, this chapter shall control. If a question should arise as to the publication and/or public notice procedures contained herein, same shall be handled in accordance with all applicable State law. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 20)  
Secs. 48-5—48-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 48-29. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or who builds or alters any building in violation of any plan or statement submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine of not more than $500.00 Each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as herein provided. 
(b)  No oversight or dereliction on the part of the Zoning Administrator or on the part of any official or employee shall legalize, authorize or excuse the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used, in violation of this chapter, the appropriate authorities of the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 6)  
Sec. 48-30. - Administration, enforcement; interpretation. 
The City Manager will appoint the Zoning Administrator to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  If the Zoning Administrator shall find or if any person files with him a complaint in writing alleging that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall immediately investigate and, when necessary, give written notice to the person responsible to cease such violations forthwith. Said notice may be delivered in person or by certified mail to violator or to any person of property where violation is occurring. 
(2)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that if this chapter imposes a greater restriction, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 5)  
Sec. 48-31. - Changes and amendments to this regulations. 
(a)  City Council may amend regulations. The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on a property application or petition, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulations, restrictions and boundaries herein established and as follows: 
(1)  Any person petitioning the City Council for a change in the regulations or the zoning district map shall do so upon forms provided for such purposes by the Office of the Zoning Administrator. All petitions or applications for changes in the regulations or zoning district map shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. 
(2)  Each such application shall be accompanied by plats (one reproducible and three copies) and the plans necessary to show the detail of the proposed change requested, as well as the relation of said property to that of all adjoining property thereof, and the street address and suitable legal description of the property proposed to be changed. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a properly paid for and completed application for rezoning, the Planning and Zoning Director shall have published the requisite notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, at least 15 days prior to the date set for said hearing. 
(b)  Procedure before the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed changes in zoning regulations or district boundaries, and written notice of all such public hearings shall be sent to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change in zoning regulations or district boundaries is proposed. 
(2)  Upon such hearing, the party requesting a change in zoning shall appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(3)  After such hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its recommendation regarding the change in zoning regulations or district boundaries. 
(4)  Each such recommendation made by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be reported to the City Council, in writing, and the applicant shall be notified of the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(5)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall establish and maintain a separate file for each application received, and shall record the names and addresses of all persons to whom notices were mailed, including the date of mailing and the persons by whom notices were delivered to the U.S. post office. All records and files herein provided shall be permanent, official and public record and/or file of the City. 
(c)  Procedure before the City Council. 
(1)  After receiving the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing concerning the same, at the earliest possible practical time, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(2)  When the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended a change in zoning regulations or district boundaries, the City Council shall be at liberty to either accept, reject or take other action, provided such action is consistent with the public notice and the provisions of this section. 
(3)  If the Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended against a proposed amendment, supplement, change or modification, or if a written protest against such change, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council. 
(4)  If the City Council has refused to grant a proposed amendment, supplement, change or modification in the boundaries of any zoning district, such amendment, supplement, change or modification in the boundaries of such zoning district shall not be submitted again prior to the expiration of 12 months from the date of the order or decision of the City Council against such zone change. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 16; Ord. No. 2011-07-116, § II, 7-26-2011)  
Sec. 48-32. - Appeals to the Board of Adjustment. 
(a)  Eligible persons; timeframe. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Appeals to stay all proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown. 
(c)  Board of Adjustment to hear appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, each party shall appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(d)  Board may reverse any order. In exercising the powers mentioned in section 48-4 herein, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as should be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whose action the appeal is taken. 
(e)  Votes necessary to reverse decision of Zoning Administrator. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter. 
(f)  Appeals from action of the Board of Adjustment. Any person, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City, may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the Office of the Board. 
(g)  Court may allow writ. Upon presentation of such petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the Board of Adjustment and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the realtor's attorney, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the appealed from, but the Court may, on application, upon notice to the Board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
(h)  Board to furnish facts to court. The Board of Adjustment shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The returned copies shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(i)  Court to take testimony. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court, with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(j)  Cost not to be allowed against the Board. Cost shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision appealed from. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 17)  
Sec. 48-33. - Special exceptions and variances. 
(a)  Defined. 
(1)  A special exception is a permission given by the Board, properly authorized by this chapter in specific cases, for an applicant to use his property in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter, provided such use subserves the general welfare and preserves the community interest. 
(2)  A variance is an authorization by the Board granting relief and doing substantial justice in the use of an applicant's property by the owner where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. 
(b)  Findings required. A special exception may be granted upon application when the Board finds: 
(1)  That the granting of such special exception will not be injurious or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the general public; 
(2)  That the granting of such special exception will not be detrimental or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or neighborhood in which the property is located; and 
(3)  That the granting of such special exception will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(c)  Determination. In determining its finding, the Board shall take into account the character and use of adjoining buildings and those in the vicinity, the number of persons residing or working in such building or upon such land, traffic conditions in the vicinity, and the conformance of such area to the Official Zoning Map and Comprehensive Plan. 
(d)  Special exceptions allowed. The Board may, after public hearing and subject to the conditions and safeguards herein contained, authorize special exceptions to this chapter as follows: 
(1)  Permit the enlargement of a nonconforming use only when the enlargement will not prolong the life of the nonconforming use. A specific time period for the return to conformity can be required. 
(2)  Permit the use of a lot in any "R" dwelling district adjacent to any other district, even if separated therefrom by an alley or by a street, for the parking of passenger cars under such safeguards and conditions of the more restricted property, provided no other business use is made of such lot. 
(3)  Permit such modification of a yard, lot area or lot width regulation requirements as may be necessary to secure appropriate improvement of a parcel of land, where such parcel was separately owned on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and is not adjacent to another parcel of the same ownership, and where such parcel is of such size that it cannot be improved without such modification, or of such restricted area that it cannot be appropriately improved without such modification. 
(4)  Permit the modification of the requirements for signs as set forth in section 48-60. 
(e)  Conditions. In granting any special exception under the provisions of this chapter, the Board may designate such conditions in connection therewith which, in the Board's opinion, will secure substantially the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances. A variance may be granted an applicant when the Board finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land or building for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or building and do not apply generally to lands or buildings in the same zone or neighborhood, and that said circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of such land or building; 
(2)  That the granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or neighborhood in which the property is located; 
(3)  That the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building and that the variance, as granted by the Board, is the minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose; 
(4)  That the literal enforcement and strict application of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and be inconsistent with the general provisions and intent of this chapter and, that in granting such variance, the spirit of this chapter will be preserved and substantial justice done. 
In addition to considering the character and use of adjoining buildings and those in the vicinity, the Board, in determining its finding, shall take into account the number of persons residing or working in such buildings or upon such land and traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
(g)  Authorization. The Board may, after public notice and hearing and subject to the conditions and safeguards herein contained, vary or adopt the strict application of any of the terms of this chapter under the power and authority herein granted and consistent with section 48-31. 
(h)  Conditions. In granting any variance under the provisions of this chapter, the Board may designate such conditions in connection therewith which, in the opinion of the Board, will secure substantially the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(i)  Nonconforming uses. The Board may permit the following: 
(1)  The change of occupancy from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use when the extent of the second nonconforming use is found to be less detrimental to the environment than the first. 
(2)  The enlargement of a nonconforming use only when the enlargement will not prolong the life of the nonconforming use. A specific time period for the return to conformity can be required. 
(3)  The reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or building on the lot or tract occupied by such building, provided such reconstruction does not, in the opinion of the Board, prevent the return of such property to a conforming use or increase the nonconformity of a nonconforming structure. 
(4)  Such variance of the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width, lot depth, coverage, minimum setback standards, off-street parking or loading regulations where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship, and where such variance is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land which differs from other parcels of land in the same district by being of such restricted area, shape or slope that it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the development permitted upon other parcels of land in the same district. 
A variation from the standard established by this chapter shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor for financial reason only, nor shall such modification be granted to permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this chapter to other parcels of land in the district. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 18)  
Sec. 48-34. - Board of Adjustment. 
(a)  Created. An agency of the City Council is hereby created, which shall be known as the City of Pearsall Board of Adjustment, and such Board shall consist of five members who are residents and taxpayers of the City. 
(b)  Terms of appointment. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve for a two-year term; however, a member shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed by the City Council. Furthermore, each member is removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(c)  Vacancies. As the term of office of each member terminates, the City Council shall appoint another member to fill such vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the same procedure as the original appointment. 
(d)  Board may establish its own rules. The Board may establish its own rules as to the attendance of its members at its meetings and, in furtherance of such, the Board may, by a majority vote and subject to final approval by the City Council, expel any member who, in the opinion of the Board, misses an unreasonable number of meetings. 
(e)  Parliamentary procedure; Chairman; meetings. The Board is hereby empowered to establish its own Parliamentary procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with the law applicable to the Board or the following: 
(1)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members of the entire membership of the Board and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by a majority of those present. 
(2)  Chairman of the Board. The Chairman of the Board shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Board and remain as such until the expiration of his term. The Chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any question, but shall have no veto power. 
(3)  Meeting. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may deem necessary. Meetings shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept, and shall be treated as public record. 
(f)  Powers and duties. The Board shall have the following power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which the Board is required to pass. 
(3)  Authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter as will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(g)  Board declared to be adjunct to City Council. The Board of Adjustment is hereby declared to be an adjunct to the City Council. All administrative personnel are hereby authorized and directed to cooperate with and assist the Board at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 3)  
Secs. 48-35—48-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 48-55. - Building permits; certificates of zoning compliance. 
(a)  Building permits required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit therefore issued by the Building Official. A building permit shall not be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this article, unless otherwise authorized in written order from the Board in the form of an Administrative Review of Variance, as provided by this chapter. 
(b)  Applications, building permits and certificates of zoning compliance. 
(1)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by site plans in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shapes of the lot to be built upon, the dimensions of the proposed building, if any, already existing on the lot, and the location and dimension of the proposed building, structure or alteration. The application will serve as a basis for issuing both the building permit and the certificate of zoning compliance and occupancy. It shall include such information as lawfully may be required by the Zoning Administrator, including existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lots and on abutting and adjacent properties; parking, where required; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, this chapter. 
(2)  One copy of the plan shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator, after he and the Building Official have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved, and attested to same by their signatures on such copy. Two of the copies of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  The Building Official shall be empowered to act within the provisions of this article upon all applications for building permits, and the same shall be approved or denied not later than the fifth business day succeeding the day of filing. In the event of refusal to issue a permit upon application, as herein provided, applicant may perfect an appeal to the Board as provided for hereafter. 
(4)  There shall be separate permits for each building or structure to be constructed, erected or altered, except accessory buildings and appurtenances which may be included in the permit for the main building when construction is simultaneous. 
(c)  Certificates of zoning compliance and occupancy. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, nor will permanent utility connections to serve the premises be made, until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefore by the Zoning Administrator, stating that the proposed use of the land conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period not to exceed six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
(3)  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance, which shall be open to public inspection. 
(4)  Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this article and punishable under the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Building permit becomes invalid. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within six months from the date of the issuance thereof, said permit shall be canceled by the Building Official, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
(e)  Conformity of construction and use. A building permit may be revoked by the Building Official at any time prior to the completion of the building or structure for which the same was issued, when it shall appear that there is departure from the plans, specifications or conditions as required under the terms of the permit; that the same was procured by false representation; was issued by mistake or that any of the provisions of refusal or neglect of any owner, agent contractor or duly authorized representative to secure such permit and pay the prescribed fee therefor, as herein provided, the Building Official may issue a stop order; provided, however, 24 hours' written notice of such revocation or order to stop shall be served upon the owner, his agent or contractor, or upon any persons employed upon the building or structure for which such permit was issued, and thereafter no such construction shall proceed. A building permit may be revoked within one year at any time by the Building Official. 
(f)  Completion of buildings. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building, the foundation for which has been completely constructed at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and the remaining construction of which shall have been completed within one year of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. In addition, any commercial or industrial building or structure, for which a building permit has been approved by the City not more than 12 months prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, may be constructed according to the terms of the building permit. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 7)  
Sec. 48-56. - Districts; zoning map; district boundaries. 
(a)  Division of City into zoning use districts. For the purpose of regulating and restricting the use of land and the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, moving or use of buildings, structures or land, all lands within the corporate City limits are hereby divided into the following districts: 
(1)  District A-O, Agriculture and Open Space District. 
(2)  District R-1, Single- and Two-Family Dwelling District. 
(3)  District R-2, Multifamily Dwelling District. 
(4)  District R-3, Manufactured Housing District. 
(5)  District C-1, Commercial, Office and Professional District. 
(6)  District C-2, Neighborhood Business District. 
(7)  District C-3, General Business District. 
(8)  District M-1, Light Industrial District. 
(9)  District M-2, Heavy Industrial, including Agricultural Industry District. 
Any use not listed herein may be placed in a suitable zoning use district classification by the City Council, after recommendation from and by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(b)  Official zoning map. 
(1)  The City is hereby divided into the above districts, as shown on the zoning map, which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. If amendments are made in district boundaries, such changes shall be entered on the zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council. No amendment to this article, which involves matter portrayed on the zoning map, shall become effective until after such change has been made on the zoning map. 
(2)  No changes shall be made on the zoning map except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this article. Any unauthorized change of any kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable under same. 
(3)  The official zoning map shall be located in City Hall and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land thereon. 
(4)  In the event that the zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret, the City Council may, by resolution, adopt a duplicate zoning map. The duplicate zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amendment. The prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(c)  Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following City limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by the above, the Commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  When streets or alleys on the ground differ from streets or alleys shown on the zoning map, the Commission shall apply the district designations on the map to the streets or alleys on the ground in such a manner as to conform to the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(9)  Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the particular district in which the adjacent property lies shall be automatically extended to the centerline of any such street or alley. 
(10)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this chapter shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(11)  In subdivided property, where a district boundary line divides property into two parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the district boundary line as shown. 
(12)  If none of the rules in subsections (c)(1) through (11) of this section apply, the Commission shall determine the location of the district boundary, with final approval from the City Council. 
(d)  Application of district regulations. 
(1)  The regulations set by this article within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  No part of a yard, open-space, off-street parking or loading space required shall be included as part of a yard, open-space, off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building or use. 
(4)  In no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot except as provided herein. 
(5)  All of the regulations stated above shall also apply to annexed territory. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 8)  
Sec. 48-57. - Annexed territory. 
Any territory hereafter annexed to the City shall be classified for A-O Agriculture and Open Space District only unless otherwise determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council at the time of annexation. Within six months from the date of annexation, the newly annexed territory shall be rezoned by the City Council for a land use consistent with the comprehensive plan and on the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. In an area classified A-O, no person shall construct, enlarge, move, alter or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a building permit from the Building Official as required in applicable City ordinances. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 9)  
Sec. 48-58. - Nonconforming uses. 
Except as hereinafter specified, any use, building or structure existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued, even though such use, building or structure may not conform with the provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived for the district in which it is located; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any use, building or structure established in violation of any zoning ordinance previously in effect in the City. 
(1)  Nonconforming uses continued or changed. The right to continue such nonconforming uses shall be subject to regulations prohibiting the creation of a nuisance and regulations reasonably protecting adjacent property. 
(2)  Conditional uses. Any use existing on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which is listed as a conditional use in the district in which it is located, shall be and shall remain a nonconforming use until a conditional use permit is obtained as provided in this chapter. 
(3)  Alteration of nonconforming uses. No existing building or premises devoted to a use that is not permitted by this chapter in the district in which such building or premises is located, shall be enlarged, except when required to do so by law or order, unless the use thereof is changed to a use that is permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located, and except as follows: 
a.  When authorized by the Board in accordance with the provisions for same, an extension of a nonconforming use may be made. 
b.  Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. 
c.  When authorized by the Board in accordance with the provisions for same, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a building which were manifestly designed or arranged for such use prior to the date on which such use of said building became nonconforming, if no structural alterations, except those required by law or order, are made therein. 
d.  When authorized by the Board in accordance with the provisions for same, enlargement or completion of a building devoted to a nonconforming use may be made upon the lot occupied by such building, where such extension is necessary and incidental to the existing use of such building and does not exceed 25 percent of its area of nonconformity. 
(4)  Cessation of use of building or land. For the purposes of the subsections (4)a through c of this section, a use shall be deemed to have ceased when it has been discontinued for 12 months, whether with intent to abandon said use or not. 
a.  No building or structure shall again be put to a nonconforming use, where such use has ceased for 12 months or more. 
b.  The use of land, without buildings, which does not conform to the provisions of this article shall be discontinued within one year from the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
c.  All signs, billboards and lots used for storage that do not require a building, made nonconforming by the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto, shall be removed within one year from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto. 
(5)  Construction approved prior to enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require any change in the overall plans, construction or designated use of any development, structure or part thereof, where official approval and the required building permits were granted before the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any amendments thereto and where construction thereof, conforming with such plans, shall have been started prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or such amendment and, where such construction shall have been completed in a normal manner within the subsequent six-month period, with no interruption, except for reasons beyond the builder's control. 
(6)  Repair of unsafe buildings. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the strengthening or repair of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority. 
(7)  Damage or destruction. Any nonconforming structure which is damaged more than 50 percent of its then-appraised tax value above the foundation by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot or other calamity or act of God, shall not be restored or reconstructed and used as it was before such happening. If such structure is damaged less than 50 percent of its then-appraised tax value above the foundation, it may be restored, reconstructed or used as before, provided that such restoration or reconstruction is completed within 12 months of the damaging event, the 12 month period not including any necessary litigation. 
(8)  Repairs and maintenance. A nonconforming structure may be repaired and maintained as necessary to keep it in sound condition, but no structural alterations shall be made unless required by law or order, or authorized by the Board. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the total structural repairs and alterations that may be made to a nonconforming structure shall not, during its life subsequent to the date on which it became a nonconforming structure, exceed 50 percent of its appraised value for tax purposes at such time. 
(9)  Moving of nonconforming structures or buildings. No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot or on any other lot, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 10)  
Sec. 48-59. - Minimum parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to state the guidelines for providing off-street parking and loading space consistent with the proposed land use in order to: 
(1)  Eliminate occurrence of nonresident on-street parking in adjoining neighborhoods; 
(2)  Avoid the traffic congestion and public safety hazards caused by failure to provide such parking and loading space; and 
(3)  Expedite the movement of traffic on public thoroughfare by prohibiting curb parking. 
(b)  General requirements for off-street parking. 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces required. In all districts, for every use, there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged in capacity, or at the time any other use is established, off-street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the requirements specified herein. 
(2)  Dimensions and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than ten feet by 20 feet and/or 200 square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be of usable shape and condition. Each parking space and the maneuvering area thereto shall be located entirely upon private property. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking spaces, without backing into public right-of-way, except for single-family and duplex dwellings. Entrances to and exits from parking areas from a street shall be no greater than 35 feet in width. 
(3)  Off-premises location. For any new use, building or structure where the required off-street parking cannot be provided on the premises because of the size or location of the lot, such parking may be provided on other property under the same ownership, but not more than 200 feet in distance from the building site, and provided that the proposed parking area is located in a district where parking lots are permitted. Where individual land parcels are not large enough to permit off-street parking, the owners of several such adjacent parcels may be required to make a financial contribution sufficient to permit the joint development of required parking space nearby to serve traffic generated by the several land uses. 
(4)  Number of off-street parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined from this section. The classification of uses referred to shall be deemed to include and apply to all uses. If for any reason the classification of any use, for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street parking space to be provided by such use, is not readily determinable hereunder, the classification and requirements for such use shall be determined by the Commission, with approval from the Council. 
(5)  Development and maintenance of parking area. Every parcel of land hereafter used as public or private parking area, including commercial parking lots, automobile, farm equipment, mobile home trailer or other open-air sales lots, and which is adjacent to an "R" district, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Barriers. All commercial, industrial and multifamily off-street parking areas, except access ways, shall be separated from the street right-of-way by a barrier curb or tire stop. 
b.  Surfacing. Except as otherwise provided, all off-street parking areas for more than three cars shall have dustless, all-weather surfacing. If asphalt or cement pavement is used, it shall be consistent with City paving standards and subject to the approval of the City Engineer and shall be installed, maintained and so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water accumulated within the area. Parking spaces will be so arranged and marked (in paved areas) as to provide for orderly and safe parking of vehicles. 
c.  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be arranged so as to direct or shield the light away from the adjoining premises in any "R" district. 
d.  Review by City Engineer. Off-street parking areas, including ingress and egress to said parking areas for more than five vehicles, shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with this section prior to the issuance of a building permit, and the City Engineer shall advise the Zoning Administrator on such compliance as necessary. 
(c)  Residential parking required. 
(1)  One parking space per dwelling unit shall be provided for the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
(2)  Two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided for each of the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
a.  Apartments (more than two); 
b.  Apartment hotels; 
c.  Other similar multifamily dwellings. 
(3)  One parking space for each transient living unit plus one space for each two employees shall be provided in each of the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
(4)  One and one-half parking spaces for each person shall be provided in each of the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
a.  Dormitory, lodginghouse, boardinghouse or roominghouse; 
b.  Other similar group quarters. 
(5)  One parking space for each two employees (based on maximum employee shift), plus 1½ parking spaces for each four patient beds, plus one parking space for each staff doctor, shall be provided for the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
a.  Convalescent homes, homes for the aged or infirmed, or hospitals; 
b.  All other similar institutions. 
(d)  Nonresidential parking required. 
(1)  One parking space for each three seats for patron use, plus one parking space for each two employees, shall be provided for each of the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
a.  Boardinghouse, private club, lunch counter or night club; 
b.  Restaurants and all other similar dining and/or eating establishments, including drive-in eating establishments. 
(2)  One parking space for each four seats, plus one parking space for each two employees, shall be provided for each of the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
a.  Churches; 
b.  Funeral parlors; 
c.  Theaters. 
(3)  One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for each two employees, shall be provided for the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein (add one 12-foot by 35-foot loading space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area in uses marked with an *): 
a.  Banks and other financial and lending institutions; 
b.  Gasoline and other motor fuel retail service stations; 
c.  Personal service shops; 
d.  Retail establishments, including retail food stores, catering services and bakeries;* 
e.  Sales, display, customer or office areas in wholesale establishments;* 
f.  Shopping center containing any combination of the above areas;* 
g.  All office buildings; 
h.  Medical and dental clinics and laboratories. 
(4)  One parking space for each two employees, plus off-street drive and loading space for a minimum of four cars for the transferring of passengers, shall be provided for each of the following, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein: 
a.  Day nurseries, day care centers or kindergartens; 
b.  All other similar businesses. 
(5)  One parking space for each two employees (based on maximum employee shift), plus at least two visitor parking spaces, shall be provided for all industrial uses, with the parking area located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(e)  Additional parking requirements. The following uses, with respect to parking facilities, shall be determined only after review of a site plan by the City Engineer and Zoning Administrator, with approval from the Commission. The parking area will be located on the same lot as the main building, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(1)  Airports, bus depots, truck terminals; 
(2)  Motor vehicle sales or repair establishments; 
(3)  Terminal facilities and all other personnel or material terminal facilities; 
(4)  Any other establishments as may be deemed by the Commission. 
(f)  General requirements for off-street loading. 
(1)  Loading space for business or industry. Any business or industry that receives or distributes materials or merchandise by vehicle shall provide adequate off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within or adjacent to the building, in such a manner as not to obstruct freedom of traffic movement of the public streets, alleys or sidewalk, in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Business uses. One loading space for each 5,000 square feet of floor area for the first 15,000 square feet of floor area. 
b.  Industrial uses. One loading space for each 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  A loading space shall contain a minimum of 420 feet and shall be approximately 12 feet in width and 35 feet in depth. All loading spaces, maneuvering aisles and driveways shall be paved. 
(3)  The following rules shall be applied in computing the number of off-street loading spaces required for the above uses: 
a.  Floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the use. 
b.  Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the next higher whole space. 
(4)  Whenever a building or use, existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, is enlarged by more than 50 percent in floor area or area used, the entire building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the off-street loading requirements, if not already doing so. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 13)  
Sec. 48-60. - Sign regulations. 
(a)  Signs shall be permitted in a specified district as follows: 
(1)  The size of a sign, for the purpose of this article, shall be measured from the outside dimensions of the sign and frame. A sign may have one or more display faces, unless otherwise specified. 
(2)  As a special exception, the Board of Adjustment may permit such identification of the requirements of this section, according to the powers of the Board as specified herein, as may be found necessary to avoid inconvenience arising because of the location of existing structures or of topography. In no case may the Board authorize a private sign on or over public property. 
(b)  Residential districts. 
(1)  Customary home occupations may display a nameplate on the face of the building or porch. The nameplate may contain only the name and occupation of the resident. It shall be attached directly to, and parallel to, the face of the building or porch. It may not exceed one square foot in area, be illuminated in any way, or project more than six inches beyond the face of the building. 
(2)  In R-2 districts, one nonilluminated sign not more than four square feet in area shall be permitted at each major entrance to the building, provided such sign shall be attached flat against the wall of said building, projecting not more than three inches therefrom, and shall bear no advertising. 
(c)  Nonresidential districts. 
(1)  Business signs may be erected in required front yards in C and M districts provided they do not extend on or over public property, do not interfere with visibility of vehicle operators, and do not contain flashing or intermittent lighting or movement that may distract vehicle operators. 
(2)  A business sign or nameplate is permitted in C and M districts when listing only the name and address of the business and when displayed parallel with and on the face of the structure. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 14)  
Sec. 48-61. - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the regulations described by this section is to allow the compatible and orderly development within the City of uses which may be suitable only in certain locations in a zoning district if developed in a specific way of only for a limited period of time. 
(b)  Required. A conditional use permit is required for all conditional uses. A conditional use permit may have a specified time limitation attached and may impose conditions other than those which are specifically set forth in this chapter. Granting a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant from complying with the requirements of all applicable building codes or other applicable ordinances. 
(c)  Application filing procedure. Application shall be made by the property owner or certified agent thereof to the Zoning Administrator on a form prescribed for this purpose by the City. Application shall be accompanied by site plans as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Site plan required. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the site plan is to insure compliance with this chapter and to assist in the orderly and harmonious development of the City; to protect and enhance the general welfare; and to help prevent the impairment or depreciation of land values and development by the erection of structures, additions or alterations thereto, without proper attention to site planning. 
(2)  Recording. The applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator three copies of his site plan. The Zoning Administrator shall keep one copy in his files. The duplicate copies shall be used during the investigation of the case and for review by the Commission in the event a hearing is required. 
(3)  Contents. The site plan shall contain drawings, to scale in triplicate, to indicate the following: 
a.  The location of all structures on the subject property and on adjoining property. 
b.  Landscaping and/or fencing of yards and setback areas and uses of landscaping and/or walls or fences for screening purposes. 
c.  Design of ingress and egress to minimize interference with traffic flow on abutting streets. 
d.  Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
e.  Height of all structures. 
f.  Proposed uses. 
g.  The location and types of all signs, including lighting and heights. 
(e)  Guidelines for approval. 
(1)  The Commission and/or Council may approve a conditional use permit, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards when it is found that the proposed use: 
a.  Meets all the minimum standards established in this chapter for this type of use. 
b.  Is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and of the plan for the physical development of the district, as embodied in the Comprehensive Plan or part thereof adopted by the Commission. 
c.  Will not be detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants nor be substantially or permanently injurious to neighboring property. 
(2)  The Commission and/or Council may impose additional, reasonable restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed conditional use. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements, suitable landscaping and additional improvements, such as curbing and sidewalks. 
(f)  Approval procedure. 
(1)  The following procedure shall be complied with prior to the approval or denial of any conditional use permit: 
a.  Within five days after receiving an application for a conditional use permit, notification of such request, by mail, shall be made to all owners of real property living within 200 feet of the property on which application has been made. The names and addresses of the affected parties shall be supplied by the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall supply the envelopes and stamps and will have to address all envelopes. (Note: letters will be mailed by the Zoning Administrator from City Hall to ensure proper notification to all affected parties.) 
b.  The Commission may, if no adverse response to the notification mentioned in subsection (f)(1) of this section is received within ten days, set the appropriate conditions for the permit, if any, and approve issuance of same upon agreement by the applicant. 
c.  If there is a negative response, the Commission shall approve or deny the same and a report of such action, together with a recommendation for final approval or denial, shall be made by the Commission to the City Council. 
d.  Before acting upon any application for a conditional use permit, the City Council shall set a time and place for a hearing thereon, following the regular public notification process. Notice of hearing shall be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. (Note: individual notice by mail will not be required.) 
e.  Upon the date of the final hearing of such application for a conditional use permit, the Council shall approve or deny same with appropriate conditions attached, if any. 
f.  Said conditions may include, but are not limited to, location, construction, maintenance and operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this chapter for the particular use, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 
(2)  Permit issuance. A conditional use permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator upon approval of such permit as provided herein. 
(3)  Development. Following the issuance of a conditional use permit, the Building Official shall ensure that if the development is undertaken, it is completed in compliance with said permit. However, if a conditional use permit has not been used within six months after the date granted, the permit is automatically canceled. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 15; Ord. No. 2011-07-116, § I, 7-26-2011)  
Secs. 48-62—48-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 48-81. - Schedule of district regulations adopted. 
(a)  Agriculture and Open Space District (A-O). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes lands within the jurisdiction of the City which are not subdivided and relatively undeveloped. This district is designed to promote orderly, timely, economical growth and to recognize current conditions. It is a reserved area in which the future growth of the City can occur. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B in section 48-83. 
(b)  Single- and Two-Family Dwelling District (R-1). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes lands within the City limits subdivided for single- and two-family residential purposes and associated uses. The district is designed to provide sufficient, suitable residential neighborhoods protected from incompatible uses and provided with necessary facilities and services. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B in section 48-83. 
(5)  Parking requirement. Refer to section 48-59. 
(6)  Sign regulations. Refer to section 48-60. 
(c)  Multifamily Dwelling District (R-2). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes lands within the City limits subdivided for single and multiple family dwelling purposes and associated uses. It may be utilized as a transitional zone between low to moderate density residential and commercial uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B in section 48-83. 
(5)  Parking requirements. Refer to section 48-59. 
(6)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B in section 48-83. 
(d)  Manufactured Housing District (R-3). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes lands within the City limits and/or its jurisdiction subdivided for single and multiple-family manufactured housing purposes and associated uses. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B in section 48-83. 
(5)  Parking requirements. Refer to section 48-59. 
(6)  Sign regulations. Refer to section 48-60. 
(7)  Site requirements. 
a.  All mobile homes must be tied down. 
b.  All housing must be skirted or have an enclosed foundation. The skirting and foundation must conform with the architectural design of the structure and be in conformity with the subdivision. 
c.  All housing will have a concrete foundation of either runners or slab. 
(e)  Commercial, Office and Professional District (C-1). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes lands within the city limits subdivided for offices or grouping of offices and their associated uses. It may be utilized as a transitional zone between residential and other commercial districts. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B in section 48-83. 
(5)  Parking requirements. Refer to section 48-59. 
(6)  Sign regulations. Refer to section 48-60. 
(f)  Neighborhood Business District (C-2). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes uses of limited retail category intended for use in or near residential neighborhood areas for purposes of supplying day-to-day retail needs of residents, such as foods, drugs and personal services. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(5)  Parking requirements. Refer to section 48-59 herein. 
(6)  Sign regulations. Refer to section 48-60 herein. 
(g)  General Business District (C-3). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes lands within the City limits subdivided for uses constituting retail goods and consumer services to residential of the trades area of the City. The district also provides space for financial, administrative and business services compatible with this areas function as the focal point of community activity and its intensive development. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A herein. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A herein. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B herein. 
(5)  Parking requirements. Refer to section 48-59 herein. 
(6)  Sign regulations. Refer to section 48-60 herein. 
(h)  Light Industrial District (M-1). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes those industrial activities which provide for an environment exclusively for, and conducive to, the development and protection of modern, relatively large scale administrative facilities, research facilities and specialized processing and assembling plants, all of a non-nuisance type, and provide for the protection of nearby residential and commercial areas. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional uses. Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional information. Refer to table B in section 48-83. 
(5)  Parking requirements. Refer to section 48-59. 
(6)  Sign regulations. Refer to section 48-60. 
(i)  Heavy Industrial, including Agricultural Industry, District (M-2). 
(1)  Purpose. This district includes those lands and improvements uses primarily for manufacturing and related undertakings which generate large degrees of traffic, involve multi- shift employment, require large parcels of land, etc., and are not generally compatible with activities in the M-1 district. 
(2)  Permitted Uses : Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(3)  Conditional Uses : Refer to table A in section 48-82. 
(4)  Area requirements/additional Information. Refer to table B herein. 
(5)  Parking requirements. Refer to section 48-59. 
(6)  Sign regulations. Refer to section 48-60.  
Sec. 48-82. - Table A. 
(a)  Table A, Permitted and conditional uses. 
TABLE A 
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT (A-O) 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Dwellings, single-family 	Aircraft, landing strips rental or repair 
Farm 	Airports, landing strips and terminal facilities 
Garden (home) 	Barn or stable for livestock 
Crop production 	Broadcast towers for radio, television or microwave 
Country club 	Cemeteries, mausoleums or crematories for the disposal of human dead 
Pasturage 	Drive-in theaters 
Customary accessory uses 	Flea markets 
Nurseries and truck garden, limited to the propagation, cultivation and sale of plants, provided no obnoxious fertilizer is stored upon the premises and no obnoxious soil or fertilizer conducted thereon. 	Golf course and clubhouse, except miniature golf courses, courses, driving ranges and other similar activities operated as a business, provided no clubhouse, swimming pool or parking area is closer than 100 feet from a property line 
Greenhouses 	Livestock production 
Mobile homes and mobile home parks or trailer courts 	Mines or quarries with permit not to exceed five years 
Private stable or livestock 	Mobile home and mobile home parks or trailer courts 
Nursery sales office 	Oil well drilling 
Picnic groves and fishing lakes, including minor and incidental concession facilities for patrons only 	Reservoirs, wells, towers, filter beds or water supply plants 
Amusement parks, commercial baseball athletic fields, race tracks, circuses, carnivals or fairgrounds 	Rodeo grounds and pens 
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the commission, with approval from the Council 	Sanitary landfills 
	Sewage, refuse or garbage disposal plants 
	Skeet shoot or target ranges 
	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the commission, with approval from the council 
 
SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT (R-1) 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Dwellings, single- and two-family 	Hobby shop - See section 48-84 
Railroad rights-of-way, but not including yards 	Daycare center 
See acessory uses in section 48-84. 	Churches, publicly owned community buildings, public museums and public libraries 
	Public parks and playgrounds 
	Public administration buildings, police and fire stations 
	Public schools, private schools, institutions of higher learning, including customary accessory uses 
	Telephone exchange 
	Temporary signs and structures, including real estate sales office located on property being sold and limited to period of sale, but not exceeding one year without permit extension. 
	Used structures moved from another location 
	Wells, water towers or water supply plants 
	Temporary school livestock and/or agricultural Projects 
	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council. 
All modular homes must be approved with a specific use permit if placed in an R-1 or R-2 district. 
 
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT (R-2) 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Permitted uses in R-1 	Conditional uses in R-1 
Apartment houses or multiple dwellings of less than ten units. 	Apartment houses or multiple dwellings of ten units or more. 
See accessory uses in section 48-84 	Boardinghouses and lodginghouses 
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council. 	Fraternity or sorority houses and dormitories 
	Townhouses or rowhouses 
	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council. 
All modular homes must be approved with a specific use permit if placed in a R-1 or R-2 district. 
 
MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT (R-3) 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Single, two family and multifamily manufactured housing 	Drive-in grocery store 
Modular Homes 	Mini-storage 
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council. 	Laundromat 
	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 
 
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE & PROFESSIONAL, DISTRICT (C-1) 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Permitted uses in R-1 and R-2 	Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes or homes for convalescents and the aged, other than for the insane, feeble-minded, alcoholics or drug addicts 
Conditional uses in R-1 and R-2 	Philanthropic or eleemosynary institutions, other than penal institutions 
Offices to be used only for the administrative functions of companies, corporations, social or philanthropic organizations or societies 	Private clubs or fraternal orders 
Offices for accountants, architects, brokers, engineers, dentists, lawyers, optometrists, physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, real estate and insurance 	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 
Mortuaries 	
Medical laboratories 	
Customary accessory uses 	
See Table B for supplementary district regulations 	
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 	
 
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2) 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 	Barbershop 
	Beauty shop 
	Candy store 
	Delicatessen 
	Flower shop 
	Gift shop 
	Ice cream parlor 
	Pastry shop 
	Restaurant 
	Drive-in grocery store 
	Dairy product storage/distribution facility 
	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 
 
GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT C-3 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Permitted uses in R-1, R-2 and C-1 	Filling or gasoline station with above-ground storage 
Conditional uses in R-1, R-2 and C-1 	Vehicular storage rooms or yards with dismantled or auto parts displayed or stored outside the building 
Art gallery 	Dance halls, night clubs, taverns and other similar activities with on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages (see alcoholic beverage chapter) 
Art shop 	Veterinary hospitals or clinics 
Book store 	Radio or television broadcasting studios 
Camera shop 	Miniature golf courses 
Cigar store 	Golf driving ranges 
Drug store 	Hospitals for the insane, feeble-minded or, alcoholic or drug addicts or, penal and correctional institutions 
Dress or millinery store 	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 
Dry goods store 	
Jewelry store 	
Music store 	
Newsstand 	
Notions or novelty store 	
Photographic studio 	
Shoe store or shop 	
Stationery store 	
Tailor shop 	
Toy shop 	
Antique shop 	
Department store 	
Dry cleaning pickup, laundry pickup station and self-service laundry and cleaning 	
Package liquor and beer sales (see alcoholic beverage chapter) 	
Post office 	
Fix-it shop 	
Filling or gasoline station, provided all storage underground 	
Commercial swimming pool 	
Bakery 	
Banks and savings & loans 	
Catering service 	
Clothing store 	
Drive-in eating establishments 	
Dancing school 	
Dress making or millinery shop 	
Electrical appliance sales 	
Glass shop 	
Hardware store 	
Hat shop 	
Household furnishings or furniture store 	
Interior decorator 	
Juice bar or shop 	
Leather goods or luggage shop 	
Pottery and ceramics shop 	
Printing and publishing establishments 	
Reducing salon 	
Sporting goods store 	
Travel agency 	
Seed stores 	
Vehicular storage rooms or yards with no dismantled or auto parts displayed or stored outside building 	
Vehicular repair garages 	
Rental stores 	
Farm or irrigation equipment sales 	
Automobile parking lots 	
Automobile sales rooms and used car lots 	
Bus and railroad stations 	
Dry cleaning or laundry establishment 	
Storage garage for vehicles 	
Indoor theaters 	
Cafeterias 	
Frozen food lockers 	
Upholstery shop 	
Motels 	
Ornamental iron sales 	
Plumbing, heating and air conditioning shops, with no storage in front or side yards 	
Wholesaling establishments 	
Sign painting plants 	
Apartment hotels 	
Skating rinks 	
Gymnasiums and similar 	
Automobile rentals 	
Mobile home or trailer court or park 	
Lumber yards 	
Carpenter or similar shops 	
Bus barns or lots 	
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 	
 
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (M-1)* 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Permitted uses in C-3, except dwellings 	Carpet cleaning establishments 
Conditional uses in C-3 	Chemical laboratories (not processing or manufacturing) 
Bottling works 	Cleaning, pressing and dyeing plants 
Cold storage plants 	Dog pounds (enclosed) 
Creameries 	Freight terminals 
Lumber yards (processing) 	Machine shops 
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 	Moving, transfer or storage plants 
	Railroad freight yards 
	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 
 
*Performance Standards in Table A Supplement are applicable to all M Districts. 
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL, INCLUDING AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY, DISTRICT (M-2)* 
Permitted Uses 	Conditional Uses 
Permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 	Conditional uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Permitted uses in M-1 	Grain elevators 
Conditional uses in M-1 	Petroleum products refinery 
Ice plants 	Bulk storage of liquid propane gas meeting all local and state requirements 
Manufacturing of items not having or potentially not having environmentally detrimental by-products 	Fabrication or assembling of irrigation pipe and equipment 
Milk depots 	Galvanizing works 
Milk bottling or distribution plants 	Chemical laboratories 
Plumbing or sheet metal shops 	Manufacturing of items having or potentially having environmentally detrimental by-products 
Vegetable processing plants 	Stone products or related activities 
Wood products plants 	Produce markets (wholesale) 
Canning or preserving plants 	Oil well supplies and related equipment 
Flour, feed or grain mills or processing plants, provided no grain elevators are utilized 	Storage, in bulk or warehouse, for fuel or other petroleum products and similar raw materials 
Planing mills 	Ammonia, bleaching powder chemical plants 
Railroad freight yards and truckage, other than main lines 	Asphalt or concrete mixing plants 
Storage, in bulk or warehouse, for building materials or similar law materials 	Breweries and distilleries 
Blooming or rolling mills 	Cotton ginning or bailing works 
Railroad yards and related activities 	Enameling works 
Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 	Electric power plants 
	Electric plating plants 
	Foundries 
	Animal skin processing 
	Metal shaping or fabricating works 
	Salvage or junk yards 
	Structural iron or pipe yards 
	Sugar refineries 
	Acid manufacturing (with report) 
	Distillation of bones 
	Fat rendering 
	Cement, lime gypsum or plaster of paris manufacturing 
	Explosives manufacturing or storage, with report from Chief of Fire Dept. 
	Fertilizer manufacturing 
	Glue manufacturing 
	Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ore 
	Stockyards or slaughter of animals 
	Wholesale storage of gasoline, with report from Chief of Fire Dept. 
	Any additions or interpretation shall be the responsibility of the Commission, with approval from the Council 
 
Performance standards in Table A Supplement are applicable to all "M" Districts. 
(b)  Table A supplement; performance standards. The following performance standards apply to permitted and conditional uses in zoning districts M-1 and M-2: 
(1)  Smoke. The requirements of the State Air Control Board. 
(2)  Particulate matter. The requirements of the State Air Control Board. 
(3)  Odor. No activity or operation shall permit odors to be released which are detectable at an "R" district boundary line and which offensively affect the sense of smell. 
(4)  Toxic material. The emission of toxic and noxious materials shall not produce concentrations exceeding all applicable federal standards. 
(5)  Glare. All artificial light sources shall be shielded so as to prevent direct rays of light from crossing a zone boundary line. 
(6)  Vibration. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line, earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column I of the following table are prohibited. In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along a zone boundary line, earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column II of the following table are prohibited. Vibrations shall be expressed as resultant displacement in inches. Also, any and all applicable federal standards more stringent than those stated below shall take precedence. 
Frequency 
(Cycles Per Second) 	Displacement Inches 	Displacement Inches 
Below 10 	0.0008 	0.0004 
10—20 	0.0005 	0.0002 
20—30 	0.0002 	0.0001 
30—40 	0.0002 	0.0001 
40 & over 	0.0001 	0.0001 
 
The aforementioned table is for steady state vibration; this is defined as continuous vibration in contrast to discrete pulses. Impact vibration (that is, discrete pulses which do not exceed 100 pulses per minute) shall not produce in excess of twice (two times) the displacement stipulated above. 
(7)  Noise. At no point on the boundary of the zone or at 125 feet from the property line of the plant or operation, whichever distance is greater, shall the sound pressure level of any operation of plant (other than background noises produced by sources not under control of these covenants, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel limit in the octave bands designated below. Also, any and all applicable federal standards more stringent than those stated below shall take precedence. 
Octave Band Frequency 
(Cycles Per Second) 	Maximum Permitted Sound Level in Decibels Along "R" District Lines or 125 Feet from Lot Line 	Maximum Permitted Sound Level in Decibels Along "C" District Lines or 125 Feet from Lot Line 
0—75 	67 	73 
75—150 	62 	68 
150—300 	58 	64 
300—600 	54 	60 
600—1,200 	49 	55 
1,200—2,400 	45 	51 
2,400—4,800 	41 	47 
4,800 & over 	37 	43 
 
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter and associated octave band filter, manufactured and calibrated according to standards prescribed by federal regulations. Measurements shall be made using the flat or C network of the sound level meter and the fast meter movement of the octave band analyzer. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed provided that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so measured, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound-level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two decibels. Noises incapable of being measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(8)  Fire hazards. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Said materials or products be stored, utilized or manufactured within complete enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system; 
b.  The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or gases which produce flammable or explosive vapors, shall be permitted in accordance with federal or state laws (exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers) and with the City's fire prevention code; and 
(9)  Water pollution. No operation or activity shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, liquid or solid waste into public waters unless in conformance with the provisions of the State Water Quality Board, the State Railroad Commission and the State Department. of Health statutes and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Plans and specification for proposed sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal facilities shall be submitted to and approval obtained from the State Department. of Health and the State. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 11(Table A))  
Sec. 48-83. - Table B. 
(a)  Table B, district requirements. 
Table B—District Requirements 
Zone Standards
District 	Minimum Lot Area 
(Gross) 	Area Per Dwelling Unit or Structure 	Lot Width a 	Lot Depth 	Front Yard 	Side Yard 
(minimum) 	Exterior Side Yard 
(minimum) 	Rear Yard 	Minimum Dwelling Unit Size 
(SF/Fam.) 	Maximum Lot Coverage 	Maximum Height 
A-O 	5 acres 	5 acres 	200' 	200' 	40' 	25' 	30' 	30' 	—- 	N/A 	No limit 
R-1 	9,200 SF 	9,200 SF 	80' 	115' 	25' 	15' or 10% of lot width b 	15' c 	30' 	650 SF 	40% 	35' or 2 stories 
R-2 	9,200 SF 	1,500 SF 	80' 	115' 	15' 	15' e 	15' 	15' 	d 	50% 	No limit f 
R-3 	6,000 SF 	4,500 SF 	40' 	90' 	10' 	7' e 	10' 	10' 	d 	75% 	No limit f 
C-1 	7,000 SF 	3,500 SF 	60' 	125' 	30' 	Same as R-1 e 	15' c 	30' 	—- 	40% 	Same as R-1 
C-2 	7,000 SF 	1,500 SF 	60' 	125' 	20' 	None g 	5'+ e 	20' 	—- 	75% 	20' or 2 stories 
C-3 	3,500 SF 	1,500 SF 	60' 	100' 	—- 	None g 	None e 	20'+ h 	—- 	75% 	60' or 5 stories 
M-1 	7,000 SF 	—- 	—- 	—- 	—- 	—- 	15' 	—- 	—- 	—- 	No limit 
M-2 	7,000 SF 	—- 	—- 	—- 	—- 	—- 	40' 	—- 	—- 	—- 	No limit 
 
a Measured at front setback line. 
b Whichever is greater but not less than 15 feet. 
c Corner lots in separate ownership at the time of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not have its buildable width reduced to less than 35 feet. 
d 650 square feet for single-family dwellings. 
e Opaque fence, wall or screen of not less than six feet in height when adjacent to any other "R" district. 
f When a multifamily structure abuts R-1 district or single-family dwelling unit, the maximum height shall be 2.5 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
g Minimum 20 feet only when abutting any "R" or "M" district. 
h One foot for every two feet over 30 feet in height. 
i Minimum lot areas apply to lots have access to and buildings connected to an organized public sewer system only. 
(b)  Table B supplement; height and area exceptions. The regulations and requirements as to height of buildings and area of lots which may be occupied by buildings, front yards, side yards, rear yards and other regulations and requirements in the foregoing sections of this article, shall be subject to the following exceptions and additional regulations: 
(1)  Height. 
a.  In districts where permitted, public or semi-public buildings, such as hospitals, hotels, churches, sanitariums or schools, either public or private, may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided that such buildings shall have yards which shall be increased one foot on all sides for each additional foot that such buildings exceed the specified height limit as established by the regulations of the district in which such buildings are situated. 
b.  Dwellings in R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts may be increased in height not exceeding ten feet in addition to the limitations of 2½ stories, or 35 feet, as prescribed in such districts, provided that two side yards of not less than 20 feet in width, each, are provided. In no case shall such dwelling, however, exceed three stories in height. 
c.  Parapet walls and false mansards shall not extend more than six feet above the height limit. Flagpoles, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, pent houses, finials, gas tanks, grain elevators, stacks, storage towers, radio towers, ornamental towers, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires, standpipes and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected as to height in accordance with existing or hereafter enacted laws affecting the same. 
(2)  Area per family. On lots where a public or community sewer is not available, the minimum lot area (gross) shall not be less than prescribed by the State Department of Health to accommodate a specific size of septic tank and drainage field. 
(3)  Yard exceptions. 
a.  In R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts, where lots comprising 40 percent or more of the frontage, on the same side of a street between two intersecting streets (excluding reverse corner lots), are developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of not more than ten feet in depth, the overage of such front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the remainder of the frontage; provided that the Board of Adjustment may permit a variance in case of hardship, or where the configuration of the ground is such as to make conformity with the front yard requirements impractical. 
b.  Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or highway upon which a lot abutts, then the depth or width of a yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
c.  In any district, a detached accessory building not exceeding 24 feet or two stories in height, or in any case not higher than the main building, may occupy not more than 30 percent of a rear yard. 
d.  No rear yard shall be required in C-1, C-3, M-1 and M-2 districts inclusive on any lot used for business or industrial purposes, the rear line of which adjoins a railway right-of-way or which has a rear railway track connection. 
e.  In computing the depth of a rear yard for any commercial or industrial use in a C-1, C-3, M-1 or M-2 district where such yard abuts an alley, one-half of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the rear yard. 
(4)  Supplementary district regulations. 
a.  Visibility at intersections in "R" districts. On a corner lot in any R district, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vehicle driver's vision at intersections. 
b.  Fences, walls and hedges. 
1.  A wire fence, woven or hog wire, may extend to the property line, provided such wire fence does not exceed the height of four feet on any property line fronting or located on a street. Hedges, shrubbery and solid fences or walls shall not exceed three feet in height on any front property line, unless such obstruction is at least 15 feet back from such front property line and shall not exceed three feet in height along any side property line within 15 feet of a street corner. 
2.  Fences constructed of barbed wire and walls topped with broken glass or surfaces with any like material shall be prohibited in R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoned areas. However, a security fence not less eight feet in height may be composed of or topped with barbed wire that is located on property zoned for nonresidential purposes. Fences built prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived will be allowed to remain. 
c.  Structures to have access. Every building hereafter erected, placed or moved shall be on a lot with direct access on a public street, or with access to a municipally approved private street. All structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required on-site parking. 
d.  Front yard required. A yard facing and abutting a street and extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and having a minimum horizontal depth measured from the front property line equal to the depth of the minimum front yard specified from the district in which the lot is located. The required yard line represents the line in front of which no building or structure may be erected, except that porches and steps on three sides located along not more than one-half the building may project a maximum of six feet into the required front yard. Balconies, decks and marquees located more than eight feet from the ground may project up to six feet into the required front yard. 
e.  Rear yard required. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines and having a minimum depth measured from the rear lot line as specified for the district in which the lot is located. There shall be no intrusion into the rear yard by stairways, balconies or other building extensions to more than four feet. 
f.  Side yard required. A yard located on a lot extending from the required rear yard and having a minimum width measured from the side lot line as specified for the district in which the lot is located. 
g.  Court width. No court shall have a width of less than ten feet, nor a width of less than 2½ inches for each foot of height of the court. 
h.  Projections into required yard or a court. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, buttresses, ornamental features and eaves; provided, however, that none of the above projections shall extend into a court more than six inches, nor into a required yard more than 30 inches; and provided further that canopies or open porches having a roof area not exceeding 60 square feet may project a maximum of six feet into the required front or rear yard; and existing open porches extending into the required yard shall not be enclosed. An open fire escape may project into a required side yard not more than half the width of such yard, but not more than four feet from the building. Fire escapes, solid-floored balconies and enclosed outside stairways may project not more than four feet into a rear yard. 
i.  Through lot. A through lot having one end abutting a limited access highway, with no access permitted to that lot from said highway, shall be deemed to front upon the street which gives access to that lot. 
j.  Driveway or walk. A driveway or walk, as distinct from a dedicated street, to provide access to premises in a C-1, C-3, M-1 or M-2 district inclusive shall not be permitted in an R-1, R-2, R-3 or C-2 district inclusive. 
k.  Merchandise display; storage. In the C-1 district, no merchandise shall be handled or displayed, except at mortuaries, and no equipment, material or vehicle other than motor passenger cars shall be stored outside a building. 
l.  Parking and storage of certain vehicles. For purposes of these regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any street in an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district, except for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading and unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. 
m.  Screening of salvage yards and junkyards. Salvage or junk yards shall be completely enclosed and effectively screened by a solid fence or wall at least eight feet high. Where applicable, such establishments shall be in conformance with standards and requirements of State and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 11(Table B); Ord. of 3-9-1988, § 1; Ord. of 9-10-1997, § 1; Ord. of 10-8-1997(2), § 1)  
Sec. 48-84. - Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses in the R-1 district shall be accessory uses, customarily incident to the uses in sections 48-81 through 48-83 and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a business or industry. (No equipment, material or vehicle other than motor passenger cars shall be stored in any residential districts.) 
(1)  Automobile parking areas which are necessary to the uses permitted in the R-1 district. 
(2)  The term "accessory use" shall include customary home occupations, such as dressmaker, musician or artist, but does not include physicians, day nurseries, barbers or beauticians, under the following restrictions: 
a.  That such uses are located in the dwelling used by a person as his private residence. 
b.  That no assistant other than a family member is employed, and no window display or sign, either illuminated or more than one square foot in area, is used to advertise same. 
c.  That no power other than electric and of not more than one-half horsepower is used in any one machine, and not more than one horsepower total is used in such home occupation. 
(3)  For any dwelling house there shall be permitted one private garage or covered carport, with space for not more than one vehicle for each 2,000 square feet of lot area, provided that such garage shall be located not less than 25 feet from the front lot line, nor less than five feet from any alley line, except that when the rear lot line is common to a side lot line, then such garage shall be located not less than 15 feet from said common rear and side lot line, and in the case of corner lots, not less than the distance required for residences from side streets. A garage constructed as an integral part of the main building shall be subject to the regulations affecting the main building, except that on a corner lot, a private garage, when attached to the main building and not exceeding the height of the main building, may extend into the required rear yard to a point not less than 15 feet from the rear lot line, and shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the required rear yard. No part of a detached accessory building shall be closer than ten feet to the main building. 
(4)  No private stable, swine, cattle, horses, goats or other livestock, fowl or animal of any kind shall be permitted to be kept inside the City limits, with the exception of temporary school livestock, fowl or agricultural projects, and then only with the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(5)  A hobby shop may be operated as an accessory use by the occupancy of the premises purely for personal enjoyment, amusement or recreation; provided, however, that such use shall not be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, fumes or electrical interferences. Furthermore, there shall be absolutely no retail or wholesale sales activity on the premises. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 12)  
Secs. 48-85—48-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REINVESTMENT ZONE 
 
Sec. 48-101. - Designating the area as a reinvestment zone. 
The area described in section 48-102 and more commonly referred to as the "Pearsall Development Project" and officially assigned the name as designated in section 48-105 (which reinvestment zone so described, named and designated is hereinafter referred to as the "zone"), is hereby designated as a tax increment reinvestment zone. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 1, 12-22-2011)  
Sec. 48-102. - Description of the boundaries of the reinvestment zone. 
Attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived as Exhibit "A," which is incorporated herein by reference for all purposes, is a county appraisal district map with the parcels, area and boundaries of the zone shaded in yellow. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 2, 12-22-2011)  
Sec. 48-103. - Creation and composition of a board of directors for the zone. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of directors (the "board") for the zone, with all the rights, powers and duties as provided by the Act to such boards or by action of the City Council. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 311.009(a), the board shall consist of not less than five and not more than 15 members. The tax increment reinvestment zone board shall consist of five members; three appointees from the City and two appointees from the County. Each taxing unit other than the City that levies taxes on real property in the zone may appoint one member to the board. A unit may waive its right to appoint a member. Upon expiration of their respective terms of office, replacements to the board shall be appointed. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by the respective taxing unit making such appointments for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(b)  The following members are hereby appointed to the board of directors for Tax Increment Reinvestment Zone Number 1 for a two-year term: 
1. 	Toby Lopez, Jr. 	Representing the City of Pearsall 
2. 	James H. Leal 	Representing the City of Pearsall 
3. 	Brenda Massengale 	Representing the City of Pearsall 
 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 3, 12-22-2011; Ord. No. 2015-12-02, 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 48-104. - Effective date and termination date of the zone. 
The zone shall take effect on December 13, 2011, and continue until its termination date of December 31, 2036, unless otherwise terminated earlier as a result of payment in full of all project costs, tax increment bonds, if any, including interest on said bonds as authorized or permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 4, 12-22-2011)  
Sec. 48-105. - Assigning a name to the zone. 
The tax increment reinvestment zone created hereby is assigned the name of "Reinvestment Zone Number 1, City of Pearsall, Texas." 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 5, 12-22-2011)  
Sec. 48-106. - Tax increment base. 
The tax increment base for the zone is the total assessed value of all real property taxable by the City and located in the zone, determined as of January 1, 2011, the year in which the zone was designated as a reinvestment zone (the "tax increment base"). 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 6, 12-22-2011)  
Sec. 48-107. - Establishment of a Tax Increment Fund. 
There is hereby created and established in the depository bank of the City, a fund to be called the "Reinvestment Zone Number 1, City of Pearsall, Texas, Tax Increment Fund" (herein called the "Tax Increment Fund"). Money in the Tax Increment Fund, from whatever source, may be disbursed from the Tax Increment Fund, invested, and paid as permitted by the Act or by any agreements entered into pursuant to the Act, or as otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 7, 12-22-2011)  
Sec. 48-108. - Findings. 
(a)  The City hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  Improvements in the zone will significantly enhance the value of all the taxable real property in the zone and will be of general benefit to the City; and 
(2)  The zone meets the requirements of section 311.005 of the Act, being that the zone area: 
"be predominantly open or undeveloped, and because of obsolete platting, deterioration of structures or site improvements, or other factors, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of the municipality…" 
(b)  The City, pursuant to the Act, further finds and declares that: 
(1)  The proposed zone is a contiguous geographical area located wholly within the City limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City; 
(2)  Less than 30 percent of the property in the proposed zone is used for residential purposes, as the term "residential" is defined in section 311.006(d) of the Act; 
(3)  The total appraised value of the taxable real property in the proposed zone or in existing reinvestment zones, if any, does not exceed 50 percent of the total appraised value of taxable real property in the City and in industrial districts, if any, created by the City; 
(4)  The proposed zone does not contain more than 50 percent of the total appraised value of real property taxable by the County and the Pearsall Independent School District; and 
(5)  Development or redevelopment within the boundaries of the proposed zone will not occur solely through private investment in the reasonably foreseeable future. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 8, 12-22-2011)  
Sec. 48-109. - Designation of a section 311.005(a) zone. 
The Zone is designated pursuant to section 311.005(a) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-140, § 9, 12-22-2011)  
Secs. 48-110—48-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FEES 
 
Sec. 48-131. - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
(a)  Establishment by resolution. The City Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals and other such matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the Office of the Zoning Administrator and may be altered or amended by the City Council. 
(b)  Payment in full of fees, charges and expenses. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal herein. 
(c)  Fees. 
(1)  A fee shall accompany each application for an amendment or conditional use permit. All publication costs and notice-by-mail costs will be the responsibility of the applicant. Immediately upon receipt of such application and fee, paid in full, the Zoning Administrator shall note thereon the date of filing and make a permanent record thereof. 
(2)  A fee shall accompany each filing of an appeal, special exception or variance to the Board of Adjustment. Immediately upon receipt of the filing fee, the Zoning Administrator shall note thereon the date of filing and make a permanent record thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-4-1983, § 19)  
Appendix A - STREET LISTINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Following is a listing of the streets within the City of Pearsall, Texas, where the City Council has adopted or approved the installation, maintenance, or use of traffic control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic. Additions made for the purpose of clarity are indicated by bracketed text. 
 
Sec. 1. - Traffic control devices. 
[(1)  Stop intersections. ] 
North Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Alabama Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Alabama Street. 
West Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Apple Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Apple Street. 
North Mulberry Street at its intersection with W. Alabama Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Alabama Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. Alabama Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Alabama Street. 
W. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Apple Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Apple Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Apple Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Apple Street. 
W. Leona Street at its intersection with S. Apple Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Apple Street. 
W. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Apple Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Apple Street. 
North Oak Street at its intersection with E. Arnold Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Arnold Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. Arnold Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Arnold Street. 
North Berry Ranch Street at its intersection with Hackberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on Hackberry Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. Athol Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Athol Street. 
E. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Ash Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Ash Street. 
E. Florida Street at its intersection with North Ash Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Ash Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Ash Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Ash Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Ash Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Ash Street. 
East San Antonio Street at its intersection with S. Ash Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Ash Street. 
E. Carter Street at its intersection with S. Ash Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Ash Street. 
W. San Antonio Street at its intersection with S. Bernal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Bernal Street. 
W. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Bernal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Bernal Street. 
W. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Bernal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Bernal Street. 
North Elm Street at its intersection with E. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Brazos Street. 
North Oak Street at its intersection with E. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Brazos Street. 
North Ash Street at its intersection with E. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Brazos Street. 
North Cedar Street at its intersection with E. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Brazos Street. 
North Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Brazos Street. 
North Garcia Street at its intersection with E. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Brazos Street. 
North Cherry Street at its intersection with W. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Brazos Street. 
North Peach Street at its intersection with W. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Brazos Street. 
North Mulberry Street at its intersection with Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on Brazos Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Brazos Street. 
North Vinton Street at its intersection with W. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Brazos Street. 
North Moreno Street at its intersection with W. Brazos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Brazos Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Bryan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Bryan Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Bryan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Bryan Street. 
E. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Bryan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Bryan Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Carter Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Carter Street. 
S. Pecan Street at its intersection with E. Carter Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Carter Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Cedar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Cedar Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Cedar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Cedar Street. 
E. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Cedar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Cedar Street. 
E. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Cedar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Cedar Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Chestnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Chestnut Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Chestnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Chestnut Street. 
E. Taft Street at its intersection with North Chestnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Chestnut Street. 
E. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Chestnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Chestnut Street. 
E. Alabama Street at its intersection with North Cedar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Cedar Street. 
W. Alabama Street at its intersection with North Cherry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Cherry Street. 
W. 23rd Street at its intersection with North Cherry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Cherry Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Cherry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Cherry Street. 
W. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Cherry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Cherry Street. 
North Huajillo Street at its intersection with W. Cibolo Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Cibolo Street. 
North Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. Cibolo Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Cibolo Street. 
North Elm Street at its intersection with E. Colorado Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Colorado Street. 
North Cherry Street at its intersection with W. Colorado Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Colorado Street. 
S. Willow Street at its intersection with W. Colorado Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Colorado Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Colorado Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Colorado Street. 
North Peach Street at its intersection with W. Colorado Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Colorado Street. 
S. Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Comal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Comal Street. 
S. Ash Street at its intersection with E. Comal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Comal Street. 
E. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Cypress Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Cypress Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Davila Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Davila Street. 
E. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Elm Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Elm Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Cypress Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Cypress Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Cypress Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Cypress Street. 
E. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Elm Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Elm Street. 
E. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Elm Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Elm Street. 
W. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Elm Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Elm Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Fairview Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Fairview Street. 
North Oak Street at its intersection with E. Florida Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Florida Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Florida Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Florida Street. 
S. Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Frio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Frio Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Frio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Frio Street. 
1581 Street at its intersection with W. Frio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Frio Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Garcia Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Garcia Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Garcia Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Garcia Street. 
W. Davila Street at its intersection with North Garcia Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Garcia Street. 
W. Pena Street at its intersection with North Garcia Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Garcia Street. 
North Govea Street at its intersection with W. Gonzales Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Gonzales Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Gonzales Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Gonzales Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Gross Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Gross Street. 
W. Davila Street at its intersection with North Govea Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Govea Street. 
W. Pena Street at its intersection with North Govea Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Govea Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. Guadalupe Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Guadalupe Street. 
Berry Ranch Road at its intersection with E. Hackberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Hackberry Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Haynes Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Haynes Street. 
W. Guadalupe Street at its intersection with North Huajillo Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Huajillo Street. 
Vaughan Street at its intersection with North Huajillo Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Huajillo Street. 
North Bryan Street at its intersection with E. Huisache Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Huisache Street. 
North Pine Street at its intersection with E. Huisache Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Huisache Street. 
S. Peach Street at its intersection with W. Leona Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Leona Street. 
S. Willow Street at its intersection with W. Leona Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Leona Street. 
S. Elm Street at its intersection with E. Leona Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Leona Street. 
S. Bernal Street at its intersection with W. Leona Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Leona Street. 
S. Pecan Street at its intersection with E. Leona Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Leona Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Leona Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Leona Street. 
S. Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Leona Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Leona Street. 
W. Pena Street at its intersection with North Llamos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Llamos Street. 
W. Gonzales Street at its intersection with North Llamos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Llamos Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. Llano Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Llano Street. 
North Huajillo Street at its intersection with W. Llano Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Llano Street. 
S. Ash Street at its intersection with E. Medina Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Medina Street. 
S. Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Medina Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Medina Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Medina Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Medina Street. 
North Oak Street at its intersection with E. Margo Drive be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Margo Drive. 
Berry Ranch Road at its intersection with E. Margo Drive be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Margo Drive. 
1581 Street at its intersection with W. Medina Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Medina Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Mesquite Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Mesquite Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Mesquite Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Mesquite Street. 
E. Pecos Street at its intersection with S. Mesquite Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Mesquite Street. 
W. Pena Street at its intersection with North Moreno Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Moreno Street. 
W. Davila Street at its intersection with North Moreno Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Moreno Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Moreno Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Moreno Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Mulberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Mulberry Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Mulberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Mulberry Street. 
W. Leona Street at its intersection with S. Mulberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Mulberry Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Mulberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Mulberry Street. 
W. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Mulberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Mulberry Street. 
W. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Mulberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Mulberry Street. 
W. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Mulberry Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Mulberry Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Neches Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Neches Street. 
North Cherry Street at its intersection with W. Neches Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Neches Street. 
North Peach Street at its intersection with W. Neches Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Neches Street. 
North Mulberry Street at its intersection with W. Neches Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Neches Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Nopal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Nopal Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Nopal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Nopal Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Nueces Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Nueces Street. 
S. Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Nueces Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Nueces Street. 
S. Pecan Street at its intersection with E. Nueces Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Nueces Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Paiz Court be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Paiz Court. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Park Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Park Street. 
E. Margo Drive at its intersection with North Paseo Tyner Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Paseo Tyner Street. 
E. Margo Drive at its intersection with S. Paseo Tyner Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Paseo Tyner Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Peach Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Peach Street. 
W. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Peach Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Peach Street. 
North Trinity Street at its intersection with North Peach Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Peach Street. 
E. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Pecan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Pecan Street. 
Rio Grande Street at its intersection with North Pecan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Pecan Street. 
W. Alabama Street at its intersection with North Peach Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Peach Street. 
W. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Peach Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Peach Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Pecan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Pecan Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Pecan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Pecan Street. 
E. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Pecan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Pecan Street. 
E. Margo Drive at its intersection with North Pecan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Pecan Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. Pecos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Pecos Street. 
S. Pecan Street at its intersection with E. Pecos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Pecos Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Pena Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Pena Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Pine Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Pine Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Pine Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Pine Street. 
E. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Pine Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Pine Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Plum Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Plum Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Plum Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Plum Street. 
W. Brazos Street at its intersection with North Plum Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Plum Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Plum Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Plum Street. 
W. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Poplar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Poplar Street. 
W. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Poplar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Poplar Street. 
W. Leona Street at its intersection with S. Poplar Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Poplar Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Puente Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Puente Street. 
W. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Puente Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Puente Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Puente Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Puente Street. 
W. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Power Plant Road be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Power Plant Road. 
North Mulberry Street at its intersection with W. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Rio Grande Street. 
Cedar Street at its intersection with E. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Rio Grande Street. 
North Ash Street at its intersection with E. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Rio Grande Street. 
North Peach Street at its intersection with E. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Rio Grande Street. 
North Oak Street at its intersection with E. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E . Rio Grande Street. 
North Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Rio Grande Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Rio Grande Street. 
North Elm Street at its intersection with E. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Rio Grande Street. 
North Cherry Street at its intersection with W. Rio Grande Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Rio Grande Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Roosevelt Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Roosevelt Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Roosevelt Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Roosevelt Street. 
S. Mulberry Street at its intersection with W. San Marcos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Marcos Street. 
S. Ash Street at its intersection with E. San Marcos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. San Marcos Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. San Marcos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. San Marcos Street. 
S. Apple Street at its intersection with W. San Marcos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Marcos Street. 
S. Willow Street at its intersection with W. San Marcos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Marcos Street. 
S. Peach Street at its intersection with W. San Marcos Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Marcos Street. 
S. Willow Street at its intersection with W. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Antonio Street. 
S. Willow Street at its intersection with E. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. San Antonio Street. 
S. Oak Street at its intersection with E. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. San Antonio Street. 
S. Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. San Antonio Street. 
S. Elm Street at its intersection with E. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. San Antonio Street. 
S. Peach Street at its intersection with W. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Antonio Street. 
S. Mulberry Street at its intersection with W. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Antonio Street. 
S. Apple Street at its intersection with W. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Antonio Street. 
North Villareal Street at its intersection with W. Sanchez Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Sanchez Street. 
1581 Street at its intersection with W. San Antonio Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. San Antonio Street. 
North Govea Street at its intersection with W. Sanchez Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Sanchez Street. 
North Llamos Street at its intersection with W. Sanchez Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Sanchez Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Sanchez Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Sanchez Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Soto Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Soto Street. 
W. Davila Street at its intersection with North Tafolla Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Tafolla Street. 
North Cedar Street at its intersection with E. Taft Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Taft Street. 
North Oak Street at its intersection with E. Taft Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Taft Street. 
North Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Taft Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Taft Street. 
Cedar Street at its intersection with E. Taft Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Taft Street. 
W. Davila Street at its intersection with North Trevino Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Trevino Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. Trinity Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Trinity Street. 
North Mesquite Street at its intersection with E. Trinity Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. Trinity Street. 
North Mesquite Street at its intersection with W. Trinity Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Trinity Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Underwood Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Underwood Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. Vaughan Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. Vaughan Street. 
W. Gonzales Street at its intersection with North Villareal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Villareal Street. 
W. Pena Street at its intersection with North Villareal Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Villareal Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Vinton Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Vinton Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Vinton Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Vinton Street. 
W. Pena Street at its intersection with North Vinton Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Vinton Street. 
W. Navarro Street at its intersection with North Vinton Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Vinton Street. 
W. Davila Street at its intersection with North Vinton Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Vinton Street. 
W. Brazos Street at its intersection with North Vinton Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Vinton Street. 
E. Alabama Street at its intersection with North Walnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Walnut Street. 
E. Trinity Street at its intersection with North Walnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Walnut Street. 
E. Carter Street at its intersection with S. Walnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Walnut Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Walnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Walnut Street. 
E. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Walnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Walnut Street. 
E. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Walnut Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Walnut Street. 
North Pecan Street at its intersection with E. William Drive be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. William Drive. 
North Berry Ranch Street at its intersection with E. William Drive be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on E. William Drive. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Willow Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Willow Street. 
W. Medina Street at its intersection with S. Willow Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Willow Street. 
W. Frio Street at its intersection with S. Willow Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Willow Street. 
North Mulberry Street at its intersection with North Willow Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Willow Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Willow Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Willow Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with S. Woodlawn Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Woodlawn Street. 
W. Comal Street at its intersection with S. Woodlawn Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on S. Woodlawn Street. 
W. Colorado Street at its intersection with North Zee Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Zee Street. 
W. Brazos Street at its intersection with North Zee Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on North Zee Street. 
North Willow Street at its intersection with W. 23rd Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. 23rd Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with W. 23rd Street be designated as a stop intersection and that stop signs be erected on W. 23rd Street. 
[(2)  Yield intersections. ] 
North Bryan Street at its intersection with East Brazos Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Brazos Street. 
Leona Street at its intersection with South Cedar Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Cedar Street. 
East San Antonio Street at its intersection with South Cedar Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Cedar Street. 
East Comal Street at its intersection with South Cedar Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Cedar Street. 
East Alabama Street at its intersection with North Chestnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Chestnut Street. 
East Trinity Street at its intersection with North Chestnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Chestnut Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Chestnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Chestnut Street. 
Rio Grande Street at its intersection with North Chestnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Chestnut Street. 
East Comal Street at its intersection with South Chestnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Chestnut Street. 
East Brazos Street at its intersection with North Chestnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Chestnut Street. 
Leona Street at its intersection with South Chestnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Chestnut Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Cypress Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Cypress Street. 
East Brazos Street at its intersection with North Cypress Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Cypress Street. 
East Rio Grande Street at its intersection with North Cypress Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Cypress Street. 
East Taft Street at its intersection with North Cypress Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Cypress Street. 
East Trinity Street at its intersection with North Cypress Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Cypress Street. 
East Alabama Street at its intersection with North Cypress Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Cypress Street. 
East Pecos Street at its intersection with South Elm Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Elm Street. 
South Ash Street at its intersection with East Frio Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Frio Street. 
North Moreno Street at its intersection with West Gonzales Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on West Gonzales Street. 
North Vinton Street at its intersection with West Gonzales Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on West Gonzales Street. 
South Ash Street at its intersection with East Leona Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Leona Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Mesquite Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Mesquite Street. 
West San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Nopal Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Nopal Street. 
South Walnut Street at its intersection with East Nueces Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Nueces Street. 
South Elm Street at its intersection with East Nueces Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Nueces Street. 
South Ash Street at its intersection with East Nueces Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Nueces Street. 
Walnut Street at its intersection with East Park Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Park Street. 
South Ash Street at its intersection with East Park Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Park Street. 
East San Antonio Street at its intersection with South Pecan Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Pecan Street. 
East Comal Street at its intersection with South Pecan Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs he erected on South Pecan Street. 
East Taft Street at its intersection with North Pecan Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Pecan Street. 
East Brazos Street at its intersection with North Pecan Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Pecan Street. 
East Alabama Street at its intersection with North Pecan Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Pecan Street. 
South Ash Street at its intersection with East Pecos Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Pecos Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Pine Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Pine Street. 
East Alabama Street at its intersection with North Pine Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Pine Street. 
East Trinity Street at its intersection with North Pine Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Pine Street. 
East Brazos Street at its intersection with North Pine Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Pine Street. 
East Rio Grande Street at its intersection with North Pine Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Pine Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Pine Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Pine Street. 
San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Plum Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Plum Street. 
West San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Plum Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Plum Street. 
North Bryan Street at its intersection with East Rio Grande Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Rio Grande Street. 
Tuna Street at its intersection with West San Marcos Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on West San Marcos Street. 
South Cedar Street at its intersection with East San Marcos Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East San Marcos Street. 
South Pecan Street at its intersection with East San Marcos Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East San Marcos Street. 
South Elm Street at its intersection with East San Marcos Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East San Marcos Street. 
South Chestnut Street at its intersection with East San Antonio Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East San Antonio Street. 
North Ash Street at its intersection with East Taft Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Taft Street. 
North Bryan Street at its intersection with East Taft Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Taft Street. 
North Pine Street at its intersection with East Taft Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Taft Street. 
North Bryan Street at its intersection with East Trinity Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Trinity Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
East Pecos Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
Leona Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
East Brazos Street at its intersection with North Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Walnut Street. 
Rio Grande Street at its intersection with North Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Walnut Street. 
East Taft Street at its intersection with North Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Walnut Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
East Comal Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
East San Antonio Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
East Nueces Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
East Medina Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
East San Marcos Street at its intersection with South Walnut Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on South Walnut Street. 
North Bryan Street at its intersection with East Alabama Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on East Alabama Street. 
Power Plant Road at its intersection with West Arnold Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on West Arnold Street. 
East Alabama Street at its intersection with North Ash Street be designated as a yield intersection and that yield signs be erected on North Ash Street. 
[(3)  One-way streets. ] 
That Alabama Street between East Pecan and Mesquite Street be designated as a one-way street directing that all traffic proceed east and that applicable signs be erected at the termini of said zone and wherever practical within said zone. 
That Florida Street between North Pecan Street and North Ash Street be designated as a one-way street directing that all traffic proceed west and that applicable signs be erected at the termini of said zone and wherever practical within said zone. 
That North Pecan Street between East Alabama Street and East Florida Street be designated as a one-way street directing that all traffic proceed north and that applicable signs be erected at the termini of said zone and wherever practical within said zone. 
That North Willow Street between West Gonzales and West Pena Street be designated as a one-way street directing that all traffic proceed north and that applicable signs be erected at the termini of said zone and wherever practical within said zone. 
East San Marcos Street between South Oak Street and South Ash Street shall be designated as a one-way street from South Oak Street to South Ash Street directing that all traffic proceed eastward. Signs indicating that East San Marcos Street between South Oak Street and South Ash Street shall be designated as a one-way street eastward from South Oak Street to South Ash Street shall be erected on the southwest and northwest corners of the intersection of East San Marcos Street and South Oak Street and on the northeast corners of the intersection of East San Marcos Street and South Ash Street and that a stop sign be erected on the southeast corner of the intersection of East San Marcos Street and South Ash Street. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this appendix is derived, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive and/or operate any motor vehicle on East San Marcos Street traveling east to west from South Ash Street to South Oak Street. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this appendix is derived, the stop sign erected on the east side of East San Marcos with its intersection with South Oak Street is hereby repealed as a traffic control device.  
Sec. 2. - No parking zones. 
That North Willow Street between West Trinity Street and West Pena Street shall be designated as a no parking zone on both sides of said street and that applicable signs shall be erected at the termini of said zone and whenever practical within said zone. 
That North Cherry Street between West Colorado Street and West Alabama Street shall be designated as a no parking zone on both sides of said street and that applicable signs shall be erected at the termini of said zone and whenever practical within said zone. 
That West Alabama Street between Power Plant Road and North Mulberry Street shall be designated as a no parking zone on both sides of said street and applicable signs shall be erected at the termini of said zone and whenever practical within said zone. 
That truck parking is prohibited on either side of Oak St. between East Comal Street and East Brazos Street and applicable signs shall be erected at the termini of said zone and whenever practical within said zone. 
That truck parking is prohibited on the east side of North Oak Street between East Brazos Street and Rio Grande Street and that applicable signs shall be erected at the termini of said zone and whenever practical within said zone. 
That truck parking is prohibited on East Colorado Street on either side between Ash Street and Oak Street and that applicable signs shall be erected at the termini of said zone and whenever practical within said zone.  
Sec. 3. - Speed limits. 
That West Trinity Street from North Mulberry Street to North Willow Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That North Willow Street from West Colorado Street to Athol Lane be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That North Mulberry Street from West Alabama Street to Athol Lane be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That West Alabama Street from North Peach Street to North Mulberry Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That Power Plant Road from West Trinity Street to Athol Lane be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That West 23rd Street from Power Plant Road to North Willow Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limits signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That West Pena Street from North Vinton Street to North Willow Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That East Florida Street from North Oak Street to North Pecan Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That East Alabama Street from North Walnut Street to Berry Ranch Road be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That North Pecan Street from East Alabama Street to East Florida Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That North Villareal Street from West Sanchez Street to West Navarro Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That West Davila Street from North Govea Street to North Willow Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That West Gonzales Street form North Villareal Street to North Willow Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That North Pecan Street from William Drive to the school property entrance be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That North Paseo Drive from William Drive to the school property entrance be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That North Mesquite Street from East Trinity Street to East Alabama Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
That Berry Ranch Road from William Drive to East Alabama Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
Margo Drive between North Oak Street and Berry Ranch Road be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
North Mulberry Street between Neches Street and West Pena Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
North Mesquite Street between Margo Drive and East Trinity Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
West Pena Street between North Moreno Street and North Willow Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
North Willow Street between West Pena Street and West 23rd Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
Power Plant Road between West 23rd Street and West 23rd Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
North Oak Street between East Trinity Street and Arnold Street be designated as a speed zone and that the lawful maximum speed for motor vehicles in said zone when children are present shall be 20 miles per hour and that applicable speed limit signs be erected at the termini of said zone. 
