7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/507
City of Plainview
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 4
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 19-
3691 adopted 4/23/19.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Plainview, Texas, as compiled, edited and published by
Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Plainview, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles, divisions and
sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall
be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Plainview, Texas.
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of
police” or other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or
such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of the City of Plainview, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any
proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/507
Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of the
City of Plainview, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Hale, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or employee
of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or employee to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically designate
otherwise.
Easement. The term “easement” shall mean a right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one
parcel of land may have in the lands of another; or a right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such
ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in the owner.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships,
associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Highway. The term “highway” shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, or public place or square, bridge, viaduct,
tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use.
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as
giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number
shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and
“affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving
time as may be in current use in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/507
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A, Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, organizations,
business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Public place. The term “public place” shall mean any public street, alley, square, highway, grounds, house or premises,
or any hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, grocery, saloon, garden, workshop or other place, or part of the same, to which
people usually resort, or have a right to resort, for business or pleasure.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Roadway. The word “roadway” shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular
travel. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” as used herein shall refer to
any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys,
avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
This section, this article, this chapter. Wherever the term “this section,” “this article” or “this chapter” is used, it shall
refer to and mean the section, article or chapter in which it is used, respectively.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words,
letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/507
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would
have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any
ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or presented to
the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the Code of
Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the code which is to be
amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article and section; provided, however, the
failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or
directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of
ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit
properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the
adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from
the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to
prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the
code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and,
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other subdivision
numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this
section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance material
inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/507
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or
an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public
health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable
by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental state, unless so specified
by state law, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the
state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance
may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies
such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor, V.T.C.A., Penal
Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of the Code of Ordinances of the city, shall be considered as a
continuation thereof and not as new enactments. (2000 Code, sec. 1-2)
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 1.02.001 Fee for copies of police reports
For furnishing a copy of a police report, accident report or any other report made or kept by the police department of the
city there shall be charged and collected a fee of five dollars ($5.00). (2000 Code, sec. 2-3)
Sec. 1.02.002 Disposition of stolen, abandoned or recovered property
(a) All abandoned, stolen, or recovered property of every kind, including motor vehicles, which shall remain with the
police department of the city for a period of sixty (60) days, without being claimed or reclaimed by the owner, whether
known or not, and which is of no further evidentiary value in the prosecution of criminal or civil cases, may be sold or
disposed of as provided herein.
(b) The chief of police, or his designee, shall furnish to the city secretary a list of all property subject to sale hereunder
before the date of sale. Possession of such property shall remain with the chief of police.
(c) Thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of sale, and a description list of the property and motor vehicles, or
both, to be offered for sale shall be posted by the city secretary at any regular entrance to the city hall and at one other
public place in the county, and if the name of the owner of such property be known, a copy thereof shall be sent to such
owner by registered mail.
(d) When the requirements of the preceding subsections have been met, the property shall be offered for sale at a
public auction to the highest bidder for each piece of property separately or assembled in lots, whichever in the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/507
discretion of the city secretary shall offer the highest price obtainable for the property, provided that motor vehicles that
are operative under their own power shall be sold separately.
(e) The public auction provided for herein shall be conducted at the place and hour designated in the notice and all
sales shall be for cash.
(f) The city secretary, or his designee, shall conduct the public auction provided for in this section and shall keep an
accurate statement of each article or motor vehicle sold and the price bid and paid therefor, and shall make a complete
report in writing to the city manager of the time, place and manner of conducting the sale, and all funds received on
account of such auction shall be delivered to the city director of finance, who shall give his receipt therefor. The director
of finance is hereby required to place all funds received by him under and by virtue of this section to the credit of the
general fund, to be thereafter disbursed as the city council shall deem appropriate.
(g) Any property which has been listed and offered for sale under the provisions of this section and for which no price
or sum has been offered, if deemed by the city secretary to be worthless and without value, shall be disposed of in such
manner as the city secretary shall prescribe. A description of all property destroyed or disposed of by the city secretary
as worthless or without value shall be reported to the city council, together with the date and manner of disposal.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-5)
State law reference–Disposition of abandoned or unclaimed property, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 18.17.
Sec. 1.02.003 Self-insurance fund
(a) The self-insurance fund, a trust fund for self-insurance, is hereby established to provide coverage for property and
liability risk. No part of said fund shall be expended for any purposes other than the liability of the city and its officers,
agents and employees.
(b) Each operating fund shall pay into the insurance fund an annual amount to be determined by the city council
through preparation of the budget.
(c) The city manager is hereby authorized to establish administrative procedures for the settlement and payment of
claims up to $5,000.00 per claim. Proposed settlements of claims exceeding $5,000.00 per claimant shall be submitted to
the city council for approval upon the recommendation of the city manager.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-231)
(d) No city funds shall be subject to garnishment, and the city shall never be required to answer in any garnishment
proceedings. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 101.023)
(e) Any person who claims injury or damage to his person or property shall give notice in writing to the city manager
of such injury or damage within thirty (30) days from its inception. The written notice shall state when, where, and how
the damage occurred, the apparent extent of such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the location of the occurrence
by street and number and names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom the claimant expects to rely to establish the
claim for such damage or injury. (Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, section 101.001
et seq.)
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Self-insurance by local governmental units, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 2259.
ARTICLE 1.03 ELECTIONS*
Sec. 1.03.001 Establishment of district boundary lines and polling places
The boundary lines and polling places for each of the seven single-member districts, subject to the approval of the
Voting Rights Division of the U.S. Department of Justice, shall constitute the boundary lines and polling places of each
of the seven single-member districts until said boundary lines and polling places are changed by ordinance. (2000 Code,
sec. 2-2)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/507
Charter reference–Council districts, adjustments of districts, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.03.002 Write-in candidates
Any qualified elector of the city, who is otherwise qualified, in order to be entitled to stand for election as a write-in
candidate, must file with the city secretary a declaration of write-in candidacy not later than the 30th day prior to the
election. The declaration of write-in candidacy must meet the same requirements as an application for a place on the
ballot. (2000 Code, sec. 2-14)
State law reference–Write-in candidates for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 146.051 et seq.
ARTICLE 1.04 CITY COUNCIL*
Sec. 1.04.001 Qualifying for office
In the event the duly elected mayor or councilmembers are for any reason prevented from qualifying for the office for
which they are elected at the first meeting of the city council after the elections, they shall nevertheless qualify for office
as soon thereafter as possible. (2000 Code, sec. 2-13)
Charter reference–Grounds for forfeiture of office, sec. 2.06(b)(1).
ARTICLE 1.05 CITY OFFICERS†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.05.001–1.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. City Secretary
Sec. 1.05.031 Office established; appointment and removal
The office of city secretary is created and established for the city. The city secretary shall be appointed by the city
manager, with the consent of the city council, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be
removable from office by the city manager, with the consent of said council, as and when the city manager may deem it
expedient. (2000 Code, sec. 2-41; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.032 Duties; salary; bond; deputies
(a) It shall be the duty of the city secretary to attend all meetings of the city council and keep accurate minutes and
records of the proceedings thereof in a book provided for that purpose, and to engross and enroll all laws, ordinances and
resolutions of the city council; to keep a corporate seal; to take care of, preserve and keep in order all books, records,
maps, papers, documents and files which have been submitted to the city council; to countersign all commissions issued
officers and all licenses issued by the mayor, and to keep a record of register thereof; and to make all notices required
under any resolution or ordinance of the city.
(b) He shall also keep a register of bonds and bills issued by the city, and all evidences of debt due and payable to,
noting particulars thereof, and all facts connected therewith as they occur.
(c) He shall carefully keep all contracts made by the city, and he shall perform all such duties as may be required of
him by law or ordinance, resolution or order of the city council.
(d) He shall receive such salary, payable in monthly installments, as may be fixed by the city manager.
(e) He shall have such assistants and deputies as the city manager, with the consent of the city council, may deem
necessary, and serve at the will of the city manager, and their salaries are to be paid by the city. The city manager may
remove such assistants and deputies from office only with the consent of said council.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-42; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/507
ARTICLE 1.06 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.06.001–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Youth Commission
Sec. 1.06.031 Created; goals and objectives
A youth commission is hereby created for the city. The goals and objectives of the commission will be to respond to
current situations affecting young persons and to develop solutions for problems, which will be presented to the mayor
and city council and other interested organizations. The youth commission will further work toward unifying the youth
of the city into a positive force for the good of the community. (2000 Code, sec. 2-281)
Sec. 1.06.032 Duties; membership; sponsor
Said youth commission will act as an advisory committee to the mayor and city council and other interested
organizations. It shall consist of student members representing the nineth through twelfth grades. Students will be
selected from the Plainview Independent School District and private schools and will serve on the commission until
graduation. The youth advisory commission shall determine the selection method for new members with the approval of
the city manager. A sponsor, selected by the city manager from the city staff, will be charged with keeping the
commission focused on a predetermined agenda during regular meetings and assisting in reporting back to the city
council. (2000 Code, sec. 2-282; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.06.033 Attendance requirements; vacation of office
Each member of the commission shall attend no less than 75% of the regular meetings called by the officers of the
commission. Any representative failing to attend 75% of the regular meetings legally called during any calendar year
without an excused absence, as determined by a majority vote of the board members, shall be automatically disqualified
for service on the commission and shall be replaced by the youth advisory commission, with approval of the city
manager. Should any member of the commission move from the city or otherwise become disqualified for any reason,
he/she shall be deemed to have vacated the office. (2000 Code, sec. 2-283)
Sec. 1.06.034 Maximum number of terms
There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve, provided the member is reappointed by the city
manager. (2000 Code, sec. 2-284; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 1.06.035–1.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Senior Citizen Commission
Sec. 1.06.061 Membership; goals and objectives
The Hale County Senior Citizens Association shall serve as the senior citizen commission for the city. The goals and
objectives of the commission will be to respond to current situations affecting senior citizens, and develop solutions for
problems, which will be presented to the mayor and city council and other interested organizations. The senior citizen
commission will further work toward unifying the senior citizens of the city into a positive force for the good of the
community. (2000 Code, sec. 2-296)
Sec. 1.06.062 Conflict of interest
If any member of the senior citizen commission concludes that he or she, as a member, has a conflict of interest with
respect to a particular matter which is pending before the commission, that member shall disqualify himself or herself
from participating in any deliberations, discussions and decision-making processes of the commission. (2000 Code, sec.
2-297)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/507
Charter reference–Conflict of interest, sec. 7.01.
Sec. 1.06.063 Meetings; staff liaison
The senior citizen commission shall hold such meetings as may be deemed necessary for the completion of the purposes,
responsibilities and functions of the commission. An employee of the city designated by the city manager shall serve as
staff liaison for the commission, and the staff liaison shall attend commission meetings and take and publish minutes of
the meetings of the commission. Published copies of the senior citizen commission meetings shall be provided to each
member of the senior citizen commission and to each member of the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 2-298)
Sec. 1.06.064 Duties
The senior citizen commission shall work with the staff liaison to identify issues related to senior citizens in the
community; act as an advisory body to the city council and provide input through the city manager and the staff liaison
to the city council on issues relating to senior citizens in the city community; provide increased opportunities for
involvement by senior citizens of the city and the community in general; advise the city council, through the city
manager and the staff liaison, regarding the delivery of senior citizen programs; and provide outreach to the community
in an effort to develop the senior citizens of the city in a positive manner. (2000 Code, sec. 2-299)
Secs. 1.06.065–1.06.090 Reserved
Division 4. Housing Authority*
Sec. 1.06.091 Created
There is hereby created by the city the housing authority of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 13-151)
Sec. 1.06.092 Purpose
The purpose of the housing authority shall be to determine the needs of the city, and the area within five (5) miles of the
city, concerning housing and providing solutions to alleviate any housing deficiencies for low-income persons. (2000
Code, sec. 13-152)
Sec. 1.06.093 Seal
The seal of the housing authority shall be the seal of the city and shall bear the name “Housing Authority of the City of
Plainview, Texas.” (2000 Code, sec. 13-153)
Sec. 1.06.094 Offices
The offices of the authority shall be at such place or places in the city as the housing authority may from time to time
designate by resolution. (2000 Code, sec. 13-154)
Sec. 1.06.095 Membership
The housing authority shall consist of five (5) commissioners appointed by the city council. All members appointed shall
be residents of the city at the time of their appointment and during their terms of office. One (1) of the five (5)
commissioners shall be a tenant of the city housing authority properties. (2000 Code, sec. 13-155; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 1.06.096 Term of members; maximum number of terms
Each commissioner of the housing authority shall serve for a term of two (2) years. Two (2) commissioners shall be
appointed beginning January 1st in odd-numbered years and three (3) commissioners shall be appointed beginning
January 1st in even-numbered years. Any term of office of any member of the housing authority expiring other than on
December 31st in any year shall be filled by appointment by the city council until December 31st of that year. (2000
Code, sec. 13-156; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.06.097 Attendance requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/507
Each commissioner of the housing authority shall attend no less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the regular, special
or emergency meetings called by the officers of the housing authority of the city. The secretary of the authority shall
make a quarterly report to the mayor and city council showing the attendance of each member of the authority. Any
commissioner failing to attend seventy-five percent (75%) of the regular, special or emergency meetings legally called
during any calendar year shall be automatically disqualified from service on the authority and shall be replaced by the
city council. (2000 Code, sec. 13-157; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.06.098 Vacation of office
Should a member of the authority move from the city or otherwise become disqualified for any reason, he or she shall
vacate the office. (2000 Code, sec. 13-158)
Sec. 1.06.099 Filling of vacancies
Vacancies occurring in the commissioners of the housing authority of the city shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term. (2000 Code, sec. 13-159)
Sec. 1.06.100 Officers; other personnel
(a) Officers generally. The officers of the housing authority committee shall be a chairman, vice-chairman and
secretary (who shall be executive director).
(b) Duties of chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the housing committee. Except as otherwise
authorized by resolution of the housing committee, the chairman shall sign all contracts, deeds and other instruments
made by the committee. At each meeting, the chairman shall submit such recommendations and information as he or she
may consider proper concerning the business, affairs and policies of the authority.
(c) Duties of vice-chairman. The vice-chairman shall perform the duties of the chairman in the absence or incapacity
of the chairman; and in case of the resignation or death of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall perform such duties as
are imposed on the chairman until such time as the committee shall appoint a new chairman.
(d) Duties of secretary. The secretary shall keep a record of the committee, shall act as secretary of the meetings of the
committee in a journal of proceedings to be kept for such purpose, and shall perform all duties incident to his or her
office. He or she shall have the care and custody of all funds of the committee and shall deposit the same in the name of
the committee in such bank or banks as the committee may select. The secretary shall sign all orders and checks for the
payment of money and shall pay out and disburse such monies under the direction of the committee. Except as otherwise
authorized by resolution of the committee, all such orders and checks shall be countersigned by the chairman. He or she
shall keep regular books of accounts showing receipts and expenditures and shall render to the committee at each regular
meeting (or more often if requested) an account of his or her transactions and also of the financial conditions of the
committee. He or she shall give such bond for the faithful performance of his or her duties as the committee may
determine.
(e) Executive director. The secretary shall be executive director of the housing authority and shall have general
supervision over the administration of the business and affairs of the housing authority, subject to the direction of the
authority. He or she shall be charged with the management of the housing projects of the housing authority.
(f) Additional duties of officers. The officers of the committee shall perform such other duties and functions as may
from time to time be required by the committee or the bylaws or rules and regulations of the committee.
(g) Election or appointment of officers. The chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected at the annual meeting of the
committee from among members of the committee and shall hold office for one year or until their successors are elected
and qualified. In case of the absence or incapacity of both the chairman and vice-chairman, the other members of the
committee may elect an acting chairman to serve during the period of absence or incapacity of the chairman and vicechairman.
The secretary shall be appointed by the committee. Any person appointed to fill the office of secretary, or any
vacancy therein, shall have such term as the committee fixes, but no member of the committee shall be eligible for this
office.
(h) Vacancies. Should the office of chairman or vice-chairman become vacant, the committee shall elect a successor
from its membership at the next regular meeting, and such election shall be for the unexpired term of said office. When
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/507
the office of secretary becomes vacant, the committee shall appoint a successor, as aforesaid.
(i) Additional personnel. The committee may from time to time employ such personnel as it deems necessary to
exercise its powers, duties and functions as prescribed by the laws of the state applicable thereto. The selection of such
personnel (including the secretary) shall be determined by the committee, subject to the laws of the state. All employees
of the housing authority are at-will employees.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-160)
Sec. 1.06.101 Annual meeting
The annual meeting of the housing authority shall be held in May, at the regular meeting place of the authority. (2000
Code, sec. 13-161)
Sec. 1.06.102 Regular meetings
Regular meetings may be held at such times and places as may from time to time be determined by resolution of the
housing committee. (2000 Code, sec. 13-162)
Sec. 1.06.103 Special meetings
The chairman of the housing authority may, when he or she deems it expedient, and shall, upon the written request of
two (2) members of the authority, call a special meeting of the authority for the purpose of transacting any business
designated in the call. The call for a special meeting may be delivered to each member of the authority, or may be mailed
to the business or home address of each member of the authority. (2000 Code, sec. 13-163)
Sec. 1.06.104 Notice of meetings
Each meeting of the housing authority shall be legally posted as required by Tex. Gov't Code, section 551.001 et seq.,
and the mayor, ex officio members and commissioners of the committee shall be notified in writing not less than three
(3) days prior to the date of any meeting. (2000 Code, sec. 13-164)
Sec. 1.06.105 Quorum
At all meetings of the committee, a majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of transacting business, provided that a smaller number may meet and adjourn to some other time or until a quorum is
obtained. (2000 Code, sec. 13-165)
Sec. 1.06.106 Order of business
(a) At the regular meetings of the committee, the following shall be the order of business:
(1) Roll call;
(2) Reading and approval of the minutes of the previous meeting;
(3) Bills and communications;
(4) Report of the secretary;
(5) Reports of committee;
(6) Unfinished business;
(7) New business;
(8) Adjournment.
(b) All resolutions shall be in writing and shall be copied in a journal of the proceedings of the committee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/507
(2000 Code, sec. 13-166)
Sec. 1.06.107 Voting
The voting on all questions coming before the committee shall be by roll call and shall be entered upon the minutes of
such meeting. (2000 Code, sec. 13-167)
Sec. 1.06.108 Reports
At least once a year, the committee shall file a report of its activities and finances for the preceding year and make
recommendations on what it considers necessary to carry out the purposes of this article and state statutes. The report
shall be filed with the city secretary. (2000 Code, sec. 13-168)
ARTICLE 1.07 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.07.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of
whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its
officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the
city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner. (2000 Code, sec. 2-241)
Sec. 1.07.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance or order of administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that
creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an
emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of
obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the
records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records
management program may require.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the
management of micrographic, electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.07.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.07.006 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment
of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-242)
Sec. 1.07.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.07.001 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or
employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records, even though he or she may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/507
have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is
prohibited. (2000 Code, sec. 2-243)
Sec. 1.07.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the
creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system
of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with
the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. (2000 Code,
sec. 2-244)
Sec. 1.07.005 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As
provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the
state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. (2000 Code, sec. 2-245)
Sec. 1.07.006 Records management plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city
council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of
recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city
that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her
duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments,
divisions, programs, commissions, boards, bureaus, the city council, committees, or similar entities of the city, and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not
exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the
records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to
participate in the records management program of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-247; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.07.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each
city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations
quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the
city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and forms design and
control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual
or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/507
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives
commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in
compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the
records management program;
(11) Direct personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records
control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of city
records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and
the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the
volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result
of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each
department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13);
and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city manager noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel
with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-248; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.07.008 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
The records management officer will file with the director and librarian a written declaration that the city has adopted
records control schedules for the city that comply with records retention schedules issued by the state library and
archives commission as provided by section 203.005(g), Local Government Code. (2000 Code, sec. 2-252)
Sec. 1.07.009 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.07.008 shall be
implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open
records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the
department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an additional
period.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-253)
Sec. 1.07.010 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has
been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management
officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved authorization request. (2000
Code, sec. 2-254)
Sec. 1.07.011 Micrographics
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming
of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records
management plan will establish policies and procedures for microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/507
that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government
records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also establish criteria for
determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is
exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer
as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. (2000 Code, sec. 2-256)
ARTICLE 1.08 DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY*
Sec. 1.08.001 Declaration required prior to sale
Before any real property of the city is sold or offered for sale, the same shall first be declared surplus property by
resolution duly adopted by the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 2-101)
Sec. 1.08.002 Appraisal
When any real property of the city has been declared surplus pursuant to the provisions of this article, the city manager
shall then have the property appraised by a competent appraiser and the appraised value thereof determined. The city
manager shall require the party requesting such declaration of surplus property to deposit with the city secretary a sum of
money necessary to cover the cost of appraisal and any advertising expenses that may be incurred as required by this
article. In the event the requesting party is not the highest bidder on the surplus real property, the deposit will be
returned. In the event the requesting party is the highest bidder, said deposit will be credited toward the accepted bid. In
the event the surplus real property is not sold, said deposit shall be forfeited to the city. (2000 Code, sec. 2-102)
Sec. 1.08.003 Notice of sale; advertisement for bids
(a) Notice of sale. The notice of surplus real property for sale shall be given by the city manager by publishing the
same in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least once for two (2) successive weeks, the first notice to be
published at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date the bids are to be received. The notice shall also notify all
prospective bidders that the city council reserves the right to reject any and all bids.
(b) Advertisement for bids; waiver of certain fees. The city manager shall advertise for sealed bids offering the
declared surplus real property for sale to the highest bidder, but the notice shall notify all prospective buyers and bidders
that no bid will be received, accepted or entertained that is less than the appraised value, together with the costs incurred,
which shall include the appraisal fee and advertising costs. The notice shall state what the appraised value is, what the
appraisal fee was, and the advertising cost incurred, and no bid under the value plus cost will be accepted or entertained.
The city council, by a simple majority vote of those present and voting, may forego the inclusion of appraisal fees and
advertising cost in the minimum bid.
(2000 Code, secs. 2-103, 2-111)
Sec. 1.08.004 Sales contract
(a) Preparation. After bids have been advertised for any surplus real property of the city, the city attorney shall prepare
a sales contract with the provisions pertaining to the sale to be contained therein, except for the consideration to be paid.
(b) Limitations or exceptions in deed. Wherever there are limitations and exceptions to be retained in the deed or
referred to in the deed as to the title of the tract of surplus real property to be conveyed under the provisions of this
article, the same shall be referred to in the contract of sale.
(c) Evidence of title. The contract of sale for the surplus real property may provide for furnishing the purchaser with
an abstract of title showing good and marketable title, or with title insurance for the amount of the purchase price,
whichever is the most desirable in the opinion of the city attorney.
(d) Distribution. The city secretary shall have the proposed contract of sale for the surplus real property reproduced in
sufficient numbers to furnish one copy of the same, which is to be entered into between the city and the successful
bidder, to any person interested in bidding upon the property.
(2000 Code, secs. 2-104, 2-105, 2-109, 2-110)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/507
Sec. 1.08.005 Bid guarantee
(a) Required. All bidders for surplus real property offered by the city shall be notified in the notice that their bid must
be accompanied by a cashier's check or certified check payable to the city for at least ten percent (10%) of their bid.
(b) Forfeiture. The notice of city surplus property for sale shall notify all prospective bidders that, if the bid is
accepted, the check payable to the city will be held and forfeited to the city in the event that the bidder fails to comply
with the terms and provisions of the sales contract in the event that his bid is accepted.
(c) Return of rejected checks. All checks received with bids for city surplus real property that are rejected shall be
returned to the bidder.
(2000 Code, secs. 2-106–2-108)
Sec. 1.08.006 Manner of conveyance
When the highest bid for cash is accepted by the city council, the surplus real property shall be conveyed pursuant to an
ordinance passed by the city council authorizing the mayor to sell and convey said property for the cash consideration
agreed upon. (2000 Code, sec. 2-112; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.007 Lease of property
Whenever it is determined by the city council that any property owned by the city should be leased for a term of time in
excess of a lease from month to month, or for one month at a time, the same procedure prescribed for the sale of city
property shall be followed, with the following variations:
(1) The terms of the lease shall be prepared and the lease agreement shall be prepared with the name of the
lessee and the consideration to be paid left blank, and the same shall be filed with the city secretary in the
same manner as is prescribed in this article pertaining to the contract of sale wherein property is to be sold.
(2) The minimum lease value per month or for the term for which the property is to be leased shall be
determined by a competent appraiser, and no bid shall be accepted for the lease of said property for less than
the appraised value as determined by said appraiser.
(3) The lease shall be prepared by the city attorney prior to advertisement for the bids as provided herein.
He shall advise with the city council to determine whether or not the terms and provisions of the lease
agreement are acceptable to the city council. This shall be done prior to the time that bids are advertised for.
(4) The advertisement for sealed bids may offer to lease the same for a single cash consideration to be paid
in advance or for a monthly or annual rental to be paid in advance.
(5) The city council may if it so desires prescribe in the notice that a certain amount of money accompany
the bid of each prospective bidder and provide that the same shall be forfeited to the city if the prospective
bidder fails to enter into the lease agreement for the lease of said property pursuant to his bid.
(6) In the lease of said property, it is hereby prescribed to be the policy of the city council that the financial
stability and character of the prospective bidder for the lease of city property for a term of years shall be
considered, and the council reserves the right to reject any and all bids without question.
(7) These rules and regulations for the lease of city property shall also apply in all cases where city
property is now leased, and said lease is terminating; however, in such cases the procedure above prescribed
may be complied with prior to the termination of any present lease providing that the lease to be entered into
will begin as of the date of the expiration of any lease that is in existence at the time the city council takes
action in regard thereto.
(8) In the event of any commitments made by the city council prior to February 15, 1965, for the lease of
property in regard to which said commitment is made, this section and the terms hereof shall not apply to the
lease of any property in regard to which there have been commitments made prior to such date.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/507
(9) In the event the city council determines it is in the best interest of the citizens to: (i) lease property
located in an enterprise zone or (ii) lease property to another political subdivision, it may do so pursuant to
state law.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-113)
Sec. 1.08.008 Trade of property
In the event that the city council in its discretion determines that it will be to the best interest of the city to dispose of
such surplus property by trading such property for other property needed by the city, then in such event the city council
may authorize the mayor to make such trade and execute the necessary instruments in order to convey such property, and
in such cases it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the provisions as to such disposal of such surplus
property or for the lease of property shall not apply. (2000 Code, sec. 2-114)
ARTICLE 1.09 CODE ENFORCEMENT: CITATION ISSUANCE AND SEARCH WARRANTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.09.001 Title
This article shall be known and cited as the “code enforcement: citation issuance and search warrants ordinance.”
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-181), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.002 Purpose and application
This article provides procedural and substantive rules relating to the issuance of citations by nonpeace officers to
defendants accused of violating criminal ordinances of the city. This article applies to the issuance of citations alleging
criminal violations within the municipal court's jurisdiction. In addition, this article authorizes and directs designated
officers to obtain search warrants from a magistrate before making any inspection incidental to the enforcement of the
city's ordinances. Subject to this article's requirements, the magistrate is further authorized to issue such warrants. The
mandates and processes established by this article were specifically designed to achieve the effective and efficient
administration of the city's enforcement programs through the improved operation of the city's municipal court.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-182), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.003 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
Citation. An ordinance violation notice and notice to appear before the municipal court, as provided for in this article.
Magistrate. Any judge of a municipal court for the city.
Officer. An official inspector for the animal control department, building codes department, code enforcement
department, fire prevention department, or health department who is charged with the enforcement of city ordinances.
Person. Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision, or legal entity of any
kind.
Search warrant. A written order, issued by a magistrate and directed to any inspector, commanding him to inspect any
specified premises to determine the presence of a violation of a fire or health hazard or unsafe building condition or a
violation of any fire, health, or building regulation, statue, or ordinance.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-183), adopted 9/14/10; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.09.004 Relation to related laws
A citation issued pursuant to this article does not relate to the issuance of a citation by a peace officer pursuant to the
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 14.06(d) and the Texas Transportation Code, section 543.003. (Ordinance 10-
3528, sec. I (2-184), adopted 9/14/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/507
Sec. 1.09.005 Authority to issue citations
Pursuant to this article, and the scope of their assigned duties, a citation may be issued by any of the following
individuals so designated by the city council:
(1) Environmental health officer;
(2) Animal control officer;
(3) Building codes officer;
(4) Code enforcement officer; and
(5) Fire prevention officer.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-185), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.006 Form and content of citation
A citation issued under this article must be in a form approved by the municipal court clerk that includes the following
information:
(1) The name, address, date of birth, or driver's license number and physical description, and telephone
number of the person cited;
(2) The offense for which the person is charged;
(3) The date and location of the offense;
(4) An appearance date;
(5) A statement requiring the person receiving the citation to appear at municipal court on or before the
appearance date indicated on the citation;
(6) A statement of the person's promise to respond to the citation, pursuant to article 27.14 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, by the appearance date indicated on the citation, including a place for the person cited to
provide the person's signature; and
(7) The signature of the person issuing the citation.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-186), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.007 Pleading subsequent to issuance of citation
All pleas arising from the issuance of a citation under this article shall be made pursuant to article 27.14 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. (Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-187), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.008 Violation of promise to appear
A person issued a citation, as authorized by this article, commits an offense if the person fails to appear or enter a plea
pursuant to section 1.09.007 on or before the appearance date indicated on the citation. (Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-
188), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.009 Interference or obstruction of issuance
A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or obstructs the issuance of a citation under this article.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-189), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.010 Providing false or fictitious name
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/507
A person commits an offense if the person gives a false or fictitious name, address, or other information to an individual
authorized to issue a citation under this article. (Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-190), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.011 Illegal cancellation of citations
No person shall unlawfully cancel or solicit the cancellation of any citation in any manner other than as provided by law.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-191), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.012 Conflicts
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with any state or federal law and shall be in addition to any rights
granted thereby. (Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-197), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.013 Penalty
Each violation under this division is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-192),
adopted 9/14/10)
Secs. 1.09.014–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administrative Search Warrants
Sec. 1.09.031 Authorized
Whenever entry is denied or prohibited, inspectors are hereby authorized to seek and obtain search warrants from a
magistrate to permit inspections incidental to enforcement of any provision of this code. Magistrates are hereby
authorized to issue such warrants pursuant to the requirements of this article. (Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-193),
adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.032 Probable cause
No search warrant shall be issued pursuant to this article except on the presentation of evidence in verified affidavit form
of probable cause to believe that a violation or violations are present on the premises sought to be inspected. In
determining probable cause, the magistrate may consider, in addition to specific knowledge, the following:
(1) Age and condition of the premises;
(2) Previous violations or hazards found on the premises;
(3) Type of premises;
(4) Purposes for which the premises are used; and
(5) Condition of the surrounding premises.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-194), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.033 Sufficiency of warrant
A search warrant issued pursuant to this article shall be sufficient if it contains the following:
(1) That it run in the name of “The State of Texas”;
(2) That it identify the premises to be inspected;
(3) That it command an inspector to inspect forthwith the premises described;
(4) That it be dated and signed by the magistrate.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/507
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-195), adopted 9/14/10)
Sec. 1.09.034 Execution of warrants
(a) An inspector to whom a search warrant is delivered shall execute it without delay and forthwith return it to the
magistrate. A search warrant shall be executed within three (3) days from its issuance or a shorter period of time if
directed by the magistrate. The time allowed shall be three (3) whole days exclusive of the issuance and execution dates.
The magistrate issuing the warrant shall endorse thereon the date and time of issuance.
(b) The inspector shall, before entering upon any premises to execute a search warrant, give notice of his purpose to
the person in charge of or occupying the premises ordered inspected. If no such person can be found, a copy of the
search warrant shall be affixed to the front door, gate or other location on the premises to be inspected.
(c) Execution of a search warrant hereunder shall not include the authority to arrest or to seize tangible goods for
purposes of criminal prosecution. However, an inspector may seize tangible property when there is an imminent and
immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
(d) Upon returning the search warrant, the inspector shall write on the back of same or paper attached thereto the
manner, date, and time it was executed and shall deliver the same to the magistrate.
(e) The magistrate shall keep or cause to be kept records of all proceedings before him/her in cases of issuance of a
search warrant as part of the official records of his court.
(f) Every application for a search warrant shall be first delivered to the city attorney or his/her designated assistant for
review and approval.
(Ordinance 10-3528, sec. I (2-196), adopted 9/14/10)
ARTICLE 1.10 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.10.001 Organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for
carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these
duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the
city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The
functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the
terms of the emergency management plan.
(2000 Code, sec. 9-1)
Sec. 1.10.002 Emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the
city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures
which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall
recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the
implementation of such plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/507
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a
period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by
means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances
attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the
training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency
management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency
management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in
the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located, and with other
municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization of, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment,
including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city.
(11) Authorization of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public
shelters and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used
during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(2000 Code, sec. 9-2)
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code,
chapter 418). (2000 Code, sec. 9-2; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.10.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set
forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties,
and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the
plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as
possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform the recommendations of the state division of
emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions
assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency
management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a
disaster. (2000 Code, sec. 9-3)
Sec. 1.10.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the
formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the
preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/507
coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as
said program may affect the city. (2000 Code, sec. 9-4)
Sec. 1.10.005 Override of existing regulations by emergency regulations
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they
shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith. (2000 Code, sec. 9-5)
Sec. 1.10.006 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and
safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership,
corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or
attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be
liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or
other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits
the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of
sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together
with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real
estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such
person. (2000 Code, sec. 9-6)
Sec. 1.10.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity
authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city
by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared
disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent
and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (2000 Code, sec. 9-7)
Sec. 1.10.008 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act
forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been
granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the
termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties
imposed by this article.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
(2000 Code, sec. 9-8)
Sec. 1.10.009 Conflicts with state or federal law or military regulations
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order,
rule, or regulation. (2000 Code, sec. 9-9)
ARTICLE 1.11 DISCRIMINATION*
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/507
Secs. 1.11.001–1.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Community Relations
Sec. 1.11.031 Declaration of policy
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city that all of its residents and persons subject to its jurisdiction
should enjoy equal freedom to pursue their aspirations and that discrimination against any individual or group because of
race, creed, color, sex, familial status, disability or national origin is detrimental to the peace, progress and welfare of the
city. (2000 Code, sec. 2-221; Ordinance adopting Code)
Charter reference–Discrimination in appointment or removal of city positions or offices, sec. 7.02(a)(1).
Secs. 1.11.032–1.11.050 Reserved
Division 3. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.11.051 Declaration of policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about, through fair, orderly, and lawful procedures, the
opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical
or mental impairment, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(b) It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual
to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental impairment,
marital status, parenthood, or age; further, that the denial of such rights through considerations based on race, color,
creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status, parenthood, or age is detrimental to
the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such
inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of the government to prevent.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-181)
Sec. 1.11.052 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein:
Administrator. The director of the community services department or authorized assistant.
Age. The calendar age of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or over.
Creed. Any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by
a person.
Discriminatory housing practice. An act that is unlawful under this division.
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for, occupancy as a
residence by one or more persons, or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location
thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. Includes a single individual or group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major life activities. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking,
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Marital status. An individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person.
Parenthood. A person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of eighteen (18).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/507
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy,
receivers, and fiduciaries.
Physical or mental impairment. Any physical or mental disability which substantially limits one or more major life
activities, including any physiological disorder or condition; cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or
more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory including speech
organs, cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine; or any mental
or psychological disorder such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness and specific
learning disabilities.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-191)
Sec. 1.11.053 Discrimination in sale or rental of housing
Except as exempted by section 1.11.056, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental
of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, sex,
religion, national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status, parenthood or age;
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or
in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, creed, sex, religion,
national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status, parenthood or age;
(3) Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement
regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status, parenthood or
age, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination;
(4) Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental
impairment, marital status, parenthood or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental
when such dwelling is in fact so available;
(5) For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a
person or persons of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental
impairment, marital status, parenthood or age;
(6) For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, influence or attempt to influence, by any words,
acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to:
(A) Promote the maintenance of housing segregated on the basis of race, color, creed, sex, religion,
national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status, parenthood or age; or
(B) Retard, obstruct, or discourage integrated housing.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-192)
Sec. 1.11.054 Discrimination in financing of housing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association,
firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans
to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance, because
of:
(1) The race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status,
parenthood or age of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/507
financial assistance; or
(2) The race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status,
parenthood or age of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or
dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-193)
Sec. 1.11.055 Discrimination in provision of brokerage services
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real
estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race,
color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, physical or mental impairment, marital status, parenthood or age. (2000 Code,
sec. 13-194)
Sec. 1.11.056 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) There shall be exempted from the application of section 1.11.053 hereof all transactions involving:
(1) The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no
more than four (4) families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies
one of such units as his residence;
(2) The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the
remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four (4) such rooms are offered.
(3) The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that:
(A) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the
sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of
any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such
broker, agent, salesman or person;
(B) The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written
notice in violation of section 1.11.053(3) of this division (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to
perfect or transfer the title);
(C) The owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at the time of the sale; and
(D) The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any
express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or
rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time.
If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of
such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with
respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period.
(b) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or society from limiting
the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of
the same religion, or from giving preference to such person, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color, sex or national origin.
(c) Nothing in this division shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which, as an incident
to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting
the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/507
(d) Nothing in this division shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a
room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing
accommodation.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-195)
Sec. 1.11.057 Fair housing administrator
The mayor shall appoint and the council shall confirm a fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as
“administrator”), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this division. The administrator may delegate his
authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. (2000 Code, sec. 13-196)
Sec. 1.11.058 Complaints
(a) Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he will be
irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereinafter referred to as
“person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify
the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the
facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based.
(b) A copy of all complaints filed with the city shall also be forwarded to the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
Division of the Region VI office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(c) The administrator shall provide for free administrative counseling to those complainants who wish to file a private
suit for relief in the local, state or federal court. (This is not free legal aid, but counseling intended only to provide a
complainant with information as to the legal remedies available.)
(d) If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe
that any person or persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint
has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such
complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
(e) The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968,
Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to
subsection (a) of this section.
(f) All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing
practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by
furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to
commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of the written complaint.
(g) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-197)
Sec. 1.11.059 Investigations
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and
full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint.
(b) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the administrator shall,
if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors
to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance
of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this division. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal
endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without
the written consent of all persons concerned.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/507
(c) Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within thirty
(30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary
compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing
practice has in fact occurred, he shall recommend to the city attorney that such violations be prosecuted in the municipal
court. With such recommendations, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall,
within thirty (30) days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such
complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute
same to conclusion within thirty (30) days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-198)
Sec. 1.11.060 Provisions cumulative; other remedies
This division is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person
aggrieved may pursue. (2000 Code, sec. 13-199)
Sec. 1.11.061 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or
business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this division, because he or they have exercised his or
their rights under this division or enjoyed the benefits of this division, or because he or they have made a charge,
testified or assisted in any investigation or in any proceeding hereunder or have made any report to the administrator.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-200)
Sec. 1.11.062 Cooperation with federal officials
The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public
Law 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this
division. (2000 Code, sec. 13-201)
Sec. 1.11.063 Education and public information
In order to further the objectives of this division, the administrator may conduct educational and public information
programs. (2000 Code, sec. 13-202)
Sec. 1.11.064 Penalty
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined a sum not to exceed the provisions of section 1.01.009 of this code for each violation.
(b) Each day a violation continues after passage of seventy-five (75) days from the date of the filing of the initial
complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(c) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division may be enjoined by a suit filed by the city
in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-203)
ARTICLE 1.12 LIBRARY
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.12.001 Designated
The building which is a library building erected on the site described in Ordinance No. 74-1659 designated and marked
with a plaque and letters as “The Unger Memorial Library,” the same being a gift from Mrs. Minnette K. Unger, shall
perpetually be known and designated as the Unger Memorial Library and is hereby dedicated for the uses and purposes
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/507
for which the same was given to the city by Mrs. Minnette K. Unger, and said site and building shall perpetually be used
for the purposes for which same were given the city. (2000 Code, sec. 14-1)
Sec. 1.12.002 Participation in state library system; designation as area library
(a) The city council does hereby accept the designation of Unger Memorial Library as an area library under the Texas
Library Systems Act of 1969.
(b) The city manager and the Unger Memorial Library board are hereby authorized and directed to do all those things
necessary and expedient to join the state library system and to elect a representative to the organizational meeting of said
library system.
(c) The service area of the Unger Memorial Library as an area library shall consist of those libraries qualified for
membership in the system which have been assigned to Unger Memorial Library for interlibrary loan under the state
library communication network.
(d) The services to the libraries assigned to Unger Memorial Library shall consist of those services now underwritten
by the Unger Memorial Library's LSCA Title One grant and such other services as may be prescribed by the state library
and historical commission.
(e) The Unger Memorial Library advisory committee and the city manager are hereby authorized and directed to do all
those things necessary and expedient to join the state library system and to qualify the Unger Memorial Library as an
area library under the state library system; provided, however, any expenditure of funds not budgeted shall be first
approved by the city council.
(f) The Unger Memorial Library advisory committee is hereby authorized and requested to elect a representative of
the Unger Memorial Library as a delegate to the organizational meeting of the state library system, pursuant to the terms
and provisions of House Bill 260-1969, 61st Legislature of the state.
(2000 Code, sec. 14-2)
Sec. 1.12.003 Fees
The following fees and/or fines will be assessed for the services listed: (2000 Code, sec. 14-3)
(1) Overdue materials:
(A) 10¢ per day (books or audio); maximum $10.00 or half the value of the item, whichever is less.
(B) 10¢ per day (periodicals).
(C) $1.00 per day (videos); maximum $10.00 or half the value of the item, whichever is less.
(2) Lost materials will incur a charge of the listed retail price of the item plus a $5.00 processing fee.
Patrons returning previously lost materials which were paid for, along with the receipt, within 3 months of the
original due date will be reimbursed the original cost of the item less the processing fee. Lost materials
remain the property of the city.
(Ordinance 05-3438, sec. I (14-3), adopted 1/25/05)
(3) Fees for copies:
(A) 15¢ per regular photocopy.
(B) 10¢ per black and white laser copy (computer).
(C) 25¢ per color copy (computer).
(D) 25¢ per microfilm or microfiche.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/507
(4) There will be no fee for a library card; however, there will be a $5.00 fee for replacement of a card.
(5) Damaged-material fees will be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
(2000 Code, sec. 14-3)
Secs. 1.12.004–1.12.030 Reserved
Division 2. Advisory Committee
Sec. 1.12.031 Created
There is hereby created the Unger Memorial Library advisory committee, hereinafter referred to as the “advisory
committee.” (2000 Code, sec. 14-16)
Sec. 1.12.032 Composition
The advisory committee shall be composed of five (5) persons. (2000 Code, sec. 14-17)
Sec. 1.12.033 Ex officio members
(a) The city librarian shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the advisory committee. The librarian shall be
excused from those discussions concerning the salary or term of employment of that position.
(b) The city manager or his appointed representative shall be an ex officio member of the advisory committee, without
voting privileges, and shall act in an advisory capacity to the committee.
(2000 Code, sec. 14-18)
Sec. 1.12.034 Appointment of members
The members of the advisory committee shall be recommended by the mayor and approved by the city council. (2000
Code, sec. 14-19)
Sec. 1.12.035 Term of members; maximum number of terms
Members of the advisory committee shall hold office for staggered terms of four (4) years and until their successors are
appointed. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve, provided the member is reappointed by
the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 14-20; Ordinance adopting code)
Sec. 1.12.036 Attendance requirements; vacation of office
Each member of the committee shall attend no less than 75% of the regular meetings called by the officers of the
committee. The secretary of the committee shall make a quarterly report to the mayor and city council showing the
attendance of each member of the committee. Any representative failing to attend 75% of the regular meetings legally
called during any calendar year without an excused absence, as determined by a majority vote of the board members,
shall be automatically disqualified for service on the committee and shall be replaced by the city council. Should any
member of the committee move from the city or otherwise become disqualified for any reason, he/she shall be deemed to
have vacated the office. (2000 Code, sec. 14-21)
Sec. 1.12.037 Filling of vacancies
Upon the death, resignation, removal or expiration of the term of office of any member of the advisory committee, such
vacancy shall be filled in the same manner by recommendation of the mayor and approval of the city council as is
provided for the appointment of members to the committee. (2000 Code, sec. 14-22)
Sec. 1.12.038 Removal of members
In the event the best interests of the city require the removal of any member of the advisory committee, the removal shall
be effected by appointment of a successor by unanimous vote of the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 14-23)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/507
Sec. 1.12.039 Officers
The advisory committee shall, from its appointed members, elect a president and a vice-president. (2000 Code, sec. 14-
24)
Sec. 1.12.040 Duties generally
The advisory committee shall encourage the development of the public library. It shall, subject to the review and
approval of the city council, establish policies and programs for the library. The committee shall cooperate with all other
public and private groups in advancing the best interests of the public library. It shall render to the city council all
recommendations it considers advisable regarding the library. (2000 Code, sec. 14-25)
Sec. 1.12.041 Library budget
The advisory committee shall advise with the city council concerning the preparation of a budget for the Unger
Memorial Library for each year. These recommendations shall be submitted to the city manager on or before the first day
of June of each year. This budget so recommended by the advisory committee shall be for the next succeeding fiscal year
beginning October first and ending September thirtieth. All expenditures made by the Unger Memorial Library shall be
made within the budget finally adopted by the city council for the operation of the library, and the total expenditures to
be made for the operation of said library in any fiscal year shall be determined by the budget so approved and adopted by
the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 14-26)
Sec. 1.12.042 Selection and salary of library personnel
The advisory committee shall recommend to the city council a librarian or assistant librarian whenever one is needed,
together with a recommended salary for each such employee. (2000 Code, sec. 14-27)
Sec. 1.12.043 Status of library personnel
All paid personnel of the library shall be city employees and shall be entitled to all benefits and policies of social
security, retirement, vacation and other benefits and policies in accordance with the ordinances and regulations and
policies of the city pertaining to its employees. (2000 Code, sec. 14-28)
Sec. 1.12.044 Contracts for use of library by nonresidents
The advisory committee shall have the authority to make contracts with any other subdivision of the state, such as any
other municipality or county, for the use of said library by members of the public residing outside of the city, and shall
be authorized to accept payments and emoluments in consideration thereof; except, however, that no said contract shall
be in derogation of the purposes of the Unger Memorial Library as designated by Mrs. Minnette K. Unger in the deed
and instrument by which the site of said library was acquired. Neither shall it have the authority to enter into any such
contract which is in violation of any existing city ordinance or state statute or federal law. (2000 Code, sec. 14-29)
Sec. 1.12.045 Authority to fix fees; fiscal control
The advisory committee shall have the authority to fix minimum fees for regulatory purposes concerning said library, but
none of which shall be such as to be in derogation of the purposes of said library, which is that of a public library, as
provided as the purpose of same in the gift from Mrs. Minnette K. Unger. Any fees or other donations or emoluments
from any contracts entered into with other municipalities or counties, or donations from organizations to said library,
shall be, by the president of the advisory committee, deposited with the city secretary. All of such funds shall be, by the
city secretary, placed in a separate fund to be known as the Unger Memorial Library Fund, and such funds shall not be
used by the city for any purpose except for the operation and maintenance of the library and for the purchase of
equipment, supplies, books or any other items that may be needed or useful in the operation and maintenance of the
library. All expenses of the operation and maintenance of said library, within the budget for same or which may be
designated as an emergency by the city council, shall, subject to the approval of the city council, either on the city's
general funds, or on the library fund or other appropriate fund. An audit of all receipts and expenditures made in any
way in connection with the operation of the library shall be made for each fiscal year of the city, and a copy of same
shall be furnished to the advisory committee and to the city. (2000 Code, sec. 14-30; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.12.046 Rules and regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/507
The advisory committee shall make such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable concerning its parliamentary
procedure and the duties of the librarian and other employees of the library, and the active management and supervision
of the library shall be in accordance with the regulations and rules as may be made by the committee, all of which rules
and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 14-31)
Sec. 1.12.047 Recommendations to council
The advisory committee shall make recommendations to the city council concerning each of their duties as herein by this
article prescribed for the committee. (2000 Code, sec. 14-32)
ARTICLE 1.13 PARKS AND RECREATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.13.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Livestock. Any domestic animal kept for their services or raised for food and other products.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-3)
Sec. 1.13.002 Fees and charges
(a) The fees and charges to be imposed by the city for the use of the Broadway Shelter House, Regional Park Rotary
Building and Joliet Street Community Center when used for the special benefit of the user shall be as follows:
(1) Use by public: $75.00.
(2) Use by corporations: $100.00.
(3) Use by any organization hosting a dance: $100.00.
(4) Use by a not-for-profit organization: $50.00.
(5) Damage and cleanup deposit: $100.00.
(6) Use of one electrical panel: $25.00.
(b) These fees apply to each day of use by the individual or group using the facilities. The damage and cleanup deposit
is refundable as recommended by the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager and his/her designee shall
establish procedures necessary for the user to receive the deposit. The refund procedures and requirements will be posted
in the buildings and provided to the user at the time a contract is signed.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-1)
Sec. 1.13.003 Operation of vehicles restricted
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in any public park within the city except upon streets
and other ways established therefor. (2000 Code, sec. 18-2)
Secs. 1.13.004–1.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. Shelter House
Sec. 1.13.031 Exception for uses sponsored by parks and recreation department
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/507
Any occupancy or use of the shelter house supervised by or sponsored by the parks and recreation department shall not
be subject to this division, but the same shall be subject to the directions and regulations of the director of parks and
recreation. (2000 Code, sec. 18-36)
Sec. 1.13.032 Application for use
Any person desiring to use the shelter house, located in what is known as the Broadway Street Park or Running Water
Draw Regional Park, shall sign an application requesting the use of said shelter house, giving the date the use is desired.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-37)
Sec. 1.13.033 Cleaning deposit required
Along with the application for use of the shelter house, the applicant shall make a deposit in an amount as required by
the city council from time to time, which shall be known as a cleaning deposit. Such deposit shall be kept by the city
secretary in an escrow account. (2000 Code, sec. 18-38)
Sec. 1.13.034 Disposition of cleaning deposit
When the occasion for which the shelter house was reserved has by any one individual, or a group, terminated, then the
supervisor of the parks department or his agent shall make an inspection of the premises, and if the same have been
cleaned to his satisfaction and no extraordinary damage has been caused by the negligence of said parties, the cleaning
deposit shall be returned to the person making the deposit; otherwise it will be paid to the city as liquidated damages.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-39)
Sec. 1.13.035 Liability of city
Any person making application to use the shelter house shall agree (and said agreement shall be embodied in the
application) that the city shall not be liable to such person, his invitees or any other person attending the gathering at the
invitation of such applicant or his group for any damages to person or property caused by negligence, or due to the
shelter house building or any appurtenances thereof being improperly constructed or becoming out of repair, nor for any
damages from any defects for want of repair of the building of which these premises form a part, but the applicant shall
agree to accept the premises as suitable for the purposes for which he, or his party, intend to use the same and each and
every appurtenance thereof, and that he waives defects therein and agrees to hold the city harmless from all claims for
any such damages. (2000 Code, sec. 18-40)
Secs. 1.13.036–1.13.060 Reserved
Division 3. Rules and Regulations
Sec. 1.13.061 Penalty
Any person found to be guilty of violating the provisions of this division shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in
section 1.01.009 of this code. (2000 Code, sec. 18-56)
Sec. 1.13.062 Enforcement
Compliance with the rules and regulations of this division is a condition precedent to the use of the public parks and
playgrounds of the city, and any person charged with the supervision and care of said parks and playgrounds and law
enforcement officers shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this division by expulsion from said parks or
playgrounds or by arrest of the offender if such official is a law enforcement officer. (2000 Code, sec. 18-52)
Sec. 1.13.063 Hours; prohibited acts
It shall be unlawful for any person in any public park or playground to:
(1) Enter into, remain, or use any portion of the public park or playground between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 7:00 a.m. unless duly authorized by the city manager or his designated representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/507
(2) Use any park areas of any public park or playground for camping, tenting or recreational vehicle
parking except in those areas specifically designated and authorized by the superintendent of parks.
(3) Leave a designated area before any outdoor fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the
area is placed in a trash receptacle or otherwise removed and properly disposed of.
(4) Build or attempt to build a fire, except in fireplaces, barbecue pits or other such areas as are
permanently fixed to the ground and under such regulations as may be so designated by the park
superintendent in the interest of safety.
(5) Use any park or playground in an area not designated as a camping area as a permanent or temporary
residence. Evidence of residence includes, but is not limited to, cooking, sleeping or use of the restroom
facilities in such a manner as to indicate the act of or fact of residing.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-51)
Sec. 1.13.064 Restricted activities
It shall be unlawful for any person within a public park or playground to commit or do any of the following acts:
(1) Play at any game of baseball, softball, football, golf, archery or other games of like character in any
park or playground except at the places set apart and designated as grounds therefor.
(2) Place and/or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft capable of being occupied by one or more
persons, whether motor-powered or not, in or on the water of any pool, lake or river in any park within the
city except at the places set apart and designated therefor.
(3) Swim, bathe or wade in any water, pool, lake or river in any park within the city except at the places set
apart and designated as grounds therefor.
(4) Fish in any water, pool, lake or river in any park within the city except at the places set apart and
designated therefor and in compliance with the rules and regulations established therefor.
(5) Ride, drive or propel any bicycle, motorbike or motor scooters over or through any park within the city
except along or upon park drives, parkways or park boulevards or upon grounds set apart and designated as
grounds therefor.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-53)
(6) Fly, launch, land or operate any unmanned aircraft including a model airplane, hot air balloon,
helicopter, glider, unmanned aerial vehicle (drone), or any component of an unmanned aircraft system either
by attached or remote control, in any park or playground within the city except at the places set apart and
designated as grounds therefor. (Ordinance 19-3689, sec. 1, adopted 3/26/19)
(7) Carry a concealed handgun, as that term is defined in section 8.01.004 of this code, in a city park,
except those persons who are duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed handgun in accordance with the
provisions of the Texas Concealed Weapons Act.
(8) Carry or discharge firearms (unless permitted under subsection (7) above), fireworks, airguns, bows
and arrows, slingshots or any device which would or could project any object which would or could create a
fire hazard or any hazard or danger to the public, except with written approval of the parks and recreation
director.
(9) Ride, lead or have any livestock activity in any park or playground except at places set apart and
designated as grounds therefor. Exceptions may be granted by the city manager or his/her designee upon
written request.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-53)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/507
(10) Float, launch, dock or operate any unmanned boat including a model boat, sailboat, raft, canoe or
sailboard at that portion of Travis Trussell Park south of West 10th Street and west of Ennis Street known as
Travis Trussell Pond. (Ordinance 19-3689, sec. 2, adopted 3/26/19)
Sec. 1.13.065 Authority to grant exceptions
The park superintendent may grant exceptions to allow any of the activities prohibited in section 1.13.064 upon written
request. Said request shall include the specific activity planned, the date and duration of the activity, and the park at
which the activity is planned. The park superintendent shall have the right to request further information and the
applicant shall produce such. The park superintendent shall have the right to impose reasonable restrictions and duties
upon the applicant's request. The park superintendent shall grant or deny the request in writing within 3 (three) working
days from the date he/she receives such request. (2000 Code, sec. 18-54)
Sec. 1.13.066 Appeal of decision regarding exception
(a) If the application for an exception under section 1.13.065 is denied, or granted with restrictions unacceptable to the
applicant, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city manager's office. Said appeal must be
made in writing within two (2) working days from the date of the park superintendent's decision. If no appeal is made
within the above time frame, the park superintendent's decision shall be final.
(b) Upon proper receipt of an appeal, the city manager, or his designate, may call a hearing and consider evidence
offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at the hearing; the city manager shall make
his decision based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented at such hearing, if a hearing is held. If a hearing is
not called, the city manager or his designate shall make a decision based upon the preponderance of evidence presented
in writing. In any event, the city manager or his designate shall issue a decision in writing within three (3) working days
from the date the application for appeal was received. The decision shall be final and may affirm, deny, or modify the
decision of the park superintendent.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-55)
Secs. 1.13.067–1.13.090 Reserved
Division 4. Rallies and Meetings
Sec. 1.13.091 Permit required
It shall be unlawful to hold any outdoor meetings for the purpose of expressive activity on public property unless a
permit for such event has been issued by the chief of police. (See article 12.15 for regulation of parades.) (2000 Code,
sec. 18-91)
Sec. 1.13.092 Application for permit
Application for use of a park for a rally, meeting or other expressive activity shall be made to the parks and recreation
department at least five (5) days prior to the event, with a copy sent to the police department, and shall contain the
following information:
(1) A description of the event;
(2) The day of the event;
(3) The hours the event will start and terminate;
(4) Location of the event;
(5) A reasonable and good-faith approximation of the number of persons expected to attend the event;
(6) The names and addresses of the persons sponsoring the event;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/507
(7) Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-92)
Sec. 1.13.093 Changes to application
If the proposed rally or meeting does not comply with the rules and regulations of the city, the chief of police may
present alternative locations, times, routes, or other conditions that will comply. The applicant can either accept the
police chief's changes or submit a new application within forty-eight (48) hours of the event that does comply with the
issues raised by the police chief. (2000 Code, sec. 18-93)
Sec. 1.13.094 Issuance of permit
Upon compliance with this division, a permit shall be issued by the chief of police. (2000 Code, sec. 18-94)
Secs. 1.13.095–1.13.120 Reserved
Division 5. Parks Advisory Board
Sec. 1.13.121 Created; membership
(a) The parks advisory board shall consist of eight (8) residents of the city appointed by the mayor and city council.
The mayor and each councilmember shall nominate one (1) individual. The nominees must be confirmed by the city
council. The board shall select a chair and other officers as deemed appropriate.
(b) The eight (8) appointed members shall be voting members of the parks advisory board.
(c) The parks superintendent shall serve as secretary.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-101)
Sec. 1.13.122 Duties
The duties of the parks advisory board shall include the following:
(1) Recommendations in regard to open space planning, parks, and recreation planning and/or the
purchase, disposal, or trade of such lands;
(2) Recommendations involving the coordination of the comprehensive or master plans, or future plans,
within the city parks department;
(3) Recommendations on any other matter pertaining to open space, parks, recreation, or land planning
problems;
(4) Recommendations on priorities for spending funds. The board shall not lobby the city council for
appropriations, but will merely make recommendations on how appropriated funds should be expended.
(5) Progress reports of the parks advisory board shall be submitted to the city council quarterly.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-102)
Sec. 1.13.123 Term of members; maximum number of terms; vacation of office
(a) Members of the parks advisory board shall hold office for staggered terms of four (4) years and until their
successors are appointed. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve, provided the member is
reappointed by the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 18-103; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Should any member of the parks advisory board move out of the city limits and cease to be a legal resident of the
city, his/her office shall automatically become vacant and shall be filled in the manner provided above. (2000 Code, sec.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/507
18-103)
Sec. 1.13.124 Attendance requirements
Each member of the board shall attend no less than 75% of the regular meeting called by the officers of the board. The
secretary of the board shall make a quarterly report to the mayor and city council showing the attendance of each
member of the board. Any representative failing to attend 75% of the regular meetings legally called during any calendar
year without an excused absence, as determined by a majority vote of the board members, shall be automatically
disqualified for service on the board and shall be replaced by the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 18-104)
Secs. 1.13.125–1.13.150 Reserved
Division 6. Plainview Skate Park
Sec. 1.13.151 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
Helmet. A head covering certified to an appropriate safety standard. For example, a person riding a bicycle should wear
a CPSC-certified helmet, and a skateboarder or in-line skater should wear an ASTM-certified helmet.
Skate park. The shaped and flat concreted areas in Lloyd C. Woods Park, specifically designated by the city council and
identified by signage as a skate park, built for the purpose of skateboarding, skating, in-line skating, roller skating, roller
blading, hockey, in-line hockey or BMX bicycles without pegs.
Outside obstacle. Any ride feature not part of the permanent, concrete skate park, including, but not limited to, portable
or makeshift ramps.
Reckless behavior. A person acts recklessly with respect to his conduct or the results of his conduct when he is aware of
but consciously disregards a substantial or unjustifiable risk of injury to any person or damage to any property.
Sec. 1.13.152 Signs
Signs designating an area as skate park must be conspicuously posted at different points at the site. The skate park sign
wording is hereby adopted and incorporated in this division as stated in the attached exhibit A to the ordinance from
which this section derives.
Sec. 1.13.153 Applicability of rules and regulations
The city's skate park rules and regulations in this division are established for the protection of the government, skate park
itself, and users of such skate park. This division is specifically designated for the skate park. All other rules, duties,
fees, and procedures of article 1.13, Parks and Recreation, also applies to this division.
(Ordinance 15-3621 adopted 7/14/15)
Sec. 1.13.154 Closing of skate park during certain hours
(a) The skate park shall be closed every day from 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m. and any time when signage is posted
closing the skate park for cleaning and maintenance.
(b) The skate park shall also be closed when it is raining, snowing or the skating area is wet or icy.
(c) Graffiti and/or vandalism of the skate park area will result in closure of the skate park for repairs.
(d) It shall be unlawful for anyone to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in such skate park during such period when it is
closed. However, if anyone applies for permission to carry out an activity in the skate park during such hours, and the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/507
park superintendent grants such exception for the specific activity as not creating a disturbance or public nuisance, then
the park superintendent may impose reasonable restrictions and duties on the person requesting an exception for such
specific activity.
(Ordinance 15-3630 adopted 11/10/15)
Sec. 1.13.155 Rules and regulations
The following rules and regulations shall apply specifically to the skate park:
(1) WARNING! Play at your own risk. Skating and biking can be hazardous activities.
(2) The skate park is designed for skateboards, skates, in-line skates, roller skates, roller blades, hockey, inline
hockey or BMX bicycles without pegs.
(3) Safety first. Protective personal equipment (helmet, elbow and knee pads, wrist and ankle protection) is
strongly recommended at all times. Proper shoes (closed toed) must be worn at all times in the skate park.
(4) The skate park facility should be used as designed. Modifications to the surface or features are strictly
prohibited. No personal ramps, rails or outside obstacles are permitted.
(5) Motorized vehicles are prohibited.
(6) Only one person shall be on skateboards, skates, bikes, or any other authorized wheeled apparatus.
(7) Only one person shall be on a bowl, rail, ramp or other obstacle at a time. In open areas, each person
shall abide by the flow and direction of the flow.
(8) Be respectful of others–No fighting or foul language.
(9) This facility is used by both experienced and inexperienced skaters and bikers. Serious injury may
result from falling, colliding or being hit by a skateboard, skate, bicycle or any wheeled apparatus authorized
in the skate park. The city assumes no responsibility for injuries. SKATE AND/OR CYCLE AT YOUR OWN
RISK!
Sec. 1.13.156 Use of skate park by children
Every child under the age of ten years on the skate park surface must be accompanied by an adult over seventeen years
of age who is directly supervising the activities of that child. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a
child under ten years of age to be on the skate park surface unless the child is accompanied by an adult over seventeen
years of age who is directly supervising the activities of that child.
Sec. 1.13.157 Unlawful activities
(a) Gum, food, drinks and/or glass containers are strictly prohibited in and about the skate park area.
(b) No person shall possess tobacco products, alcoholic beverages or illegal substances in or about the skate park.
(c) A person is prohibited from possessing or unleashing an animal on the skate park surface.
(d) Graffiti, tagging, littering, and applying stickers or other items to any area within and about the skate park is
prohibited.
(e) A person is prohibited from possessing or utilizing an outside obstacle on the skate park surface.
(f) A person is strictly prohibited from engaging in reckless behavior.
Sec. 1.13.158 Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/507
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with this Code of Ordinances, section 1.01.009. Any such violation shall
constitute a separate offense on each successive day continued.
(b) The criminal penalty provided in this section is independent of any other civil remedy, penalty, or permit
revocation which may be available for any violation or threatened violation of any provision of this division.
Sec. 1.13.159 Use
Any person using the skate park:
(1) Implies consent with all conditions and regulations stated in this division and posted at the skate park.
(2) Who violates any of these rules and regulations may cause the skate park user to be ejected from the
facility.
(3) Assumes all risk and waives liability to the city for any injury, damage or loss suffered while using the
skate park.
(4) Is liable for any damage or injury that person causes to any other person or property during the use.
(Ordinance 15-3621 adopted 7/14/15)
ARTICLE 1.14 AIRPORTS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.14.001–1.14.030 Reserved
Division 2. Airport Zoning Board†
Sec. 1.14.031 Created; powers and duties
Subject to like provisions being made by the commissioners court of the county, by proper order, duly promulgated and
entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of chapter 391 of the Acts of the Regular Session of the 50th
Legislature, 1947, there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Plainview/Hale County Joint
Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in sections 2 and 3 of chapter 391 of
the Acts of the Regular Session of the 50th Legislature, 1947. (2000 Code, sec. 2-141)
Sec. 1.14.032 Membership; chairman
The Plainview/Hale County Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of five (5) members, two (2) to be appointed
by the city council, and two (2) members to be appointed by the commissioners court of the county. The fifth member
shall be elected by a majority of the members appointed, and said fifth member shall serve as chairman of the board.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-142)
Sec. 1.14.033 Term of members
Each member shall serve a term on the Plainview/Hale County Joint Airport Zoning Board which shall be concurrent
with his term of office as a member of the city-county joint airport board. Any termination of membership on the citycounty
joint airport board shall automatically terminate membership on the Plainview/Hale County Joint Airport Zoning
Board. (2000 Code, sec. 2-143)
Sec. 1.14.034 Filling of vacancies
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Plainview/Hale County Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be filled by
appointment or election for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the appointment and election of the
original members of the Plainview/Hale County Joint Airport Zoning Board. (2000 Code, sec. 2-144)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/507
Sec. 1.14.035 Attendance requirements; vacation of office
Each member of the board appointed by the city shall attend no less than 75% of the regular meetings called by the
officers of the board. The secretary of the board shall make a quarterly report to the mayor and city council showing the
attendance of each member of the board. Any representative failing to attend 75% of the regular meetings legally called
during any calendar year without an excused absence, as determined by a majority vote of the board members, shall be
automatically disqualified for service on the board and shall be replaced by the city council. Should any member of the
board move from the city or otherwise become disqualified for any reason, he/she shall be deemed to have vacated the
office. (2000 Code, sec. 2-145)
Sec. 1.14.036 Maximum number of terms
There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve, provided the member is reappointed by the city
council. (2000 Code, sec. 2-146)
Secs. 1.14.037–1.14.060 Reserved
Division 3. Airport Zoning Regulations and Regulation of Aircraft Activity*
Sec. 1.14.061 Title
This division shall be known and may be cited as the “Plainview/Hale County Airport Zoning Ordinance.” (Ordinance
04-3437, sec. I (2-151), adopted 12/14/04)
Sec. 1.14.062 Definitions
Administrative agency. An administrative agency to be designated by the Plainview/Hale County Joint Airport Zoning
Board to administer and enforce airport zoning regulations.
Aircraft. Any weight-carrying structure for navigation of the air that is either self-propelled or mechanically propelled,
including but not limited to airplanes, helicopters, gliders and balloons.
Airport. Plainview/Hale County Airport.
Airport elevation. The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean
sea level (MSL). The elevation of the Plainview/Hale County Airport is 3,374.0 feet above MSL.
Airport hazard. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flights or takeoff or
which obstructs or interferes with the central or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an
airport, or any installation or facility relating to flight, and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; which is
hazardous, interfering with or obstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft; or which is hazardous to or
interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles.
Airport hazard area. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as
provided in this division.
Airport reference point. The point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so
designated. The airport reference point for the Plainview/Hale County Airport is latitude 34° 10' 05.3" north, longitude
101° 43' 02.4" west.
Approach surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward
from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
section 1.14.064. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones. These zones are set forth in section 1.14.063.
Board of adjustment. A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/507
Conical surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of
twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
Hazard to air navigation. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient
utilization of the navigable airspace.
Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this division and shown on the zoning
map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
Horizontal surface. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan
coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
Joint airport zoning board. A board consisting of five (5) members, two (2) members appointed by the city council and
two (2) members appointed by the commissioners court of the county; the four (4) members so appointed shall elect a
fifth member, the chairman.
Landing area. The surface area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxing of aircraft.
Nonconforming use. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this division or an amendment thereto.
Non-precision instrument runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation
facilities with only horizontal guidance, or any area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision
instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
Obstruction. Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds the limiting height set
forth in section 1.14.064.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and
includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative.
Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface,
the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared
hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary
surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most
precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is
the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary surface is, for other than
utility runways, 500 feet for non-precision instrument runways having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths
statute mile.
Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.
Structure. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but not limited to buildings,
towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
Transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway
centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of
the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of
5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway
centerline.
Tree. Any object of natural growth.
(Ordinance 04-3437, sec. I (2-152), adopted 12/14/04)
Sec. 1.14.063 Zones
In order to carry out the provisions of this division, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include
all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surface as they
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/507
apply to Plainview/Hale County Airport. Such zones are shown on the Plainview/Hale County airport zoning map
consisting of one (1) sheet, prepared by the state department of transportation, aviation division, planning and
programming section, and dated January 19, 2004, which is attached to Ordinance 04-3437 and made a part hereof. An
area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height
limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1) Approach zones.
(A) Runway 4/22 approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of runway
4/22 on Hale County Airport for non-precision instrument landings and takeoffs. The inner edge of the
approach zone shall have a width of 500 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a
distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500
feet at a horizontal distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the
continuation of the centerline of the runway. The approach slope extends one (1) foot in height for each
thirty-four (34) feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as primary
surface.
(B) Runway 13/31 approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of runway
13/31 on Hale County Airport for non-precision instrument landings and takeoffs. The inner edge of the
approach zone shall have a width of 500 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a
distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500
feet at a horizontal distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the
continuation of the centerline of the runway. The approach slope extends one (1) foot in height for each
thirty-four (34) feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as primary
surface.
(2) Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to each
runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on
either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transitional surfaces extend
outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of
7 to 1 from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of approach surfaces.
(3) Horizontal zone. The area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation,
or a height of 3,524.0 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of
10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runways 4/22 and 13/31 and
connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
(4) Conical zone. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(Ordinance 04-3437, sec. I (2-153), adopted 12/14/04)
Sec. 1.14.064 Height limitations
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no structure shall be created, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be
allowed to grow, in any zone created by this division to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein
established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as
follows:
(1) Approach zones.
(A) Runway 4/22: One (1) foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end
of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the
runway.
(B) Runway 13/31: One (1) foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end
of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the
runway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/507
(2) Transition zones.
(A) Runway 14/22: Slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and
at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150
feet above the airport elevation, which is 3,374.0 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the
foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they
intersect the horizontal surface.
(B) Runway 13/31: Slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and
at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150
feet above the airport elevation, which is 3,374.0 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the
foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they
intersect the horizontal surface.
(3) Horizontal zone. Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, or a height of
3,524.0 feet above mean sea level.
(4) Conical zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the
airport elevation.
(5) Exceptions. Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or
maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land.
(Ordinance 04-3437, sec. I (2-154), adopted 12/14/04)
Sec. 1.14.065 Use restrictions
(a) Generally. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, no use may be made of land or water within any
zone established by this division in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird
strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft
intending to use the airport.
(b) Nonconforming uses.
(1) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this division shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date of this division (ordinance adopted December 14, 2004), or otherwise interfere with
the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun
prior to the effective date of this division, and is diligently prosecuted.
(2) Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance
thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport manager to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights
shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city and the county.
(c) Permits.
(1) Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (A), (B), and (C) hereunder, no material
change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree
shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted
by the administrative agency. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/507
would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit
shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this division shall be granted unless a
variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (f) of this section.
(A) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be
required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five feet of vertical height above the ground, except
when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend
above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
(B) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than
4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
seventy-five feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend
above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
(C) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal
zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending
to permit any construction or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree, in excess of any
height limits established by this division, except as set forth in section 1.14.064(5).
(d) Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard or
permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air
navigation, than it was on the effective date of this division (ordinance adopted December 14, 2004) or any amendments
thereto, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit
shall be granted.
(e) Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the administrative agency determines that a
nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to extend above the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
(f) Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or
use his property, in violation of the regulations prescribed in this division may apply to the city board of adjustment for a
variance from such regulations in question. The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a determination from
the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the
safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application
or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the
public interest, but would do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the spirit of this division. Additionally, the
board of adjustment may consider no application for variance to the requirements of this division unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the Plainview/Hale County airport board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the
variance. If the Plainview/Hale County airport board does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after
receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application.
(g) Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted, if such action is deemed advisable by the
airport manager or the board of adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this division and be reasonable in the
circumstances, may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to allow the airport
manager to install, operate, and maintain, at the expense of the city and the county, such markings and lights as may be
necessary.
(h) Enforcement. The director for planning for the city, or his designee, shall be the official responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the airport height hazard zoning regulations and to hear and decide all applications
for permits. Applications for permits shall be made to the administrative agency upon a form published for that purpose.
Applications required by this division to be submitted to the administrative agency shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. Applications for variances shall be made to the board of adjustment by first filing said application for
variance with the administrative agency, which shall forthwith transmit said application to the board of adjustment for
determination.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/507
(i) Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the airport manager made in his
administration of this division, if of the opinion that a decision of the administrative agency is an improper
application of these regulations, may appeal to the city board of adjustment.
(2) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of
adjustment, by filing with the administrative agency a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
administrative agency shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(3) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
administrative agency certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it,
that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of administrative agency,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the
board of adjustment on notice to the administrative agency and due cause shown.
(4) The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due
notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party
may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(5) The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this division, reverse or affirm, in
whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
(6) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment may appeal
to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 04-3437, sec. I (2-155), adopted 12/14/04)
Sec. 1.14.066 Regulation of aircraft activity
(a) Authorization required. It shall be unlawful for any person to take off or land or, being the owner or operator of
any aircraft, to permit or authorize the taking off or landing of any aircraft within the corporate limits of the city, unless
such aircraft has been duly authorized under the provisions of this section or shall be taking off or landing from an
airport that has been previously approved and designated by the airport board as a public airport.
(b) Authorization procedure.
(1) Any person desiring a permit for the purposes of aircraft activity within the corporate limits of the city
shall file with the director of municipal services a request therefor in writing. Such request shall specify the
following:
(A) The name and address of the owner of the aircraft and the type of aircraft to operated within the
city;
(B) The date or dates such aircraft activity will take place;
(C) The location of the aircraft activity and route of the aircraft;
(D) The duration of the aircraft activity;
(E) The purposes(s) of the aircraft activity; and
(F) The liability insurance carrier of the owner for the aircraft and the activity, and the amount of
such coverage.
(2) Upon the receipt of the request for authorization of aircraft activity, the director of municipal services
shall make a determination as to whether such authorization should be given. Factors which the director shall
consider include, but are not limited to, the location and proposed route of the aircraft, the date(s) of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/507
proposed activity, and the purpose(s) of the activity. The primary consideration for authorization shall be the
safety of the citizens and property of the city.
(3) The request for authorization shall be acted upon by the director within five (5) calendar days.
(4) If the request for authorization is denied by the director, the applicant shall have ten (10) calendar days
in which to file a written request of appeal to the city manager. If no written request is received by the city
manager within such time, the director's decision shall be final.
(5) If an appeal is properly filed with the city manager, the city manager shall hold a hearing with ten (10)
calendar days from the date such request is received. The city manager shall hear evidence by all interested
parties and no formal rules of evidence shall apply. The city manager shall issue a decision affirming,
modifying, or reversing the director's decision within 48 hours of the closing of the hearing. Such decisions
shall be final.
(c) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to properly licensed emergency helicopters or other similar aircraft
operated or directed by law enforcement agencies acting in emergency situations or to other official government activity.
(2000 Code, secs. 2-152–2-154; Ordinance 04-3437, sec. II (2-156–2-158), adopted 12/14/04)
Sec. 1.14.067 Penalty
Any violation under this article shall be subject to the penalty provision of section 1.01.009 of this code. (2000 Code,
sec. 2-155; Ordinance 04-3437, sec. II (2-159), adopted 12/14/04)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
At large. Not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise, or in a fenced yard or enclosure; the wearing of a muzzle by a dog shall not be regarded as control under this
definition.
Cat. A member of the feline species of animals, including both male and female.
Dangerous animal. Any animal shall be deemed dangerous upon the occurrence of any one of the following:
(1) An unprovoked attack on a person, domesticated animal, or livestock, causing serious bodily injury or
death, by an animal outside a secured enclosure in which the attacking animal is kept;
(2) An unprovoked act of aggression by an animal outside a secured enclosure which causes a person to
reasonably believe the animal will attack and cause serious bodily injury to a human, domesticated animal, or
livestock;
(3) Doctor of veterinary medicine certifies that an animal poses a danger to human life, animal life, or
property based on a reasonable medical probability after observation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/507
Dog. A member of the canine species of animals, including both male and female.
Domesticated animal. Animals which are kept as pets, such as dogs or cats.
Fowl. Any chicken, turkey, pheasant, quail, guineas, geese, ducks, peacocks, and other domestic feathered creatures.
Harboring. The furnishing of lodging, shelter, food or water.
Owner. Any person owning, keeping or harboring a domesticated animal.
Poisonous snake or poisonous reptile. Any snake or reptile that is poisonous, including rattlesnakes, water moccasins,
coral snakes, and any other snake or reptile that is known to be poisonous.
Wild animal. Any live monkey, raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or other warm-blooded animal
which can be found in the wild state, and nonpoisonous snakes and nonpoisonous reptiles.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-1; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.002 Appointment of senior animal control officer
The city manager shall appoint an animal control officer and such assistants as may be required. Such officer shall be
under the supervision and control of the city manager. (2000 Code, sec. 5-91; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.003 Interference with animal control officer
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder the animal control officer, or the designee thereof, in the
performance of his official duty. (2000 Code, sec. 5-4)
Sec. 2.01.004 Service fees and charges
Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be reclaimed by the owner in person taking custody of
such animal upon complying with section 2.04.098 of this chapter and payment of the following fees based upon owner
impoundment records within a two-year period:
Animal registration/license fees
Animal license fee, through local veterinary $3.00
Duplicate license fee, through local veterinary 1/2 of license fee
Dangerous dog license fee $75.00
Boarding fee, per day
All animals except livestock $5.00
Livestock $6.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/507
Impoundment fees per animal, except livestock
First time in 12-month period $25.00
Second time in 12-month period $50.00
Third time in 12-month period $60.00
Impoundment fees for livestock, per head
First time in 12-month period $50.00
Second time in 12-month period $100.00
Third time in 12-month period $150.00
Miscellaneous fees, per animal
Any animal trap, deposit $60.00
Euthanasia
For city residents $10.00
For noncity residents $25.00
Quarantine fee, daily $5.00
Pick-up fee for animal to be quarantined $25.00
Redemption deposit in lieu of rabies vaccination $15.00
Shipping fee for rabies test $20.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/507
All fees due are assessed for each animal impounded.
(Ordinance 10-3539, sec. IV (5-136), adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 2.01.005 Stock running at large
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any horse, mule, mare, jack, jennet, cow, sheep, goat or other
animal to permit same to run at large, day or night, within the corporate limits of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 5-2)
State law reference–Estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, ch. 142.
Sec. 2.01.006 Fowl running at large
It shall be unlawful for any person raising or keeping any type of chickens, turkeys, ducks or guineas, or any other type
or kind of fowl (excluding pigeons), to allow or permit the same to be at large or run at large within the city. (2000 Code,
sec. 5-3)
Sec. 2.01.007 Artificially colored animals
No person shall dye, color or artificially color any rabbit, baby chick, duckling, or other animal, or offer for sale any
such dyed, colored, or artificially colored animal. (2000 Code, sec. 5-5)
Sec. 2.01.008 Open traps and metal jaw traps
No person shall expose an open trap or metal jaw trap likely to injure any domesticated animal or person. (2000 Code,
sec. 5-6)
Sec. 2.01.009 Duty upon striking animal with motor vehicle
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domesticated animal or livestock shall immediately report
such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event the owner is unavailable or unknown, then such report shall be
made to the animal control officer, or the city-county health department, or the local humane society. (2000 Code, sec. 5-
7)
ARTICLE 2.02 KEEPING REGULATIONS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.02.001 Keeping of livestock, swine or fowl restricted
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain for any length of time whatsoever any of the following
animals or fowl within the city upon any property zoned other than M-1, M-2 or agricultural or where otherwise
specifically permitted by the city's zoning ordinance. In addition, where such animals are allowed to be kept, harbored or
maintained, stables, enclosures, pens, coops, roosts, or other places wherein the same are so kept, harbored or maintained
shall not be within the following indicated proximity to any residence or dwelling other than that of the owner or keeper
of such animals or fowl:
(1) Cows, horses, mules, sheep, goats, jacks, jennets, or other livestock, 200 feet;
(2) Swine of any type or kind whatsoever, 500 feet;
(3) Fowl of any type or kind whatsoever, except pigeons, 100 feet.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-11)
Sec. 2.02.002 Sanitation
It shall be the duty of any person keeping, harboring or maintaining any animals or fowl in the city to keep the enclosure,
stable, pen, coop, roost or other place wherein the same are kept, harbored or maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. (2000 Code, sec. 5-12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/507
Sec. 2.02.003 Keeping of pigeons
(a) Every person who owns, controls, keeps, maintains or harbors any pigeons in the city shall at all times keep them
confined in proper cages; provided that pigeons bearing a seamless leg band issued by a recognized association of
pigeon fanciers may be released for exercise or performance upon the condition that the owner or person who has
possession of such pigeons shall not permit them to alight on buildings or property of others, and that such seamless
banded homing pigeons shipped or transported to the city may be released within the city for the purpose of engaging in
a pigeon race.
(b) It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping pigeons to keep such fowl in a coop or enclosure, and such
coop or enclosure shall be kept at a distance of at least twenty (20) feet from every building or structure used for
sleeping, dining or living; provided that this subsection shall not apply to the owner of the pigeons.
(c) An individual who feels that the pigeons are a “nuisance” may seek relief under article 8.02 of the city code,
entitled “Nuisances Generally.”
(d) Animal control personnel shall be allowed to enter the premises where pigeons are kept at all reasonable times so
that an inspection may be completed.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-13)
Secs. 2.02.004–2.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit for Keeping Wild Animals, Poisonous Snakes or Poisonous Reptiles*
Sec. 2.02.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain any wild animal within the corporate city limits, except as
follows:
(1) If a person and his or her facility housing such dangerous wild animal(s) has complied with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the acquisition and
retention of applicable permits, prior to final adoption of this chapter, said person may retain dangerous wild
animal(s) in the above-described facility in compliance with all federal, state, and local laws, including, but
not limited to, Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, as amended;
(2) A governmental agency or entity acting in an official capacity;
(3) A permitted wildlife educational or scientific research center; or
(4) Animal exhibitions with valid state and federal permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.032 Application
Any person desiring to keep any wild animal for scientific or educational purposes within the city shall first obtain a
permit to be issued by the senior animal control officer, or his authorized representative, after due application therefor.
The application shall be on a form furnished by the senior animal control officer, giving the information required by this
division and such additional and other information as may be required by the senior animal control officer as necessary
to make a determination of whether or not the permit should be issued. (2000 Code, sec. 5-17; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.033 Prerequisite conditions
The senior animal control officer or his/her authorized representative shall not approve the issuance of a permit required
by the provisions of this division unless he finds and determines that:
(1) The keeping of said poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal will be maintained within a cage
or other enclosure that will prevent the escape of said poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal even
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/507
in the event of a tornado or other calamity.
(2) The keeping of said poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal is for scientific or educational
purposes.
(3) All adequate precautions pertaining to the keeping of said poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild
animal will be maintained to prevent its or their escape.
(4) The keeping of said poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal in the vicinity where kept will
not cause undue concern to inhabitants of the city or to persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(5) The poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal will not be kept in any part of a residential
section of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-18; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.034 Cancellation
Any permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be cancelled by the senior animal control officer or his/her
authorized representative at any time if he finds that:
(1) Any person to whom a permit has been issued is maintaining said poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or
wild animal within a cage or other enclosure that will not prevent the escape of said poisonous snake,
poisonous reptile or wild animal in the event of a tornado or other calamity which would cause destruction of
the property or the cage or enclosure in which the same is kept;
(2) The keeping of any poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal is not solely for a scientific or
educational purpose;
(3) The keeping of the poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal is for the pleasure, satisfaction,
enjoyment or profit (or any one of said reasons) of the permittee;
(4) Adequate precautions are not being maintained to prevent the escape of the poisonous snake, poisonous
reptile or wild animal;
(5) The poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal is being kept in a vicinity of the city where the
keeping of same will cause undue concern to inhabitants of the city or to persons of ordinary sensibilities; or
(6) The poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal is being kept in a residential section of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-19; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.035 Appeals
Any person may appeal any decision of the senior animal control officer or his/her authorized representative to the city
council by stating, in writing, the nature of the appeal, the decision appealed, the relief sought, and any other relevant
information as requested by the council. (2000 Code, sec. 5-20; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.036 Seizure or destruction of animals kept without permit
If any person, not having a permit issued under the provisions of this division, keeps, harbors or maintains any poisonous
snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal within the city, the senior animal control officer or his/her authorized
representative may summarily seize and take possession of the same if he can do so with safety, and, if he cannot do so
with safety, he shall cause said poisonous snake, poisonous reptile or wild animal to be summarily destroyed. (2000
Code, sec. 5-21; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.03 IMPOUNDMENT OF LIVESTOCK AND NONDOMESTICATED ANIMALS
Sec. 2.03.001 Impoundment facilities
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/507
It shall be the duty of the senior animal control officer or his/her designee to provide a lot, pound or other enclosure in
which to place and hold animals and fowl found in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (2000 Code, sec. 5-31;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.03.002 Applicability
The provisions of this article shall apply to the impoundment of livestock and nondomesticated animals (hereafter in this
article, “animals and fowl”). Domesticated animals and pets shall be subject to impoundment and disposition under the
provisions of article 2.04 of this chapter.
Sec. 2.03.003 Sale of impounded animals authorized; holding period
Animals or fowl not redeemed within seven (7) business days from the impoundment or release from quarantine shall
become property of the city. At the direction of the senior animal control officer or his/her designee the animal or fowl
shall either be kept for city purposes, be humanely destroyed, or sell such animal or fowl to the highest bidder.
Sec. 2.03.004 Notice of sale of animal
Notice of the sale of any impounded animal or fowl under the provisions of this article shall be given for at least fortyeight
(48) hours prior to the date of such sale by posting three (3) public notices thereof, one of which shall be posted at
the city hall and publishing a notice of sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or the county.
Sec. 2.03.005 Fees
The fees and charges which shall be imposed for the impoundment of animals or fowl under the provisions of this article
shall be as determined by the city council.
Sec. 2.03.006 Sale and disposition of receipts from sale of animal
(a) All animals or fowl sold under the provisions of this article shall be sold separately for cash to the highest bidder.
The sale may be by either sealed bid or outcry auction conducted by a certified livestock auctioneer. If a sealed bid is to
be used then:
(1) Bidders shall be provided an opportunity to view the animal on the advertised day of sale, prior to the
deadline for submitting a bid.
(2) Bids shall be opened not later than one hour after the deadline for submitting bids.
The maker of the high bid (by sealed bid or auction) or designated agent, must remove the animal from city custody by
5:00 p.m. on the day of sale or be subject to a premium of $50.00 for each day or part of a day that the animal remains in
city custody thereafter plus cost of care.
(b) A strict account of the proceeds thereof shall be kept. Any surplus not necessary to pay the fees and expenses
incurred by the impoundment and disposition of such animals or fowl shall be paid to the city treasurer and deposited in
the general fund of the city.
Sec. 2.03.007 Redemption rights of owner
(a) The owner of any animal or fowl sold under the provisions of this article shall have the right for thirty (30) days
from and after the date of such sale to file a claim with the city treasurer to recover the net sale proceeds paid for such
animal if the owner provides an affidavit of ownership containing:
(1) The name and address of the owner;
(2) The date the owner discovered that the animal was an estray;
(3) The property from which the animal strayed;
(4) A description of the animal, including its breed, color, sex, age, size, markings of any kind, including
ear markings and brands, and other identifying characteristics; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/507
(5) A sworn statement that the affiant is the owner or caretaker of the animal.
(b) In determining the net proceeds available, if any, for distribution, the owner shall not receive the deducted
expenses incurred by the city in impounding, handling, seeking the owner of, or selling the estray.
(Ordinance 18-3675, sec. 1, adopted 4/24/18)
ARTICLE 2.04 DOMESTICATED ANIMALS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Female dogs and cats in heat prohibited in public places
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any unspayed female dog or cat, while such dog or cat is in
heat, to allow the same to be upon, in or about any public house, public place, street or alley in the city. (2000 Code, sec.
5-41)
Sec. 2.04.002 Vicious animals prohibited in public places
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or owners in control of any vicious or dangerous animal to keep or permit the
same in or about any public location within the corporate limits of the city without complying with all requirements of
the Texas Health and Safety Code, section 822.042, as amended. In addition, the owner must comply with each of the
following local requirements, at the owner's expense, before the animal is released from the animal control facility:
(1) Obtain liability insurance coverage in the amount of at least two hundred and fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by a vicious or dangerous animal causing bodily
injury to a person or for damages to any person's property resulting from keeping of such vicious or
dangerous animal. Proof of such certificate of insurance shall be provided annually meeting the above
requirements to the animal control department;
(2) Register with the city by providing the name and address of the owner; the breed, age, sex, color and
any identifying marks of the animal; the location where the animal is to be kept if it is not at the address of
the owner; and two (2) color photographs that clearly identify the vicious or dangerous animal;
(3) Have the animal sterilized;
(4) Construct a cage, pen or enclosure for the vicious or dangerous animal that has secure sides; a secure
top attached to the sides; and a secure bottom which is either attached to the sides or else the sides of the
structure must be embedded in the ground no less than two (2) feet. The pen or enclosure must be completely
encircled by a fence constructed in such a manner as to prevent a person or child from being able to reach the
animal's pen or enclosure;
(5) Not allow the animal to go outside its cage, pen or enclosure unless the animal is under physical
restraint. No person shall permit a vicious or dangerous animal to be kept outside of its cage, pen, or
enclosure on a chain, rope, or other type of leash unless a person is in physical control of the chain, rope, or
leash and the person is of competent strength to control the animal at all times. Vicious or dangerous animals
shall not be leashed to inanimate objects, such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. All dangerous animals outside
their cage, pen, or enclosure must be securely fitted with a muzzle that will not cause injury to the animal nor
interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent the animal from biting other animals or human beings;
(6) Post signs giving notice of a vicious or dangerous animal on the premises in which such animal is
confined. Such signs shall be conspicuously posted at both the front and rear property entrances and shall
bear letters not less than two (2) inches high, stating “DANGEROUS ANIMAL ON PREMISES.” Such signs
shall also display a symbol that is that is understandable by small children, that warns of the presence of a
vicious or dangerous animal;
(7) Attach a fluorescent orange tag provided by the animal control department to the animal's collar that is
worn at all times so that the animal can be easily identified;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/507
(8) Implanting a microchip into the animal, which is compatible with scanning equipment used by the
animal control department, and register it for life with the city's animal control department and a recognized
national animal registry;
(9) Pay the appropriate dangerous animal permit fee annually, not later than five (5) days prior to the
annual expiration renewal date;
(10) Pay the impoundment and daily care fees accrued during the investigation and any appeal of the
vicious or dangerous animal determination process;
(11) Present proof of current vaccination or pay the fee for vaccination.
(b) In the event the owners or keeper fails or refuses to timely comply with these requirements in accordance with
state law, then the animal control officers shall humanely destroy the vicious or dangerous animal.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of city to regulate the keeping of dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.041 et seq.
Sec. 2.04.003 Dogs running at large
(a) The owner of a dog commits an offense if such dog is found:
(1) Running at large upon any public street, highway, alley, court, square, park, sidewalk, or other public
place, ground, or public property within the limits of the city; or
(2) Running at large upon any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) The term “at large” as used in this section shall mean not under the control of the owner, either by leash, chain,
cord or other suitable material attached to a collar or harness, or not constrained securely within an enclosure or fence.
The owner or occupier of the premises where any dog is found in violation of this section shall be presumed to be the
owner of such dog.
(c) A violation of this section does not require any culpable mental state.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-43)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.04.004 Barking dogs
Any person who shall own or harbor on his premises or in or about any premises under his control any dog which, by
loud or unusual barking or howling, shall cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of nearby
premises to be disturbed, or reasonably liable to be disturbed, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (2000 Code, sec. 5-44)
Sec. 2.04.005 Chains, ropes or other devices used for restraining dogs
If a dog is chained or tethered within the corporate limits of the city, the chain, rope, cable or other restraint device must
be a minimum of six (6) feet in length. The restraint device must be attached to a comfortable collar around the dog's
neck. The restraint device must not be so heavy as to impede the movement of the animal. (2000 Code, sec. 5-45)
Sec. 2.04.006 Leaving animal unattended in vehicle
A person having charge or custody of an animal shall not place or confine such animal or allow such animal to be placed
or confined in a motor vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such a period of time as may endanger the health of
the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death of the animal.
City enforcement agents finding an animal being held in violation of this provision may obtain a search warrant from a
justice of the peace pursuant to section 821.022 of the Health and Safety Code and may impound such animal pending a
hearing. (2000 Code, sec. 5-46)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/507
Secs. 2.04.007–2.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. License*
Sec. 2.04.031 Keeping unlicensed animal
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dog or cat in the limits of the city for which a license has not been
procured from a local veterinary clinic. (2000 Code, sec. 5-51)
Sec. 2.04.032 Annual rabies license and city license required
Each person owning or keeping a dog or cat within the city shall procure a rabies and a city license annually. Such
licenses shall be provided by local veterinary clinics. (2000 Code, sec. 5-52)
Sec. 2.04.033 Vaccination against rabies
It shall be the duty of the owner or harborer of each and every dog and cat kept in the city to have such dog or cat
vaccinated against rabies by a practicing veterinarian at least once each year; provided, however, that such dog or cat
must have been vaccinated within one month of the date of the owner's or keeper's application for the license required in
this division, or within thirteen (13) months prior to the expiration date of the license applied for. (2000 Code, sec. 5-53)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.04.034 Issuance
Upon compliance with the provisions of this division, and upon payment of the fee required, a local veterinary clinic
shall issue the license required by this division. (2000 Code, sec. 5-54)
Sec. 2.04.035 Tags
Upon complying with the provisions of this chapter, the owner of such dog or cat shall be issued a numbered metallic tag
stamped with the number and expiration. The senior animal control officer is hereby authorized to appoint issuing agents
as his deputies for the limited purpose of issuing animal identification/registration tags. An issuing agent may not issue a
tag for a dog or cat that is not currently vaccinated against rabies. The tag shall at all times during the year be securely
fastened to a collar that is worn around the neck of the dog or cat, and the failure of the owner in this respect shall have
the same effect as if no license fee has been paid upon the dog or cat. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any
counterfeit license tag upon a dog or cat except the tag adopted and issued by the city. (2000 Code, sec. 5-55; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.036 Duration
Each license issued under the provisions of this division shall run for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
issuance. (2000 Code, sec. 5-56)
Sec. 2.04.037 Duplicates
It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any dog or cat to procure a duplicate tag from an issuing agent in the event
that the original tag is lost or destroyed, and such agent shall issue a duplicate tag upon application of any person who
has complied with the provisions of this division and upon the payment of one-half (1/2) the cost of the original tag at
the time of the purchase. (2000 Code, sec. 5-57; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 2.04.038–2.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Nuisances
Sec. 2.04.061 Enumerated
The following acts and conditions are hereby declared to be a public nuisance within the city limits:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/507
(1) The harboring or maintaining of more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months of age in an enclosure
unless the enclosure contains at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of space for each dog so
enclosed;
(2) The harboring or maintaining of more than three (3) cats over three (3) months of age in an enclosure
unless the enclosure contains at least one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of space for each cat
so enclosed;
(3) The harboring or maintaining of any dog or cat, or dogs or cats, in any enclosure unless said enclosure
is kept clean and sanitary and free of offensive odors;
(4) The harboring or maintaining of any dog or cat, or dogs or cats, in any enclosure unless the excrement
from said dog or cat is cleaned up and disposed of or buried at least once every twenty-four (24) hours.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-71)
(5) An owner, harborer, or other person in possession of an animal commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the animal to defecate in the city on public property and fails to
remove and properly dispose of such excrement. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.062 Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of any nuisance as
provided by the provisions of this division. (2000 Code, sec. 5-72)
Sec. 2.04.063 Abatement required
Every person possessing any place in or on which there is a nuisance as defined by this division, as soon as its presence
comes to his knowledge, shall proceed at once to abate such nuisance. (2000 Code, sec. 5-73)
Sec. 2.04.064 Duty of police and animal control officers to report violations
It shall be the duty of every police officer and every employee of the senior animal control officer to watch for any
nuisance as defined by this division and to report at once all of the facts to the senior animal control officer. (2000 Code,
sec. 5-74; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.065 Notice and order to abate
Whenever any nuisance as defined in this division shall exist, the senior animal control officer shall notify, in writing,
the owner or occupant of the premises where the nuisance exists and shall order the owner or occupant to abate and/or
remove the nuisance described in such notice within such time which may be specified. (2000 Code, sec. 5-75;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.066 Extension of time for compliance
Within the period of time given in the order for abatement, the owner or occupant shall have the right to appear in the
office of the senior animal control officer of the animal control department to show cause why the order should not or
cannot be complied with; and the senior animal control officer may, at his/her discretion, give such extension of time for
the abatement of the nuisance as may be necessary if there is no immediate danger to public health. (2000 Code, sec. 5-
76; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.067 Abatement by city
If the owner or occupant refuses to obey an order to abate as provided in this division, or if the premises are unoccupied,
or if the owner cannot be found, the senior animal control officer shall cause the nuisance to be abated or removed and
shall defray the costs thereof at the expense of the city. All expenses so incurred shall be charged against the owner and
shall constitute a lien on the premises where the nuisance existed. (2000 Code, sec. 5-77; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.068 Impoundment of animals
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/507
The senior animal control officer shall have the power to cause the abatement by ordering the dogs or cats kept by the
person maintaining the nuisance impounded in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article in regard to
impounding dogs or cats. (2000 Code, sec. 5-78; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 2.04.069–2.04.090 Reserved
Division 4. Impoundment*
Sec. 2.04.091 Authorized
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this division, all
domesticated animals found in violation of the provisions of this article within the city, whether such animal shall be in
the immediate presence of its owner or custodian or otherwise. (2000 Code, sec. 5-92)
Sec. 2.04.092 Impoundment facilities
The senior animal control officer, under the direction of the city manager, shall provide a suitable place for the
impounding of all domesticated animals picked up under the provisions of this article, and such pound shall be under his
control. (2000 Code, sec. 5-93; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Quarantine and impoundment facilities generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.04.093 Right of entry
The animal control officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of
seizing and impounding any animal found thereon in violation of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 5-94)
Sec. 2.04.094 Registry of impounded animals
The animal control officer, upon impounding or receiving any animal under the provisions of this division, shall make a
complete registry of such animal, entering the breed, color and sex of the animal and whether the animal has been
vaccinated, and the time and place of taking such animal into custody. (2000 Code, sec. 5-95)
Sec. 2.04.095 Right of owner to redeem animal
The owner of any animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this division shall have the right to redeem
the same upon the payment of any and all fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of such animal;
provided, however, the payment of such impoundment fees shall not bar the imposition of any fine which may be
imposed for the violation of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 5-96)
Sec. 2.04.096 Holding period; disposition of unredeemed animals
(a) All impounded animals shall be redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours after the same was impounded. When
calculating the seventy-two-hour-period for redemption, hours occurring on days when the animal shelter is not open for
business will not be counted as part of the redemption period, as long as space is available to hold the impounded
animals. If all animal shelter cages become full, the humane society office manager and the supervisor of animal control
will agree on which untagged animals will be euthanized, so that space can be made for additional animals.
(b) At the direction of the senior animal control officer or designee, an animal or fowl not timely redeemed by the
owner shall either be placed for adoption with a bona fide humane society to find a suitable home, kept for city purposes,
or be humanely destroyed, or be disposed of for medical purposes.
(Ordinance 18-3675, sec. 2, adopted 4/24/18)
Sec. 2.04.097 Fees
The fees and charges which shall be imposed for the impoundment of animals or fowl under the provisions of this article
shall be as determined by the city council. (Ordinance 10-3539, sec. II (5-98), adopted 1/11/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/507
Sec. 2.04.098 Redemption of unvaccinated animal
(a) Any animal impounded under this article may be reclaimed by the owner in person upon the payment of required
impoundment fees set forth in this chapter, and based upon impoundment records maintained by the animal control
department. The animal control department shall return the animal if the owner can provide sufficient proof of being the
animal's owner and if such release will not impair the public safety or the animal. The owner has the responsibility to
personally visit the shelter before the expiration of the designated holding period to reclaim their animal; and
(b) Any domestic animal over the age of three (3) months which does not have a current rabies vaccination shall not
be redeemed, transferred, or adopted until the animal has been so vaccinated. The owner of any impounded domesticated
animal which has not been vaccinated as required by this article, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, may redeem his
animal by making a deposit in the specified amount as determined by the city council and be allowed twenty-four (24)
hours to get such animal vaccinated. If such owner fails to procure a vaccination certificate within twenty-four (24)
hours, the deposit shall be forfeited and the animal shall be impounded again. Upon presentation within such period of
time of a certificate of vaccination issued under this article, the deposit shall be refunded.
(Ordinance 10-3539, sec. II (5-99), adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 2.04.099 Destruction of sick, injured, unweaned or donated animals
The animal control officer may destroy any animal by a humane method if the animal is donated, unweaned, or so sick
or injured that its cure is considered by the animal control officer to be impracticable, or if death is imminent; and, in any
of such events, such destruction may be done immediately without notice or any waiting period. (2000 Code, sec. 5-100)
Sec. 2.04.100 Disposition of funds
All moneys received and collected under the provisions of this division shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-103)
Sec. 2.04.101 Reports
The animal control officer shall file such reports of his activities under the provisions of this division, under oath, as are
required by the mayor and council. (2000 Code, sec. 5-104)
ARTICLE 2.05 RABBITS
Sec. 2.05.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article:
Rabbit. Includes hares and rabbits of every kind.
Rabbitry. Any building, structure, box, pen or cage where more than three (3) grown rabbits are kept for any length of
time for purposes of breeding or raising rabbits, upon any lot or lots containing less than two thousand three hundred
thirty-three and one-third (2,333-1/3) square feet for each rabbit so kept.
(2000 Code, sec. 5-111)
Sec. 2.05.002 Proximity of rabbitry to dwelling
The keeping, maintaining or operation of any rabbitry within one hundred (100) feet of where any person, other than the
owner or operator of such rabbitry, resides is dangerous and detrimental to the well-being of such person and to the
inhabitants of the city, and is and shall be deemed unlawful and a nuisance. (2000 Code, sec. 5-112)
ARTICLE 2.06 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.06.001 Rabies control authority
The senior animal control officer of the animal control department is designated as the rabies control authority of the city
for the purposes of administering the Rabies Control Act of 1981 in accordance with the Texas Health and Safety Code,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/507
chapter 826. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.06.002 Quarantine of suspected rabid animal
Any animal which bites or scratches a person or which otherwise gives symptoms of having rabies shall be immediately
reported to the county health officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the health officer, for
a period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the health
officer or under his direction. The county health officer may designate the animal control officer to act in his place at any
time. At the discretion of the health officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter
designated as the city pound, or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of
stray animals, or in the case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated
as the city pound. (2000 Code, sec. 5-121)
State law references–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.; quarantine and impoundment
facilities generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.06.003 Duty of owner to surrender animal for quarantine
Upon the demand made by an animal control officer, it shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to surrender any animal
which has bitten a human or another animal, or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, for quarantine,
which expense shall be borne by the owner. The owner may reclaim such quarantined animal if adjudged free of rabies
upon payment of fees set forth in this chapter and upon compliance with the vaccination provisions of this chapter.
(Ordinance 10-3539, sec. III (5-122), adopted 1/11/11)
Sec. 2.06.004 Disposition of dead rabid animal
When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the
animal dies while under such observation, the health officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the
department of state health services for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health authorities of
reports of human contacts and the diagnosis. (2000 Code, sec. 5-123)
Sec. 2.06.005 Areawide quarantine authorized
When the report indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the health officer may order an areawide quarantine for a period
of sixty (60) days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine no pet animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted to
be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the
city without permission of the health officer. (2000 Code, sec. 5-124)
State law reference–Area rabies quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.045.
Sec. 2.06.006 Vaccination requirements during areawide quarantine
During the areawide quarantine period and as long thereafter as he decides it is necessary to prevent the spread of rabies,
the health officer may require that all animals, three (3) months of age or older, shall be vaccinated against rabies. All
vaccinated animals shall be restricted (leashing or confinement on enclosed premises) for thirty (30) days after
vaccination. During the quarantine period, the health officer is hereby empowered to provide for a program of mass
immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine rabies vaccination clinics strategically located
throughout the area of health jurisdiction. (2000 Code, sec. 5-125)
Sec. 2.06.007 Adoption of impounded stray animals during areawide quarantine
No animal which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to be
adopted from any animal shelter during the period of rabies emergency quarantine, except by special authorization of the
health officer. (2000 Code, sec. 5-126)
Sec. 2.06.008 Extension of areawide quarantine
In the event there are additional cases of rabies occurring during the period of areawide quarantine, such period of
quarantine may be extended for an additional period of time. (2000 Code, sec. 5-128)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/507
Sec. 2.06.009 Destruction or isolation of animals bitten by rabid animal
Any unvaccinated animal bitten by another animal suspected of or known to be rabid shall be immediately destroyed or
shall be surrendered to the animal control department for a period of three (3) months' quarantine, and shall be
vaccinated during the third and eighth week of quarantine. Any vaccinated animal bitten by another animal suspected of
being or known to be rabid shall be immediately vaccinated and surrendered to the animal control department for a
period of forty-five (45) days' quarantine. When the biting animal is determined not to be rabid, the bitten animal shall
be released. All animals quarantined shall be at the owner's expense. Upon surrender of an animal for quarantine, the
owner shall be required to pay in advance one (1) month's quarantine fee to defray a portion of the expense of caring and
feeding the animal. Additional quarantine expenses shall be paid at the beginning of each subsequent month's quarantine.
If an owner fails to pay for any expense of quarantine when due, the animal shall become the property of the city and
shall be subject to immediate disposal. The senior animal control officer is authorized to permit the quarantine of a bitten
animal at a licensed veterinary clinic for the necessary quarantine period at the owner's option and expense. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 2.06.010 Killing suspected rabid animal or removing animal from city
No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or
any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove such animal from the city limits without written
permission from the health officer. (2000 Code, sec. 5-129)
Sec. 2.06.011 Surrender of carcass of dead animal exposed to rabies
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the health officer. (2000 Code,
sec. 5-130)
Sec. 2.06.012 Refusal to surrender animal for quarantine or destruction
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is
made therefor by the health officer. (2000 Code, sec. 5-132)
Sec. 2.06.013 Duty of physicians to report bite cases
It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the health officer the names and
addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in
rabies control. (2000 Code, sec. 5-131)
Sec. 2.06.014 Duty of veterinarians to report suspected rabies cases
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control department his diagnosis of any animal
observed by him as a rabies suspect. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.06.015 Exemptions
Hospitals, clinics, and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt
from the provisions of this article, except where expressly stated. (2000 Code, sec. 5-134)
Sec. 2.06.016 Adoption of chapter 826, Texas Health and Safety Code
All rules and regulations found in chapter 826, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein in their entirety, except when less stringent than any rule or regulation promulgated in this chapter.
Should any provision of this chapter apply more strictly, said provisions shall prevail. (2000 Code, sec. 5-135)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/507
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 3.02 BUILDING TRADES AND FIRE CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 3.02.001 Established; membership
The board shall consist of seven (7) members and four (4) alternates, who will be called to serve on the board in the
event a regular member cannot be present. All members appointed shall be residents of the city at the time of their
appointment and during their term of office. (2000 Code, sec. 6-41)
Sec. 3.02.002 Name
The board shall be known as the City of Plainview Building Trades and Fire Code Board of Appeals. (2000 Code, sec. 6-
42)
Sec. 3.02.003 Composition
The board shall consist of members with the following qualifications:
(1) One (1) building contractor.
(2) One (1) licensed master electrician.
(3) One (1) representative of the local electrical service provider.
(4) One (1) licensed master plumber.
(5) One (1) representative of the local gas service provider.
(6) One (1) licensed heating and air conditioning contractor.
(7) One (1) person who by experience has working knowledge of the above trades.
(8) Four (4) alternates who meet any of the above qualifications.
(9) The city building official or his/her authorized representative shall be an ex officio member and serve
as secretary for the board without voting privileges.
(10) The city engineer shall be an ex officio member of the board without voting privileges.
(11) The city fire marshal or other representative of the fire department, as determined by the fire chief,
shall be an ex officio member of the board without voting privileges.
(Ordinance 04-3433, sec. VII (6-43), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.02.004 Appointment of members
The members of the board shall be appointed by the city council, and shall serve staggered terms. (2000 Code, sec. 6-44)
Sec. 3.02.005 Term of members; maximum number of terms
Each member of the board shall serve for a term of four (4) years or until their replacement is appointed. There shall be
no limit on the number of terms a member may serve. (2000 Code, sec. 6-45)
Sec. 3.02.006 Notice of meetings
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/507
Each meeting of the board shall be legally posted as required by chapter 551 Texas Government Code, and ex officio
members and members of the board shall be notified in writing not less than three (3) days prior to the date of any
meeting. (2000 Code, sec. 6-46)
Sec. 3.02.007 Attendance requirements
Each member of the board shall attend no less than 75% of the regular meetings called by the officers of the board. The
secretary of the board shall make a quarterly report to the city council showing the attendance of each member of the
board. Any representative failing to attend 75% of the regular meetings legally called during any calendar year without
an excused absence, as determined by a majority vote of the board members, shall automatically be disqualified for
service on the board and shall be replaced by the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 6-47)
Sec. 3.02.008 Vacation of office
Should a member of the board move from the city or otherwise become disqualified for any other reason, he/she shall
vacate the office. (2000 Code, sec. 6-48)
Sec. 3.02.009 Removal of members
A board member may be removed from office by the city council, with cause. (2000 Code, sec. 6-49)
Sec. 3.02.010 Filling of vacancies
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the board shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term, by the city
council. (2000 Code, sec. 6-50)
Sec. 3.02.011 Compensation of members
All board members shall serve without compensation. (2000 Code, sec. 6-51)
Sec. 3.02.012 Officers; quorum
(a) The board shall meet as soon after appointment as possible and select a chair and vice-chair from within its
number and may adopt such rules as it deems necessary for the orderly conduct of its affairs. A full, complete record of
the proceedings of said board shall be kept by the secretary of the board or his/her designee.
(b) Four (4) members of this board shall constitute a quorum.
(2000 Code, sec. 6-52)
Sec. 3.02.013 Powers and duties; appeal hearings
(a) Notice of appeal. The building trades and fire code board of appeals shall require notice of appeal in writing
stating grounds for appeal and other such matters. A person directly interested, affected, or aggrieved in decisions made
by the chief building official or fire marshal pertaining to the administration of this chapter may request an appeal of
such decision before the board. The appellant, chief building official, and fire marshal shall be given reasonable notice of
the time and place of appeal. In hearing such appeal and reviewing testimony presented, the board shall not have the
power to waive or set aside the requirements of these codes.
(b) Appeals from board's actions. Any action of the board may be appealed by a person directly interested, affected, or
aggrieved in the action by written petition filed with the board and the city secretary within twenty-one (21) days of such
action for a hearing before the city council. The city council's actions shall be final. Further appeals may be filed with
the nearest court of competent jurisdiction.
(c) Advisory responsibility of the board. The board shall submit to the city council such recommendation for the
improvement and revision of these codes as it may from time to time deem necessary and proper in light of the
development of new materials, methods or techniques which would result in a better and more economical installation.
All requests for use of materials or methods not covered in these codes shall be fully supported by factual evidence, or
prior approval, from a recognized testing agency or such impartial qualified authority acceptable to the board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/507
(Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-53), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.03 BUILDINGS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.03.001 Definitions
(a) Whenever the word “municipality” or the word “city” is used in the codes adopted by this article, it shall be
construed to mean the City of Plainview, Texas.
(b) Whenever the words “corporate counsel” or “city attorney” are used in the codes adopted by this article, they shall
mean the city attorney of this city.
(2000 Code, sec. 6-18; Ordinance 04-3433, sec. V (6-20), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.03.002 Conflicting regulations
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the codes adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this
Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state
law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. (2000 Code, sec. 6-19; Ordinance 04-3433,
sec. V (6-21), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.03.003 Trench excavation safety
(a) On all construction projects, public or private, within the boundaries of the city or within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction, the bid document and the contract shall contain:
(1) Detailed plans and specifications for adequate safety systems that meet OSHA standards; and
(2) A pay item for these safety systems.
(2000 Code, sec. 6-20; Ordinance 04-3433, sec. V (6-22), adopted 10/26/04)
(b) This requirement shall not apply to persons subject to safety standards adopted under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code,
section 121.201 et seq., and subject to the administrative penalty provisions of V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, section 121.206
et seq. (2000 Code, sec. 6-20; Ordinance 04-3433, sec. V (6-22), adopted 10/26/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Trench safety requirements, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 756.021 et seq.
Sec. 3.03.004 Building permit fees
(a) Minimum permit fee: $45.00.
(b) The city shall charge and collect, and every applicant for a building permit shall pay the following fees:
(1) New commercial or residential construction: $0.08 sq ft.
(2) New construction, additions to existing buildings: $0.08 sq ft.
(3) Alterations to existing buildings*: See below.
(4) Building inspection for moved buildings**: See below.
(5) Moving permit (to move a building in the city): $45.00.
(6) Demolition permit: $45.00.
(7) Certificate of occupancy: $25.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/507
(8) Reinspection or red tag fee: $25.00.
(9) After-hours inspections***: $25.00.
(10) Any inspection not listed: $45.00.
(11) Roofing contractor's permit fee: $45.00.
(12) Automatic fire-extinguishing systems: $45.00.
(13) Fire alarm systems and related equipment: $45.00.
(14) Fire pumps: $45.00.
(15) Standpipe systems: $45.00.
* Minimum permit fee plus $1.00 for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of valuation over $10,000.00.
** Buildings that are to be moved to another location within the city limits or into the city limits, the inspection fee is
based on the hourly rate for code administration, plus 15%, plus IRS standard mileage rate.
*** After hours inspections are between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day on
weekends and city-recognized holidays.
(Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-1), adopted 1/25/11)
Secs. 3.03.005–3.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. International Building Code
Sec. 3.03.031 Adopted
(a) The 2015 International Building Code, written by the International Code Council, Inc., as hereinafter amended, is
specifically adopted as part of the building code of the city. The same is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set
forth at length. (Ordinance 17-3646 adopted 1/24/17)
(b) A copy of said International Building Code shall be filed with the city secretary and a copy maintained in the
office of the chief building official of the city. All such copies are open to public inspection during business hours of the
offices where they are maintained, with amendments thereto. (Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-16), adopted 1/25/11)
Sec. 3.03.032 Amendments
Amendments to the 2015 International Building Code, which incorporates the appendixes, are as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Plainview.”
Section 101.4. Referenced codes. Amend by adding end of paragraph “and as adopted and amended by the City of
Plainview.”
Section 101.4.3. Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall apply [to] the installation,
alteration, repair, and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and
appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewerage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. The
provisions of the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to private disposal systems.
Section 105.2. Work exempt from permit. Amend buildings as follows: 1. One-story detached accessory structures used
as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet
(18.58m2). 2. Fences not over 8 feet (2440 mm) high.
Section 107.1. General.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/507
Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and
other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional and shall contain the seal of a Texas-licensed engineer or a Texas-licensed
architect.
The registered design professional who prepares construction documents shall have full responsibility for complying
with Texas Occupations Code, chapter 1001 (Engineers) or chapter 1051 (Architects), as applicable, and shall affix
design professional official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data. Where special conditions exist,
the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design
professional.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not
required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such
that review of the construction documents, prepared by a registered design professional, is not necessary to obtain
compliance with this code.
Section 109.3. Building permit valuations.
The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include
total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas,
mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is
underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet
the approval of the building official. If the applicant fails to present sufficient documentation to support the valuation on
the application, final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official in accordance with the most current
building valuation data as published by the International Code Council or approved statements sufficient to clearly
document all construction costs.
Section 113.1. General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals:
City of Plainview Building Trades and Fire Code Board of Appeals; see article 3.02 of the City of Plainview Code of
Ordinances.
Section 113.2. Limitations on authority. Delete in entirety.
Section 113.3. Qualifications. Delete in entirety.
Section 116.6. Unsafe structures. Insert to read as follows: Abandoned and substandard structures shall be subject to the
requirements of the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances and state law.
Section 903. Automatic sprinkler systems.
903.2.8. Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3 shall be provided
throughout all buildings with a group R fire area. Detached one-and two-family dwellings not more than three stories
above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories in
above grade plane in height, shall be exempt from this requirement.
Nothing in this article or the adopted fire code shall prohibit the installation of a fire suppression system if the owner of a
detached one-or two-family dwelling not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of
egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories in above grade plane in height desires to have one
installed, so long as the system is installed according to applicable NFPA standards.
Section 1101.2. Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible in accordance with
this code and ICC A117.1.
Exception: Elements regulated under the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and built in accordance
with TDLR-approved plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the TDLR, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/507
Section 1101.3. Permits and inspections. Plans of the proposed installations and alterations shall be submitted, permits
shall be obtained for the proposed work, the work shall be inspected, and the work shall be completed in accordance
with the International Building Code as adopted.
Section 1101.4. Responsibility to comply with federal and state laws. Compliance with federal and state laws addressing
accessibility for persons with disabilities shall be the responsibility of the building designer, builder, and owner. The
city's approval of either plans or installations will not relieve a person from the obligation to comply with either federal
or state laws.
Section 1507.8.1. Deck requirements. Wood shingles shall be used only on solid sheathing.
Section 1507.9.1. Deck requirements. Wood shakes shall be used only on solid sheathing.
Section 1507.9.6. Material standards. Wood shakes shall comply with the requirements of table 1507.9.6. Amend the
table as follows:
TABLE 1507.9.6
WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Material Minimum
Grades
Applicable
Grading Rules
Wood shakes of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Taper sawn shakes of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Preservative-treated shakes and shingles of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Fire-retardant-treated shakes and shingles of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes of Southern pine treated in accordance
with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 3B and section
5.6)
1 or 2 TFS
CSSB= Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau.
TFS= Forest Products Laboratory of the Texas Forest Services.
Section 1511.1. General. Materials and methods of application used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering
shall comply with the requirements of chapter 15, Roof Assemblies and Rooftop Structures, including but not limited to
decking, flashing, and ventilations.
Section 1511.3.1.1. Exceptions. A roof recover shall not be permitted where any of the following conditions occur:
1. Where the existing roof or roof covering is water-soaked or has deteriorated to the point that the existing
roof or roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional roofing.
2. Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.
3. Where the existing roof has two or more applications of any type of roof covering.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/507
4. For asphalt shingles.
Table 1604.1. Insert the following table:
TABLE 1604.1
CLIMATIC and GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind Design
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject to Damage From
Winter
Design
Temp
Ice Barrier
Underlayerment
Required
Flood
Hazard
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp.
Speed
Topographic
effects
Special
wind
debris
zone
Windborne
Weathering
Frost
Line
Depth
Termite
15 psf Sec.
1609
No No No B Moderate 18" Moderate to
Heavy
20° No Municipal
Code
311 58.752
Section 1612.1. All structures constructed within a special flood hazard area shall comply with the City of Plainview
Code of Ordinances at article 3.13, Flood Prevention.
Section 1612.3. Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas, the applicable governing authority
shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special
flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in an engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Plainview” (Flood Prevention in City of Plainview Code of Ordinances at article 3.13),
dated February 18, 2011, as amended or revised, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood
hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section.
Section 1612.5. Flood hazard documentation.
The following documentation shall be prepared and sealed by a registered design professional and submitted to the
building official.
1. For construction in flood hazard areas other than high hazard areas or coastal A zones:
1.1. The elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, as required by the lowest floor
elevation inspection in section 110.3.3.
1.2. For fully enclosed areas below the design flood elevation where provisions to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do not meet the minimum requirements in section 2.6.2.1 of
ASCE 24, construction documents shall include a statement that the design will provide for equalization
of hydrostatic flood forces in accordance with section 2.6.2.2 of ASCE 24.
1.3. For dry floodproofed nonresidential buildings, construction documents shall include a statement
that the dry floodproofing is designed in accordance with ASCE 24.
1.4. All structures constructed within a special flood hazard area as designated by the City of
Plainview Code of Ordinances at article 3.13 shall be provided with a foundation system designed by a
registered professional engineer or registered architect.
Section J103. Permits required. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section J104. Permit application and submittals. Delete this section in its entirety.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/507
Section J107.5. Compaction. All fill material shall be compacted to 90 a minimum 95 percent of maximum density and
shall be within 2% of optimum moisture content as determined by ASTM D 698, Standard Proctor, in lifts not exceeding
12 inches (305 mm) in depth.
Section K101.0. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Electrical Code-Administrative Provisions of City of
Plainview and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
Section K103.2. Work exempt from permit. The following work shall be exempt from the requirement for a permit:
1. Listed cord and plug-connected temporary decorative lighting.
2. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor.
3. Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location.
4. Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories.
5. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not
capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.
6. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical
equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying
appliances. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment
unsafe.
Exemptions from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in
violation of the provisions of this code or other laws or ordinances of the City of Plainview.
Section K111.1. Adoption. Electrical systems and equipment shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance
with the NFPA 70 as applicable, except as otherwise provided in this code.
(Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-17), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance 17-3646 adopted 1/24/17)
Sec. 3.03.033 Contractor registration
No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, improve, convert or demolish any roof or roof structure
for which a permit is required within the corporate limits of the city until such person has registered with the city and has
made, executed and delivered to the building official a permit surety bond and a certificate of insurance in accordance
with the following:
(1) Permit surety bond.
(A) Contractors are required to obtain a good and sufficient corporate surety bond or permit surety
bond, in the amount shown in table 3.03.033 payable to the city for the use and benefit of either the city
or the property owner for damages as a result of any act or neglect of the principal or his agents or
employees; or by reasons of failure to repair any defective work, material or installation; or for failure
to pay any fees or other charges due the city; or for failure to remedy any defects or faulty workmanship
or material within the time prescribed by the building official for the completion of such remedial work,
without additional cost to the person for whom the work was done; and guaranteeing compliance with
the requirements of the applicable construction codes of all work installed by the principal, his agents or
employees.
(B) Claim upon such bond may be filed by either any person damaged by reason of the principal's
failure to perform his obligations under the bond, or the city for violation of applicable construction
codes.
(C) Suspension or revocation of the registration of the principal shall not by itself affect the liability
of either the principal or the surety on such bond.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/507
(2) Certificate of insurance. Contractors are required to maintain liability insurance and shall provide a
certificate of insurance showing the levels of liability insurance coverage in accordance with table 3.03.033.
Table 3.03.033
Contractor Categories State License or
Registration
Required
City
Registration
Annual City
Registration Fee
License and
Permit Surety
Bond
General
Liability
Insurance
Commercial Roofing
Contractor
No Yes $35.00 $20,000.00 $300,000.00
Residential Roofing
Contractor
No Yes $35.00 $20,000.00 $100,000.00
(3) Homestead exemption. A homeowner for which a homestead exemption has been given for his/her
property intended for the permit and said homeowner is acting as his/her own roofing contractor.
(Ordinance 17-3646 adopted 1/24/17)
Secs. 3.03.034–3.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. International Residential Code
Sec. 3.03.061 Adopted
(a) The 2015 International Residential Code, as written by the International Code Council, Inc., as hereinafter
amended, is specifically adopted as part of the building code of the city. The same is incorporated herein by reference as
if fully set forth at length. (Ordinance 17-3647 adopted 1/24/17)
(b) A copy of said International Residential Code shall be filed with the city secretary and a copy maintained in the
office of the chief building official of the city. All such copies are open to public inspection during business hours of the
offices where they are maintained, with amendments thereto. (Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-26), adopted 1/25/11)
Sec. 3.03.062 Amendments
Amendments to the 2015 International Residential Code, which incorporates the appendixes, are as follows:
Section R101.1. Title. Insert “City of Plainview.”
Section R105.2. Work exempt from permit. Amend buildings as follows:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses,
provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet (18.58m2).
2. Fences not over 8 feet (2440 mm) high.
Section R108.3. Building permit valuations. Building permit valuation shall include total values of the work for which a
permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other permanent systems, including
materials and labor. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official in accordance with the most
current building valuation data as published by the International Code Council or approved statements sufficient to
clearly document all construction costs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/507
Section R112.1. Board of appeals. Amend to read as follows: City of Plainview Building Trades and Fire Code Board of
Appeals. See article 3.02 of the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section R112.2. Limitations on authority. Delete.
Section R112.3. Qualifications. Delete.
Section R112.4. Administration. Delete.
Section R301.2(1). Climatic and geographic design criteria. Insert table:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind Design Seismic
Design
Category
Subject to Damage From Winter
Design
Temp
Ice Barrier
Underlayerment
Required
Flood
Hazard
Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp.
Speed Topographic
effects
Special
wind
debris
zone
Windborne
Weathering Frost
Line
Depth
Termite
15 psf 115 mph No No No B Moderate 18" Moderate to
Heavy
20° No Municipal
Code
311 58.75
Section R313.2. One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems.
Nothing in this article or the adopted fire code shall prohibit the installation of a fire suppression system if the owner of a
detached one- or two-family dwelling not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of
egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories in above grade plane in height desires to have one
installed, so long as the system is installed according to applicable NFPA standards.
Section R315.2.2. Alterations, repairs, and additions. Where alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or
where one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the individual dwelling unit shall be
equipped with carbon monoxide alarms located as required for new dwellings.
Exceptions:
1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of siding, or the addition or
replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck, is exempt from the requirements of this
section.
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing systems not involving gas lines are exempt from the
requirements of this section.
Section 315.3. Location. Carbon monoxide alarms in dwelling units shall be installed outside of each separate sleeping
area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. Where a fuel-burning appliance is located within a bedroom or its
attached bathroom, a carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed within the bedroom. Approved alarms shall be installed
in accordance with manufacturers' installation instructions or located on the wall or ceiling at a height 42 inches above
floor, avoiding locations near heating/cooling vents or areas which provide turbulent airflow, and a minimum 36 inches
away from openings to areas of high humidity. Avoid installing CO alarms in kitchens or above fuel-burning appliances.
Section R401.2. Requirements. Foundation construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads according to
section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting soil. Fill soils that support footings and
foundations shall be designed, installed and tested in accordance with accepted engineering practice. Gravel fill used as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/507
footings for wood and precast concrete foundations shall comply with section R403. Concrete foundations shall be
designed in accordance with this code or in accordance with the 2015 Panhandle Residential Foundation Manual.
Section R405.1. Concrete or masonry foundations. Exception. A drainage system is not required when the foundation is
installed on well-drained ground or sand-gravel mixture soils according to the Unified Soil Classification System, Group
I Soils, as detailed in table R405.1 or constructed in accordance with the 2015 Panhandle Residential Foundation
Manual.
Section R905.7.1. Deck requirements. Wood shingles shall be used only on solid sheathing.
Section R905.8.1. Deck requirements. Wood shakes shall be used only on solid sheathing.
Section R905.8.5. Material standards. Wood shakes shall comply with the requirements of table R905.8.5.
TABLE R905.8.5
WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Material Minimum
Grades
Applicable
Grading Rules
Wood shakes of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Taper sawn shakes of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Preservative-treated shakes and shingles of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Fire-retardant-treated shakes of naturally durable wood 1 CSSB
Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes of Southern pine treated in
accordance with AWPA Standard U1 (Commodity Specification A,
Use Category 3B and section 5.6)
1 or 2 TFS
CSSB= Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau.
TFS= Forest Products Laboratory of the Texas Forest Services.
Section R908.1. General. Materials and methods of application used for re-covering or replacing an existing roof
covering shall comply with the requirements of chapter 9, including but not limited to decking, flashing, and ventilation.
Section R908.3.1.1. A roof re-cover shall not be permitted where any of the following conditions occur:
1. Where the existing roof or roof covering is water-soaked or has deteriorated to the point that the existing
roof or roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional roofing.
2. Where the existing roof covering is wood, slate, clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.
3. Where the existing roof has two or more applications of any type of roof covering.
4. For asphalt shingles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/507
Section P2603.5.1. Sewer depth. Insert for number in both locations: 12 inches (305 mm).
Section P3002.1. Piping within buildings. Drain, waste and vent (DWV) piping in buildings shall be as shown in tables
P3002.1(1) and P3002.1(2) except that galvanized wrought-iron or galvanized steel pipe shall not be used underground
and shall be maintained not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above ground. Allowance shall be made for the thermal
expansion and contraction of plastic piping.
TABLE P3002.1(1) ABOVE-GROUND DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPE
Material Standard
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters,
including schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid,
or composite wall
ASTM D 2661; ASTM F 628; ASTM F
1488; CSA B181.1
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; CISPI 301; ASTM A 888
Copper or copper-alloy pipe ASTM B 42; ASTM B 43; ASTM B 302
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K, L, M or DWV) ASTM B 75; ASTM B 88; ASTM B 251;
ASTM B 306
Galvanized steel pipe ASTM A 53
Polyolefin pipe CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid, or
composite wall
ASTM D 2665; ASTM F 891; CSA
B181.2; ASTM F 1488
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid,
or composite wall
ASTM D 2949; ASTM F 1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Types 304 and 316L ASME A 112.3.1
TABLE P3002.1(2) UNDERGROUND BUILDING DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPE
Pipe Standard
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters,
including schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid,
or composite wall
ASTM D 2661; ASTM F 628; ASTM F
1488; CSA B181.1
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/507
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; CISPI 301; ASTM A 888
Copper or copper alloy tubing (Type K, L, M or DWV) ASTM B 75; ASTM B 88; ASTM B 251;
ASTM B 306
Polyolefin pipe ASTM F 1412; CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid, or
composite wall
ASTM D 2665; ASTM F 891; ASTM F
1488; CSA B181.2
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid,
or composite wall
ASTM D 2949; ASTM F 1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Type 316L ASME A 112.3.1
Section P3002.2. Building sewer. Building sewer piping shall be as shown in table P3002.2. Forced main sewer piping
shall conform to one of the standards for ABS plastic pipe, copper or copper-alloy tubing, PVC plastic pipe or pressurerated
pipe listed in table P3002.2.
TABLE P3002.2 BUILDING SEWER PIPE
Material Standard
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters,
including schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid,
or composite wall
ASTM D 2661; ASTM F 628; ASTM F
1488
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; ASTM A 888; CISPI 301
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in sewer and drain
diameters, including SDR 42 (PS 20), PS35, SDR 35 (PS 45), PS50,
PS100, PS140, SDR 23.5 (PS 150) and PS200; with a solid, or composite
wall
ASTM F 1488; ASTM D 2751
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in sewer and drain diameters,
including PS 25, SDR 41 (PS 28), PS 35, SDR 35 (PS 46), PS 50, PS 100,
SDR 26 (PS 115), PS140 and PS 200; with a solid, or composite wall
ASTM F 891; ASTM F 1488; ASTM D
3034; CSA B182.2; CSA B182.4
Concrete pipe ASTM C 14; ASTM C 76; CSA A257.1M;
CSA A257.2M
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/507
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K or L) ASTM B 75; ASTM B 88; ASTM B 251
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe (SDR-PR) ASTM F 714
Polyolefin pipe ASTM F 1412; CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with solid, or
composite wall
ASTM D 2665; ASTM D 2949; ASTM D
3034; ASTM F 1412; CSA B182.2; CSA
B182.4
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid,
or composite wall
ASTM D 2949, ASTM F 1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Types 304 and 316L ASME A 112.3.1
Vitrified clay pipe ASTM C 425; ASTM C 700
Part VIII Electrical. Delete in entirety.
APPENDIX J. Existing buildings and structures. Adopted.
(Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-27), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance 17-3647 adopted 1/24/17)
Secs. 3.03.063–3.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. International Energy Conservation Code
Sec. 3.03.091 Adopted
(a) The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code, as written by the International Code Council, Inc., as
hereinafter amended, is specifically adopted as part of the building code of the city. The same is incorporated herein by
reference as if fully set forth at length. (Ordinance 17-3648 adopted 2/28/17)
(b) A copy of said International Energy Conservation Code shall be filed with the city secretary and a copy maintained
in the office of the chief building official of the city. All such copies are open to public inspection during business hours
of the offices where they are maintained, with amendments thereto. (Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-31), adopted 1/25/11)
Sec. 3.03.092 Amendments
The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section C101.1. Title. Insert “City of Plainview.”
Section 108.4. Failure to comply. Insert:
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons, who erects, installs, alters, or repairs work in violation of the
provisions of this article, or who fails to do any act required hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction hereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/507
“general penalty; continuing violations.” Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any of the terms or provisions
of this article by any corporation or association shall be subject to the penalty provided in this section.
(c) Revocation of licenses or certification. Conviction under the provisions of this section shall be deemed
just cause for the revocation of any certification, registration, or license which such person may have or hold
under the provisions of this section and examinations for reissue of such certification or license shall be at the
discretion of the board.
(d) Enforcement. The building official, the electrical inspector, and their assistants shall be empowered to
cause criminal charges to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the enforcement of this
article.
Section 109.1. Board of Appeals. Amend to read as follows: City of Plainview Building Trades and Fire Code Board of
Appeals. See article 3.02 of the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section C109.2. Delete in entirety.
Section C109.3. Delete in entirety.
(Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-32), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance 17-3648 adopted 2/28/17)
Secs. 3.03.093–3.03.120 Reserved
Division 5. International Existing Building Code
Sec. 3.03.121 Adopted
(a) The 2015 International Existing Building Code, as written by the International Code Council, Inc., as hereinafter
amended, is specifically adopted as part of the building code of the city. The same is incorporated herein by reference as
if fully set forth at length. (Ordinance 17-3648 adopted 2/28/17)
(b) A copy of said International Existing Building Code shall be filed with the city secretary and a copy maintained in
the office of the chief building official of the city. All such copies are open to public inspection during business hours of
the offices where they are maintained, with amendments thereto. (Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-36), adopted 1/25/11)
Sec. 3.03.122 Amendments
The 2015 International Existing Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Plainview.”
Section 112.1. Board of appeals. Amend to read as follows: City of Plainview Building Trades and Fire Code Board of
Appeals. See article 3.02 of the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section 112.2. Delete in entirety.
Section 112.3. Delete in entirety.
Section 706.1. General. Amend to read: Materials and methods of application used for recovering or replacing an
existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of chapter 15 of the 2015 International Building Code (IBC),
including but not limited to decking, flashing, and ventilation.
Exceptions:
1. Reroofing shall not be required to meet the minimum design slope requirement of one-quarter unit
vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in section 1507 of the 2015 International Building Code for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/507
roofs that provide positive drainage.
2. Recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall not be required to meet the requirement for
secondary (emergency overflow) drains or scuppers in section 1503.4 of the 2015 International Building
Code (IBC) for roofs that provide for positive drainage. For the purposes of this exception, existing
secondary drainage or scupper systems required in accordance with the IBC shall not be removed unless they
are replaced by secondary drains or scupper designed and installed in accordance with section 1503.4 of the
IBC.
Section 706.3. Recovering versus replacement. Amend to read: New roof coverings shall not be installed without first
removing all existing layers of roof coverings down to the roof deck where any of the following conditions occur:
1. Where the existing roof or roof covering is water-soaked or has deteriorated to the point that the existing
roof or roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional roofing.
2. Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.
3. Where the existing roof has two or more applications of any type of roof covering.
4. For asphalt shingles.
Section 1401.2. Applicability. Insert: 1957.
Appendix B–Supplementary accessibility requirements for existing buildings and facilities. Appendix B was added to
address accessibility in construction for items that are not typically enforceable through the traditional building code
enforcement process. Chapter 11 of the International Building Code (IBC) contains provisions that set forth
requirements for accessibility to buildings and their associated sites and facilities for people with physical disabilities.
Sections 410, 605, 705, 806, 906, 1006, 1012.1.4, 1012.8, 1105, 1204.1, 1205.15, 1401.2.5, and 1508 in the code address
accessibility provisions and alternatives permitted in existing buildings.
Section B101.1. General. Modify as follows:
Exception: Buildings regulated under the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and built in
accordance with TDLR-approved plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the TDLR, shall be deemed to be
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
Section B102.1. General. Modify as follows:
Exception: Buildings regulated under the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and built in
accordance with TDLR-approved plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the TDLR shall be deemed to be
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ordinance 11-3543, sec. I (6-37), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance 17-3648 adopted 2/28/17)
ARTICLE 3.04 ELECTRICITY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Scope
All electrical work installed within the city shall be installed in conformity with the provisions of this article, and it is
hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install any electrical work in violation of the
provisions of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 10-1)
Sec. 3.04.002 Administration and enforcement
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be vested in the city electrical inspector, who
will be under the administrative supervision of the building official of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 10-2)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/507
Sec. 3.04.003 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall be defined as herein stated. In the event of a dispute as to the
meaning on an application of any work, phrase, or descriptive term as used herein, a determination of meaning by the
building trades and fire code board of appeals shall be conclusive on all parties. For the purpose of this article, the
following words shall have the following meanings:
Board. The term “board” shall mean the building trades and fire code board of appeals.
Building official. The person charged with the administration of this article.
Direct supervision. The continual oversight and control of electrical apprentices by a licensed journeyman electrician or
a licensed master electrician, who shall be physically present at the jobsite or installation at all times any electrical work
is in progress. The term shall also mean the continual oversight and control of all journeyman electricians and electrical
apprentices by the master electrician, who shall personally direct day-to-day activities, work of the firm, prepare bids,
enter into agreements or sign contracts and manage the firm's financial affairs.
Electrical apprentice. An individual licensed as an apprentice who works under the direct supervision and orders of a
master electrician, a journeyman electrician, or a residential wireman, and who is registered with the city or state but
who has not yet passed a journeyman electrician examination.
Electrical contractor. A person or entity, licensed as an electrical contractor, that is in the business of performing
“electrical contracting” as defined by Texas Occupations Code, section 1305.002(5).
Electrical inspector. The duly appointed electrical inspector of the city and all duly appointed assistant electrical
inspectors.
Electrical installation. The installation of wiring devices or equipment for the distribution, transmission or utilization of
electrical energy.
Electrical maintenance work. The replacement or repair of existing electrical appurtenances, apparatus, equipment,
machinery, or controls used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on, outside, or attached to a building,
residence, structure, property, or premises. All replacements or repairs must be of the same rating and type as the
existing installation. Any replacement or repair that shall be made to bring such work in compliance with applicable
codes under Texas Occupations Code, chapter 1305. Electrical maintenance work does not include the installation of any
new electrical appurtenances, apparatus, equipment, machinery, or controls beyond the scope of any existing electrical
installation.
Electrical trade. A person shall be in the electrical trade if they install or contract to install, maintain, or repair, connect,
reconnect, service or maintain any wiring, fixtures or equipment used for the conducting of electricity for which a permit
may be required by this article.
Fixture. A unit which supports a means of illumination.
General supervision. Exercise of oversight by a master electrician on behalf of any electrical contractor, or electrical
sign contractor, or by a master sign electrician on behalf of an electrical sign contractor of performance by all classes of
electrical licensees of electrical work bearing responsibility for the work's compliance with applicable codes under Texas
Occupations Code, chapter 1305.
Journeyman electrician. A person who works for or under the supervision of or by the direction of a master electrician in
the electrical trade, has passed a journeyman electrician examination approved by the board or state, and is qualified as
provided in this article. Said journeyman electrician shall be physically present on the jobsite at all times electrical work
is in progress and shall maintain continual oversight and control of all electrical apprentices.
Master electrician. Any person who holds himself/herself out to the public to do electrical work or to contract to do any
or all kinds of electrical work stated in this article. A person who himself/herself or by the employment of journeyman
electricians, restricted residential wiremen and/or apprentices performs the work of installing wires, conduits, apparatus,
fixtures or other appliances for carrying or using electricity for light, heat, or other purposes whether the master
electrician contracts to do the work personally or through others and is licensed as is provided in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/507
Master sign electrician. Any person who holds himself/herself out to the public to contract for himself/herself or by the
employment of registered sign technicians and/or registered sign trainees to perform the work of manufacturing,
installing, connecting, reconnecting, or servicing of electric signs, or any cold cathode or neon gas tubing, inside or
outside, of whatever description or for any purpose and is licensed as provided in this article. This work shall not include
extension of or additions to an existing branch circuit.
Maintenance electrician. One who is a full time employee of a company or business and whose duty is to maintain
existing electrical installations, including all fixtures and appurtenances contained in a designated property building or
buildings either: (1) owned by his employer; or (2) operated under a maintenance contract by his employer. A person
holding this license shall not otherwise engage himself as a maintenance electrician on any buildings other than those
designated on the maintenance license.
National Electrical Code. The current edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) as approved by the National
Fire Protection Association and adopted by the city council.
Offer to perform. To make a written or oral proposal, to contract in writing or orally to perform electrical work or
electrical sign work, or to advertise in any form through any medium that a person or business entity is an electrical
contractor or electrical sign contractor, or that implies in any way that a person or business entity is available to contract
for or perform electrical work or electrical sign work.
On-site supervision. A licensed individual other than an electrical apprentice must exercise the supervision of electrical
work or electrical sign work. Continuous supervision of an electrical apprentice is not required, though the on-site
supervising licensee is responsible for review and inspection of the electrical apprentice's work to ensure compliance
with any applicable codes or standards.
Opening or outlet. The location where a ceiling light, bracket light, wall light, porch light, or a floodlight is to be
mounted: also, any electrical consuming opening or outlet.
Residential appliance. A unit of electrical equipment that is designed and installed in a dwelling by direct connection to
any existing electrical circuit to perform a specific function, such as a water heater, for example. The term does not
include general use equipment, such as an electric motor, for example, that is not designed for a specific function.
Residential appliance installer. An individual, licensed as a residential appliance installer, who on behalf of a residential
appliance installation contractor, performs electrical work that is limited to residential appliance installation as defined
by Texas Occupations Code, section 1305.002(12-e).
Residential appliance installation contractor. A person or entity licensed as a residential appliance installation
contractor, that is in the business of residential appliance installation as defined by Texas Occupations Code section
1305.002(12-d).
Residential wireman. An individual licensed as a residential wireman, who works under the general supervision of a
master electrician on behalf of an electrical contractor, or employing governmental entity, while performing electrical
work that is limited to electrical installations in single-family and multifamily dwellings not exceeding four stories, as
defined by Texas Occupations Code, section 1305.02(13).
Sign electrician journeyman. One skilled and experienced in the physical labor involved in electrical installations of
signs and who does or holds himself out as intending to do electrical installation and/or maintenance under the
supervision of a master sign electrician and who holds a license issued under the provisions of this article. This
definition does not include running lines or circuits from sign location to or into the building or load center.
Signs. Any physical device, panel, or installation attached to or located on a building or structure, used to display any
message or communicate any thought or idea and which uses electricity for its intended operation.
Window sign. Any tubing containing neon gas located or installed on the inside of a building to display any message or
communicate any thought or idea and which uses electrical current for its operation.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-3), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.004 Applicability
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/507
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any electrical installation or to make any alteration, repair or addition to an
existing electrical installation except as provided in this article. (2000 Code, sec. 10-4)
Sec. 3.04.005 Exemptions
(a) Traffic/signal work. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the fire, police or public safety installation, or
other similar installations installed and maintained by the city or installed under contract by a private installer for a
government agency.
(b) Franchises. The provisions of this article shall not apply to electric light, heat and power companies, telephone and
telegraph companies and cable television or other communication companies, operating under a city franchise or state or
federal laws in the installation, maintenance, removal or repair of wires or other equipment used in connection with their
business or plants.
(c) Manufacturers of electrical equipment. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit manufacturers of electrical
apparatus or equipment from carrying on reasonable electrical experiments with materials and products within the
confines of their own premises and all installations therein, provided further that the electrical inspector may require the
manufacturer to make whatever changes the inspector believes necessary for the protection of public life, welfare and
property.
(d) Street lighting. The provisions of this article shall not apply to installations in connection with the illumination of
public streets, alleys or parkways by the city, the state highway department, the public electric utility company or federal
highway agencies.
(e) Homeowner. Work not specifically regulated by a municipal ordinance that is performed in or on a dwelling by a
person who owns and resides in the dwelling.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-5), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.006 Penalty
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons, who installs, or causes to be installed, maintains or causes to be maintained,
electrical wiring, devices, or equipment used in connection with the installation of any/or maintenance of electrical
wiring, devices, and equipment in violation of the provisions of this article, or who fails to do any act required hereby,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009
of this code, “general penalty; continuing violations.”
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any of the terms or provisions of this
article by any corporation or association shall be subject to the penalty provided in this section.
(c) Revocation of licenses or certification. Conviction under the provisions of this article shall be deemed just cause
for the revocation of any certification, registration, or license which such person may have or hold under the provisions
of this article and examinations for reissue of such certification or license shall be at the discretion of the board.
(d) Enforcement. The building official, the electrical inspector, and their assistants shall be empowered to cause
criminal charges to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the enforcement of this article.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-6), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.007 Fees doubled if no license in force
(a) Where work for which a permit is required by this article is started or proceeded with, prior to applying for and
receiving a valid permit, the fee for the work as specified shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not
relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this article and in the execution of the work, nor from
any other penalties prescribed herein.
(b) Any work so started or proceeded with shall forthwith cease until such time as said double fee has been paid and a
permit granted except that for good cause shown the electrical inspector of the board may permit such work to continue.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-7), adopted 1/20/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/507
Sec. 3.04.008 Enforcement of chapter
The building official, electrical inspector, and their designated representative shall be empowered to compel the
suspension of any electrical sign work and/or electrical wiring being done in violation of this article. (Ordinance 11-
3541, sec. I (10-8), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.009 Present permits to continue in effect
All permits lawfully held at the time this article goes into effect shall continue until their date of expiration as if they had
been secured under the terms of this article. Such shall be governed by the terms of this article from and after the date it
becomes effective. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-181), adopted 1/20/11)
Secs. 3.04.010–3.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Electrical Inspector and Assistants
Sec. 3.04.031 Office created; appointments; salary
(a) Office created; assistant authorized. There is hereby created the office of the electrical inspector of the city, within
which may be assistant electrical inspectors.
(b) Appointment. The electrical inspector and the assistant electrical inspectors shall be appointed by the building
official with the approval of the city manager. The electrical inspector shall be under the administrative supervision of
the building official.
(c) Salary. The salaries of the electrical inspector and his assistants shall be fixed by the mayor and city council.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-21), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.032 Right of entry; identification
(a) Right of entry.
(1) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article or whenever
the building official, the electrical inspector, or their designated representative has reasonable cause to believe
that a condition exists in violation of the electrical code thus making such building or premises unsafe,
dangerous, or hazardous, said official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect
same or perform any duty imposed upon the electrical inspector by this article. If such building or premises is
occupied, there shall first be presented proper credentials and entry requested.
(2) If such building or premises is unoccupied, reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
(3) If entry is refused, the building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative shall
have recourse to any remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(4) When the building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative shall have obtained a
property inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any
other persons having charge, care, or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper
request is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein for the purpose of the inspection
and examination pursuant to this article.
(b) Identification. When on duty, the electrical inspector shall carry a means of identification furnished by the city and
shall show same upon the request of any person at the jobsite.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-22), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.033 Liability for damages
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/507
The building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative charged with the enforcement of this article,
acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render themselves personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or omission in the discharge of their
duties. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-23), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.034 Records; disposition of moneys received
(a) Required records. The electrical inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a written record of all of the following
which are required to be issued or performed under the provisions of this article.
(1) Permits.
(2) Licenses.
(3) Inspections.
(4) Condemnations.
(5) Disconnects of electrical installations resulting from condemnations.
(b) Moneys received. The electrical inspector shall turn over to the general fund of the city all moneys and payments
received by his office and from the board.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-24), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.035 Inspections generally
The electrical inspector shall:
(1) Inspect all electrical installations which shall include alterations, repairs and additions in compliance
with the provisions of this article;
(2) Make inspections of existing electrical installations when he reasonably believes they are unsafe,
improper, and constitute a hazard to life or property;
(3) All reports shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible code official. This code official is
authorized to require expert opinion, as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-25), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.036 Tags indicating approval or disapproval
(a) At the time of making the inspection the electrical inspector shall attach a green tag or card to an approved
installation and shall attach a red tag or card to a disapproved installation.
(b) It shall be a violation of this article to remove, deface, damage or mutilate a tag.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-26)
Sec. 3.04.037 Correction of unsafe, improper or unlawful installations
(a) Notice. The electrical inspector shall, upon determining that an unsafe, improper or unlawful electrical installation
exists, immediately notify the owner of the premises, his agent, or the electrician performing work in the premises. The
notice shall be in writing, specifying the exact deficiency existing, and shall allow the parties a reasonable time, as
determined by the electrical inspector, to correct the deficiency.
(b) Default (electricity ordered discontinued). If corrective action is not begun immediately or the deficiency is not
corrected within the prescribed time, the electrical inspector shall, if he believes public welfare endangered, in writing,
order the electrical supply to the premises discontinued.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/507
(2000 Code, sec. 10-27)
Sec. 3.04.038 Stop-work notice
(a) Authority to stop work. The electrical inspector shall stop the installation, alteration, operation or repair of any
electrical work on or in any consumer's premises when, in the inspector's opinion, the work is being done in a reckless,
careless or unsafe manner or in a manner which violates the provisions of this article.
(b) Posting of notice. Upon determining that particular work should stop, the electrical inspector shall post a notice to
that effect on the consumer's premises and thereafter no person shall proceed with the installation until the electrical
inspector has cancelled the stop-work notice.
(c) Effect of posting red tag or card. The posting of a red tag or card on the premises shall constitute a stop-work
notice, as stated on the red tag.
(d) Removing or damaging notice. It shall be a violation of this article to remove, deface, damage or mutilate, or
conceal the stop-work notice.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-28)
Secs. 3.04.039–3.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Appeals
Sec. 3.04.061 Board
See article 3.02 of this code for procedures regarding the building trades and fire code board of appeals. (Ordinance 11-
3541, sec. I (10-41), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.062 Notices; appeal from board's actions
(a) Notice of appeal. The board shall require notice of appeal in writing stating grounds for appeal and other such
matters. A person directly interested, affected, or aggrieved in decisions made by the director or the director's
subordinates pertaining to the administration of this article may request an appeal of such decision before the board. The
appellant and the building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative shall be given reasonable notice
of the time and place of appeal.
(b) Appeals from board's actions. Any action of the board may be appealed by a person directly interested, affected, or
aggrieved in the action by written petition filed with the board and the city secretary within twenty-one (21) days of such
action for a hearing before the city council.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-42), adopted 1/20/11)
Secs. 3.04.063–3.04.080 Reserved
Division 4. Licenses and Bonds
Sec. 3.04.081 General license requirements
(a) A person, firm, or corporation shall not perform work requiring an electrical license under title 8, Occupations
Code, chapter 1305. Except as provided by section 1305.003, a person, firm, or corporation may not perform or offer to
perform electrical work or residential appliance installation unless the person or business holds an appropriate license
issued or recognized under this article.
(b) A licensed applicant or licensee shall file with the city a completed certificate of insurance or other evidence
satisfactory to the city when applying for initial and renewal licenses and upon request of the city.
(c) Each successful applicant for an electrician's license shall maintain and furnish to the city the following general
liability and completed operation insurance:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/507
(1) In addition to all other insurance requirements, the master electrician of record, the master sign
electrician of record, and the firm for whom the master is holding the master's license or the holder of a
maintenance permit must continuously maintain on file with the building official evidence in the form of a
certificate that the holder of the master's license carries the following types and amounts of insurance: license
holders shall have bodily injury liability insurance of at least three hundred thousand and no/100 dollars
($300,000.00) and property damage liability insurance of at least three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for both general liability and completed operations insurance. This amount shall equal the
same amount as the state, should requirements be changed by the state.
(2) If the person holding a master's license severs the connection with a firm that is jointly covered by the
same insurance, a new certificate showing proper coverage will be required of both parties.
(3) The holder of any master's license is responsible for providing evidence of a new or renewal policy of
any required insurance coverage upon termination or renewal of any policy.
(d) Such applicant shall furnish the building official with a certificate of insurance on an industry standard certificate
of insurance form with a thirty-day cancellation notice.
(e) A licensed contractor shall furnish the name of the insurance carrier, policy number, name, address, and telephone
number of the insurance agent with whom the contracting company is insured to any customer who requests it.
(f) Insurance must be obtained from an admitted company or an eligible surplus lines carrier, as defined in the Texas
Insurance Code, chapter 981, or other insurance companies that are rated by A.M. Best Company as B+ or higher.
(g) The insurance policy shall include a provision that in the event such coverage is cancelled or reduced, the
insurance company shall notify the building official at least prior to such cancellation or reduction in coverage.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-61), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.082 Licensed contractor's responsibilities
(a) A person shall not engage in the business of electrical contracting without being licensed, insured, or bonded and
registered in the manner required by this section as a master electrician or as a licensed electrical contractor, licensed
electrical sign contractor, or a licensed residential appliance installation contractor and employing a master electrician in
accordance with subsection (d) below.
(b) Any person holding a master electrician's license shall not establish, maintain or advertise a place of business at
any location within the city under any name other than that registered with the electrical inspector; a person shall not
qualify more than one electrical business service or other entity at any one time.
(c) Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contracting shall make application for registration and
shall pay the $30.00 annual registration fee at the office of the electrical inspector. This registration must include the
name of the person holding the master electrician's license, the name of the business under which work is to be
performed, the street address, mailing address and permanent telephone number of the place of business, and the names
of all journeymen and electrical apprentices employed by the firm.
(d) No person or firm shall engage in the electrical contracting business within the city unless the business is qualified
by a master electrician who:
(1) Is an owner or full-time employee of the business;
(2) Directly supervises the daily operation of the business in an active manner;
(3) Is not engaged in or employed by any other electrical business at the same time;
(4) Is authorized to order employees of the business to correct defects, errors and deficiencies in electrical
work installed or performed by the business; and
(5) Shall be equally and jointly responsible with his employer for the business firm's complying with the
provisions of this article in its entirety, including payment for indebtedness to the city for permit fees,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/507
inspection fees and license fees.
(e) A licensed electrical contractor of any type shall display its name and license number on both sides of each vehicle
owned or operated by the business and used in the conduct of electrical work. Lettering shall be of a contrasting color
and at least two inches in height. The license number shall be preceded by the letters “TECL,” “TSCL” or “TICL.”
(f) All of a contractor's nonexempt electrical work shall be performed by licensed individuals. A contractor is
responsible for compliance with applicable codes for all such electrical work performed on its behalf.
(g) The contractor's name, address, telephone number, and license number shall appear on all proposals, invoices, and
written contracts proposed by the contractor. The following information: “Regulated by the Texas Department of
Licensing and Regulation, P.O. Box 12157, Austin, Texas 78711, 1-800-803-9202, 512-463-6599; website:
www.license.state.tx.us/complaints” shall be listed on invoices and written contracts.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-62), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.083 Permanent place of business
(a) Every master electrician and master sign electrician or licensed electrical contractor or any type licensed under this
article shall have and shall maintain a definite, permanent place of business. A permanent place of business shall consist
of a current street address, telephone number and mailing address at which the master electrician can be reached, and it
shall be furnished to the electrical inspector and updated as required.
(b) Every licensed electrical contractor of any type and its designated master electrician shall be responsible for
supervision of all licensees performing work on behalf of the contractor to assure compliance with applicable statutes
and rules, and in particular, standards of conduct set out in these rules.
(c) Journeyman electricians shall not supervise more than three electrical apprentices on any given jobsite at one time.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-63), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.084 Licenses not transferable
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person holding an electrician's license authorized to be issued under the provisions of
this article to transfer the same or allow the use of same directly or indirectly by any other person for the purpose of
doing electrical work or for obtaining a permit to do electrical work.
(b) A person who has been employed as a master electrician by another master electrician electrical contractor in order
to open a permanent place of business and qualify as an electrical firm within the city shall:
(1) Obtain and maintain a master electrician license from the state;
(2) Be equally and jointly responsible with his employer for the business firm's complying with the
provisions of this article in its entirety, including payment for indebtedness to the city for permit fees,
inspection fees, and license fees;
(3) Give written notice to the electrical inspector immediately whenever he leaves or is discharged from
the employ of a person who is required by this article to employ a master electrician.
(c) The permit privileges of the employer master electrician shall, without further order or action, be suspended
immediately upon termination or discharge of the employee master electrician, until the employment and qualifying of
another employee master electrician.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-64), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.085 Scope of maintenance electrician license
The maintenance electrician's license shall not be construed in any way to allow the holder thereof to install any new
circuit, outlet, or additions, or to perform any electrical work for which a permit is required, or to perform any work
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/507
required by this article to be performed by a master electrician, master sign electrician, journeyman electrician or
journeyman sign electrician. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-65), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.086 Location of work
Every holder of a maintenance electrician's license shall notify the electrical inspector immediately when such holder
makes any change in his employment, giving in such notice the name of his new employer and the location of the
premises in or on which he is to be employed to perform electrical maintenance work. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-
66), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.087 Scope of electrical apprentice license
(a) Possession of an apprentice license. Every apprentice electrician shall keep such license in his possession and on
his person at all times when engaged in work on any electrical installation project or site.
(b) Working under supervision. Every apprentice shall undertake electrical work only when engaged under the direct
supervision of a master electrician, master sign electrician, journeyman electrician or journeyman sign electrician. No
more than three (3) apprentice electricians shall be under the direct supervision of a licensed journeyman or master
electrician on any individual jobsite - a ratio of 3 apprentices to each journeyman or master electrician.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-67), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.088 Suspension or revocation of electrical licenses
(a) The board may request suspension of the license or registration of any class of electrician who has committed any
of the following:
(1) The practice of any fraud or deceit in obtaining a permit or registration;
(2) Intentionally violating any provision of this article;
(3) Any gross negligence, in competency or misconduct in the performance of electrical work within the
city.
(b) In considering charges under this section or section 3.04.006 of this article, the board shall proceed upon sworn
information furnished by an official of the city, or by some person having knowledge of an alleged violation in the
performance of electrical work. Such information shall be in writing and shall be duly verified by the person familiar
with the allegations made. The board, if it deems the information sufficient to support further action on its part, shall
issue an order setting the matter for hearing at a specified time and place and the secretary of the board, with the advice
and counsel of the city attorney, shall cause a copy of the board's order and of the information to be personally served
upon the electrician or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least fifteen (15) days before the date set for the
hearing.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-68), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.089 Procedures for conduct of suspension or revocation hearings
(a) Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the city official or aggrieved party shall be considered in the
hearing. In determining such charges, the board shall proceed upon the sworn information furnished by any person who
is of sound mind and legal age.
(b) Record. A record of the entire proceedings may be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent
recording determined to be appropriate by the board.
(c) Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing shall also be reported by a phonographic reporter if requested by any
party thereto. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of the
fee prescribed therefor. Such fees may be established by the board, but shall in no event be greater than the cost
involved.
(d) Continuances. The board may grant continuances for good cause.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/507
(e) Oaths; certification. In any proceedings under this article the board, or any board member, has the power to
administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts.
(f) Reasonable dispatch. The board and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any
matter before it. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives.
(g) Rules. The hearing need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
(1) Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
(2) Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any
direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over
objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
(3) Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on
which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence
of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over
objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
(4) Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
(5) Rights of parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others:
(A) To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
(B) To introduce documentary and physical evidence; to serve search warrants;
(C) To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
(D) To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called;
(E) To rebut the evidence against him;
(F) To represent himself or to be represented by anyone of his choice who is lawfully permitted to do
so;
(G) To subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, punish for contempt, require production of documents
and records relevant to the issues.
(6) Official notice.
(A) What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after
submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of
ordinances of the city or rules and regulations of the board [sic].
(B) Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed
and these matters shall be noted in the record, referred to therein, or appended thereto.
(C) Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on
request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of
authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the board.
(D) Inspection of the premises. The board may inspect any building or premises involved in the
appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that: (i) notice of such inspection shall be given to the
parties before the inspection is made; (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and (iii) the board shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material
facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or
explain the matters so stated by the board.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/507
(7) Hearing before the board itself. Where a contested case is heard before the board itself, no member
thereof who did not hear the evidence or has not read the entire record of the proceedings shall vote on or
take part in the decision.
(8) Form of decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of
the issues presented, and the action to be taken. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant
personally or sent to him by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(9) Effective date of decision. The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein.
(10) Any person who may feel himself/herself aggrieved by any action or decision of the board may, within
thirty (30) days after receiving the decision of the board, take recourse from said action or decision as
provided by the laws of the state. Such recourse shall not have the effect of suspending any decision of the
board unless the suspension is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(11) Any person whose rights, under an electrical license or registration, have been suspended or revoked
by the board shall not engage in or do electrical work during said term of the suspension or revocation.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-69), adopted 1/20/11)
Secs. 3.04.090–3.04.120 Reserved
Division 5. Permits and Inspections
Sec. 3.04.121 Permit required; exceptions
(a) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to begin any work of installing, erecting or altering material,
wiring, fixtures or other apparatus to be used for the utilization of electricity for light, heating or power in or on any
building or premises in the city without first securing a permit from the electrical inspector.
(b) Work for which permit not required. No permit shall be required for minor work such as repairing flush and snap
switches, replacing fuse or changing lamp sockets and receptacles. This article shall not be construed to require a permit
for maintenance work on the premises of a person regularly employing a maintenance electrician for that purpose.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-91)
Sec. 3.04.122 Application for permit; permit fees
Applications for permits, either by phone or in person by the contractor, must be secured prior to commencement of any
work. Contractors may pay in advance, or apply for an account to be paid once a month. Contractors will be billed
monthly. If an approved contractor fails to pay his/her account within 15 days after the date of the billing statement, no
permits can be issued to the contractor until the past-due account has been paid in full. Fees are as follows:
Electrical permits:
(1) New commercial or residential construction*: $0.04 per sq. ft.
(2) New construction, additions to existing buildings*: $0.04 per sq. ft.
(3) Minimum permit fee: $25.00.
(4) Alterations to existing buildings (minimum permit fee): $25.00.
(A) First 100 outlets: $0.40 each.
(B) Additional outlets over 100: $0.30 each.
(5) Altering or change-out of meter loop: $25.00.
(6) Construction meter loop: $25.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/507
(7) Sign connections: $25.00.
(8) Reinspection or red tag fee: $25.00.
(9) After-hours inspections: $25.00. After-hours inspections are between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. Monday through Friday and all day on weekends and city-recognized holidays.
(10) Any inspection not listed: $25.00.
*On any new construction, the building wiring, meter loop and construction meter loop are separate
permits.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-92)
Sec. 3.04.123 Issuance and contents of permits
(a) Permits are authorized to applicants when arrangements for payment of fees have been made, all license and bond
requirements of the code have been complied with, when the plans and specifications of the proposed electrical work
have been approved, and use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended when deemed necessary. The
applicant shall state the kind of work to be done and the address of the building where the work is to be done. The
building inspection personnel will issue a permit and such permit shall be without effect as to any work not therein
described or as to any place other than described:
(1) A homeowner shall apply for a permit and state that the electrical installation will be made in a singlefamily
dwelling in which he currently resides or will reside upon completion if the single unit is under
construction, that he will make the electrical installation himself accepting no help from outside parties, and
that he has not obtained a permit to make an electrical installation within the past two years. The homeowner
shall furnish such proof of ownership as the inspector may require.
(2) Permits issued to homeowners shall be valid only for work done at the residence occupied by the
homeowner at the time of permit issue. Permits for commercial buildings, leased or rented property, shall be
issued only to a master electrician.
(b) After first registering with the city and paying the registration fee, then further applications may be made verbally
by telephone by registered individuals with a valid charge account.
(c) An application for a permit shall be considered as permission from an authorized representative to inspect the
premises.
(d) Falsification of an application for a permit by a master electrician or a homeowner shall be justification for the
electrical inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to cancel a permit if one has been issued.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-93), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.124 Permits to be issued to master electrician; responsibility for work
Permits for electrical work shall be issued to a master electrician or his/her designated representative. The master
electrician whose name appears on the permit shall be responsible for all violations of the code that occur on such
project. (2000 Code, sec. 10-94)
Sec. 3.04.125 Approval of plans and specifications
The plans and specifications of the electrical work of all new buildings or buildings to be remodeled in which electrical
wires are to be installed will be submitted to the electrical inspector by the owner or architect for his approval before the
permit will be issued. All such plans shall specify the size of feeders and subfeeders and their length when there are
more than four (4) branch circuits. When, according to such plans and specifications, the electrical work specified
complies with the provisions of this article, the electrical inspector shall approve the plans and specifications therefor in
writing. If any changes are required by the electrical inspector, he shall attach a list of such requirements to the plans or
specifications. When such plans and specifications have been corrected, they shall be resubmitted for approval. (2000
Code, sec. 10-95)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/507
Sec. 3.04.126 Permit for temporary installations
(a) When a permit to install work of a temporary character, for a time to be specified in such permit, and not in any
case to exceed thirty (30) days, shall have been issued by the electrical inspector, strict compliance with the rules of
permanent work will not be exacted, provided the character of the work is entirely safe for the period designated in the
permit. No temporary work or alterations shall be allowed on live circuits unless protected by a proper switch and fuse.
(b) Should the temporary electrical installation be needed beyond the thirty-day period, subsequent permits may be
issued. An inspection shall be made before the issuance of any subsequent permit, and each subsequent permit shall be
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-96)
Sec. 3.04.127 Ready-built homes
Where buildings are constructed in lumberyards or on premises within the city limits, other than where the building is on
a permanent foundation, and where such building is to be moved into and located within the city limits, wiring
installation shall be made by a bonded and licensed master electrician in conformity with this article, and permits shall
be applied for. (2000 Code, sec. 10-97)
Sec. 3.04.128 Changing or replacing fixtures
After the original inspection of fixtures, if fixtures are changed or replaced with other fixtures where circuit wires
without change of size are run directly into the receptacle of the changed or replaced fixtures, no fixture permit or
inspection shall be required, provided such work is done by persons licensed under this article to do so. However, if such
change or replaced fixtures require a change in the size of wire, a permit and inspection shall be required. (2000 Code,
sec. 10-98)
Sec. 3.04.129 Emergency work
In case of emergency necessitating immediate new wiring or repairs to electrical wiring at a time when the office of the
electrical inspector is closed, the work may be carried out without first obtaining a permit. Thereafter, a written
application shall be submitted to the electrical inspector for a permit during the next day that such office is open. Before
the permit shall be issued, all requirements for its issuance must be complied with. (2000 Code, sec. 10-99)
Sec. 3.04.130 Expiration of permit
(a) Every permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the installation authorized by such permit is
not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of such permit or if the installation authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned, at any time after the work is commenced, for a period of sixty (60) days.
(b) Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained. The fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) the
amount paid for the original permit.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-100)
Sec. 3.04.131 Surrender of unused permit
A master electrician or homeowner who has obtained an electrical permit shall surrender said permit to the electrical
inspector within sixty (60) days of the issuing date of the permit to be eligible for a refund of the permit fee, provided no
work has begun on the electrical installation. (2000 Code, sec. 10-101)
Sec. 3.04.132 Rough-in inspection
(a) The licensed master electrician or homeowner shall be responsible for notification to the electrical inspector when
the electrical installation is ready for rough-in inspection. An electrical installation shall be considered ready for roughin
inspection at such time that all raceways, panel board cabinets, service equipment, outlet boxes, junction boxes,
conductors and conductor splices are installed and before concealment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/507
(b) There shall be a rough-in inspection and a final inspection on such electrical installation. The owner whose
installation is ready for inspection shall allow the electrical inspector's office twenty-four (24) hours, Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays recognized by the city excepted, after notification to inspect before proceeding to work on the electrical
installation.
(c) For minor extensions and additions, on which in the judgment of the electrical inspector adequate inspection is
possible after completion of the work, a rough-in inspection will not be required.
(d) The licensed master electrician or homeowner shall be responsible for notifying the electrical inspector on
completion of an electrical installation, and requesting a final inspection. A final inspection shall be made before a
certification of compliance is given.
(e) A certification of compliance shall be obtained on every electrical installation before the electrical installation is
tied to the power supply of an existing installation or to the power company service lines.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-102)
Sec. 3.04.133 Final inspection
Upon application of the master electrician or his authorized representative in charge of the project, the electrical
inspector shall make a final inspection of the installation, and, if such work is found to comply with this article, a
certificate of inspection shall be issued stating that the work has been done according to the provisions of this article and
the rules governing the respective class to which it belongs. Such certificate shall not relieve the master electrician of
responsibility for any defective work that may have been concealed or escaped the notice of the electrical inspector.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-103)
Sec. 3.04.134 Red, green and yellow inspection tags
(a) At the completion of the initial or rough-in inspection, the electrical inspector or his deputy shall, if such
installation is approved, cause a green “approval” tag to be affixed to a visible and accessible point on the electrical work
approved. If such inspector determines that such installation is not acceptable, he shall affix to such electrical work, a red
“violation” tag which shall have printed thereon in substance, a warning that the work or installation will not pass
inspection, and that it is a violation of city ordinances to conceal or continue any of the electrical work until the
installation is reinspected and approved. If, upon reinspection, the violation has been satisfactorily corrected, the
electrical inspector shall then cause the red “violation” tag to be removed and the green “approval” tag to be affixed in
its place. The same process shall be followed upon the final inspection, with a red “violation” tag to be affixed if the
installation is not approved. Approval on final inspection, or final reinspection, shall be denoted by placing a green
“approval” tag on the approved installation. Whenever a red “violation” tag is affixed on the installation, at either the
rough-in or final inspection, the electrical inspector shall note on the back of such tag the precise violation involved and
such other factual information as the electrical inspector may feel necessary to inform the master electrician of the
specific items that need to be corrected. A yellow tag may also be used to note minor corrections, requiring a
reinspection to be called for before proceeding with the work, whenever noted on the tag.
(b) No person, firm or corporation engaged in any work at the building site shall ever cause, allow or suffer electrical
work to be covered over unless same bears an inspection tag showing final approval, nor shall any red, green, or yellow
inspection tag be affixed to any electrical work by anyone other than the city's electrical inspector or his deputies.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy or deface a red, yellow or green tag, or for contractor or any
other person to conceal any wiring or conduit which has not been approved as indicated by the presence of the inspection
tag. The electrical inspector shall have the authority to require any person, firm or corporation to uncover any wiring or
electrical equipment which has been concealed without the knowledge or permission of the electrical inspector.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-104), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.135 Inspections
The building official or his/her designee shall make all of the required inspections. All reports shall be in writing and be
certified by a responsible code official. The building official is authorized to require expert opinion, as deemed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/507
necessary, to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, at no expense to this jurisdiction. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I
(10-105), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.136 Service of notice
If the person to whom any order or notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this article cannot be found after
reasonable search has been made for him, then such order or notices may be served by posting same in a conspicuous
place upon the premises occupied by him or where the defects recited in the order or notice are alleged to exist, or on the
premises which may be deemed unsafe or dangerous. Such service shall be equivalent to personal service of such order
or notice. Any order to comply with the terms of this article or other notice shall be sent in a sealed envelope, certified
mail, return receipt requested with postage prepaid and directed to the last known address of the electrician, owner,
lessee, or occupant of the premises where the defects recited in the order are alleged to exist, and shall be equivalent to
the personal service of such order. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-106), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.137 Payment of fees
All permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city before the issuance of a permit and before any work is started.
Fees shall be as provided for by the mayor and city council and as contained in section 3.04.122. (2000 Code, sec. 10-
107; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.138 Double fee when work commenced without permit
Where work for which an electrical permit is required by this article is started or proceeded with prior to applying for
and paying for said permit, the permit fee shall be doubled. This section shall not apply to emergency work done in
accordance with section 3.04.129 of this article or to homeowners who apply for the required permit within seventy-two
(72) hours of starting said work. (2000 Code, sec. 10-108)
Sec. 3.04.139 Fee exceptions
No exemptions. (2000 Code, sec. 10-109)
Secs. 3.04.140–3.04.160 Reserved
Division 6. Electrical Code and Installation Regulations
Sec. 3.04.161 Electrical code adopted
All installation hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the city shall be done in first class workmanlike manner
in accordance with the 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the National Fire Protection
Association, and said National Electrical Code is made a part of this article, with the additions and deviations therefrom
contained in this code. (Ordinance 17-3650, sec. I, adopted 3/28/17)
Charter reference–Adoption of code of technical regulations, sec. 2.15.
State law reference–National Electrical Code adopted as municipal residential and commercial electrical code, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 214.214.
Sec. 3.04.162 Minimum size wire
Nothing less than No. 12 AWG copper wire will be permitted within the corporate limits of the city, with the following
exceptions:
(1) That ground wire in nonmetallic cable shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code;
(2) For special circuits such as controls, public address systems, annunciators and signals, ordinary switch
legs for lighting systems will not be construed as control wiring;
(3) No. 2 or greater aluminum wire may be used in commercial wiring provided it is installed in
accordance with the National Electrical Code;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/507
(4) No. 4/0 aluminum wire may be used in residential wiring provided it is installed in accordance with the
National Electrical Code.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-122), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.163 Wiring and meters in townhouses, apartments and condominiums
(a) Wiring in townhouse or rowhouse units. In townhouse or rowhouse units separated by a two-hour firewall meeting
building code requirements, romex wiring methods may be used. All electrical wiring in common or party walls is to be
placed in conduit. Electrical outlets, boxes and fixtures installed in common walls shall not be less than eighteen (18)
inches apart horizontally or vertically. (2000 Code, sec. 10-123; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Wiring in apartment buildings. Apartment buildings of more than four (4) dwelling units shall have all wiring
encased in approved raceways.
(c) Meters in apartment houses and condominiums. Apartment houses of more than five (5) individual dwelling units
and residential condominiums shall be provided with individual metering devices to each dwelling unit in accordance
with regulations of the state public utility commission and state statutes.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-123)
Sec. 3.04.164 Use of lamp cord
The use of ordinary twisted-pair cotton-covered lamp cord type C will not be approved for use on drop lights, pendants
or portable lamps, but reinforced or approved portable cords no smaller than no. 16 AWG shall be used. (2000 Code, sec.
10-125)
Sec. 3.04.165 Wiring in bathrooms, kitchens or laundry rooms
All lights in bathrooms, kitchens or laundry rooms shall be controlled by wall switches, located where they cannot be
readily reached from a bathtub, sink lavatory, or shower whenever possible to do so. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-
126), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.166 Panel boards
All panels must be large enough to accommodate the present load requirements and have at least two spare circuits for
future use. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-127), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.167 Window unit refrigeration coolers
Window unit refrigeration coolers of one thousand (1,000) watts or more must be wired on separate circuits from any
other appliance or lighting circuits with the proper size wire and fuses or circuit breakers for their load requirements.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-128)
Sec. 3.04.168 Change in location or use of building; conduit installation from panel
(a) Change in location. Should any residence or building be moved from one location to another and should the wiring
be nonconforming to the new location, the residence or building shall be rewired.
(b) Change in use. Should the occupancy of a residence be changed entirely from residential to another use, the wiring
shall be made to conform to the requirements of the new use.
(c) Conduit installation from panel. A one-inch empty conduit shall be installed from the panel to the attic or from the
panel to below the first floor to every new or completely remodeled installation. When installed from the panel to the
attic, the conduit shall be extended to a point providing thirty (30) inches of clearance between ceiling joist and rafters
when possible.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-129)
Sec. 3.04.169 Moving meter from inside to outside location
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/507
When meters are moved from an inside to an outside location in existing construction, metal raceways will not be
required if the fused panel or circuit breakers are also moved to the outside and the existing service conductors from the
old panel locations are used as branch circuit conductors from the new to the old panel or switch, or if a fused switch or
breaker is installed outside to protect existing feeders or the existing panel or breaker. (2000 Code, sec. 10-130)
Sec. 3.04.170 Metal raceways required; exceptions
(a) All installations hereafter and all installations made in all buildings subject to excess moisture and gases, all grain
elevators and buildings where hay and grain are stored or kept, and all 3-phase installations shall have all wiring encased
in metal raceways.
(b) Exception: Schedule 40 or 80 PVC may be used as an underground conduit when buried in the earth at a minimum
depth of eighteen inches (18") measured from the top of the conduit (1987 NEC 300-5). PVC shall not be used as a
general raceway in open air.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-131)
Sec. 3.04.171 Gasoline service stations, grain storage buildings, and buildings subject to excess moisture and
gases
(a) All installations made in service stations must be installed in metallic raceways with the proper types of explosionproof
fittings, boxes, etc. Separate runs of conduit will be required for all gasoline pump installations, and no separate
lighting or sign circuits will be permitted in these conduits.
(b) All installations made on all buildings subject to excess moisture and gases and all grain elevator or grain storage
buildings must be installed in metallic raceways with explosion-proof or dust-tight boxes and fittings as required by the
National Electrical Code.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-132)
Sec. 3.04.172 Neon border lighting transformers
Transformers which supply current to neon border lighting shall be enclosed in a metal box with a weatherproof lid and
with working space sufficient to install or to remove the transformers with their wires and appurtenances. (2000 Code,
sec. 10-134)
Sec. 3.04.173 Exit lighting for places of public assembly
(a) “Place of assembly” defined. Exit lighting shall be provided in all places of assembly. Places of assembly include,
but are not limited to, all buildings or portions of buildings used for gathering together fifty (50) or more persons in
commercial places of assembly and one hundred (100) or more persons in noncommercial places of assembly.
(b) “Exit” defined. An exit is a continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way, and shall include
intervening doors, doorways, corridors, exterior exit balconies, ramps, stairways, smoke-proof enclosures, horizontal
exits, exit passageways, exit courts and yards.
(c) Location of exit signs. Exit lights shall be placed at all required exits and at any other points in the building to
indicate clearly the direction of egress.
(d) Design. Each exit light fixture shall be designed with two (2) lamp holders.
(e) Required wattage. Exit lamps shall be not less than fifteen (15) watts nor more than twenty-five (25) watts. The
total wattage of exit light lamps per circuit shall not be more than one thousand six hundred and fifty (1,650) watts.
(f) Lettering and color. Every exit sign shall have the word “EXIT” in plainly legible letters not less than six (6)
inches high with the principal strokes of letters not less than three-fourth (3/4) inch wide. The glass shall be red and
white or green and white.
(g) Service and wiring. The service for the exit light system shall be ahead of the main line fuses. The exit lighting
system shall be kept entirely independent of all other wiring systems and equipment, and shall not enter the same
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/507
raceway or cabinets of other systems except in cases of automatic transfer switches.
(h) Switch. Automatic transfer switches shall be the only switching devices permitted in the exit lighting system. The
automatic transfer switch shall be accessible only to authorized personnel and shall be controlled from one point only.
(i) Permits and inspections. Permits for installation, addition, alteration or erection of emergency lighting systems or
exit lighting systems shall be applied for and plans approved before any work is begun. Floor plans, occupancy and
occupancy loads or other essential information shall be submitted with the application to aid in determining compliance
with this division. A final inspection of emergency lighting systems or exit lighting systems shall be made and the
installation approved before the building or structure is placed in use.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-135)
Sec. 3.04.174 Service entrance and service drops
(a) All metal; extent. An all-metal service entrance, complete with raintight entrance equipment, from the point of
contact with the power company service drop conductors to the distribution panel and to all sub-panels shall be used.
S.E. cable or other similar cables will not be accepted for service entrance use, except with the prior approval of the
electrical inspector.
(b) Conductors; clearance. Service drop conductors to buildings may not be installed with less than ten (10) feet
clearance from ground, floor, platform or projection from which they may be reached. Where the point of entry to the
building does not meet this requirement, then an approved bracket or method of support to obtain this clearance shall be
installed. If a mast is used, the minimum requirement is two-inch rigid steel conduit. In mast installations, the point of
attachment for the service cable may be eighteen (18) inches above the roof, under certain conditions. See: National
Electrical Code.
(c) Disconnecting switches. All disconnecting switches set on the exterior of buildings shall be equipped with dead
front panel.
(d) Size of conductors; certain residences. Minimum size of meter base and conductors for residential and commercial
uses shall be rated 100 amp, and minimum size conductors shall be No. 4 copper or No. 2 aluminum from the point of
the service entrance to main circuit breaker panel.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-136), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.175 Temporary installations
(a) Purposes. The electrical inspector is hereby authorized to issue special temporary permits for the use of MC,
nonmetallic cable, or armored cable, for temporary installations in areas where metal raceways are required.
(b) Exact location and duration. Such permits shall state the exact location and duration thereof. The length of time for
a temporary permit shall be determined by the electrical inspector.
(c) Use discontinued on expiration. Upon the expiration of a temporary permit, the holder thereof shall immediately
discontinue the use of the temporary installation. All temporary wiring installed must be removed.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-138), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.176 Number and location of outlets
(a) Dwelling-type occupancies. In every kitchen, family room, dining room, breakfast room, living room, parlor,
library, den, sun room, bedroom, recreation room, or similar room, receptacle outlets shall be installed so that no point
along the floor line in any wall space is more than six (6) feet, measured horizontally, from an outlet in that space,
including any wall space two (2) feet or more in width and the wall space occupied by sliding panels in exterior walls.
The wall space afforded by fixed room dividers, such as freestanding bar-type counters, shall be included in the six-foot
measurement.
(1) In the kitchen and dining areas, a receptacle outlet shall be installed at each counter space wider than
twelve (12) inches. Countertop spaces separated by range tops, refrigerators, or sinks shall be considered as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/507
separate countertop spaces. Receptacles rendered inaccessible by the installation of stationary appliances
shall not be considered as these required outlets.
(2) Receptacle outlets shall, insofar as practicable, be spaced equal distances apart. Receptacle outlets in
floors shall not be counted as part of the required number of receptacle outlets unless located close to the
wall.
(3) At least one GFCI wall receptacle outlet shall be installed in the bathroom adjacent to the basin
location.
(4) For a one-family dwelling, at least one receptacle outlet shall be installed outdoors.
(5) At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed in each basement and attached GFCI.
(6) At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed for the laundry.
(A) Exception no. 1: In a dwelling unit that is an apartment or living area in a multifamily building
where laundry facilities are provided on the premises that are available to all building occupants, a
laundry receptacle shall not be required.
(B) Exception no. 2: In other than single-family dwellings where laundry facilities are not to be
installed or permitted, a laundry receptacle shall not be required.
(C) Exception no. 3: In a dwelling that is a unit in a hotel, motel, motor court or motor hotel, a
laundry receptacle shall not be required.
(7) As used in this section, a “wall space” shall be considered a wall, unbroken along the floor line by
doorways, fireplaces and similar openings. Each wall space, two (2) or more feet wide, shall be treated
individually and separately from other wall spaces within the room. A wall space shall be permitted to
include two (2) or more walls of a room (around corners) where unbroken at the floor line. The purpose of
this requirement is to minimize the use of cords across doorways, fireplaces and similar openings.
(8) The receptacle outlets required by this section shall be in addition to any receptacle that is part of any
lighting fixture or appliance, located within cabinets or cupboards, or located over five and one-half (5-1/2)
feet above the floor.
(b) Hotels, motels and similar occupancies. Guestrooms in hotels, motels and similar occupancies shall have
receptacles installed in accordance with dwelling-type occupancy. (See subsection (a) of this section.)
(c) Ground fault circuit interrupters.
(1) All 125 volt, 15 and 25 ampere receptacles installed in bathrooms shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter (GFCI) protection.
(2) All 125 volt, 15 and 20 ampere receptacles installed in residential garages shall have ground fault
circuit interrupter protection except receptacles for appliances occupying dedicated spaces which are cord
and plug connect and receptacles that are not readily accessible.
(3) All 125 volt, 15 and 20 ampere outdoor receptacles shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection
except receptacles installed in excess of six feet six inches (6' 6") of direct ground level. All 125 volt, 15 and
20 ampere receptacles installed in bathrooms shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. At least
one 125 volt, 15 or 20 ampere ground fault circuit interrupter receptacle shall be installed in basements, and it
shall be identified.
(4) All 125 volt, 15 and 20 ampere receptacles installed within six feet (6') of the kitchen sink above
countertop surfaces shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
(d) Commercial installations. For commercial installations, not over one thousand six hundred and fifty (1650) watts
per circuit shall be installed. Outlets for heavy-duty lamp holders shall be rated at not less than five hundred watts per
opening and other outlets shall be rated not less than three hundred watts. In no case shall the wattage exceed more than
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/507
eighty percent of the rated current-carrying capacity of the conductors used. Special purpose outlets, where load
requirements are known, shall be wired as outlined in the National Electrical Code for the equipment to be used.
Receptacle outlets shall be limited to five per circuit for each ten feet, regardless of the number of receptacles, unless the
load requirements are known to be greater than one thousand six hundred fifty watts.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-139)
Sec. 3.04.177 Raceways
(a) Steel tubing, E.M.T. or thin wall conduit. Steel tubing, E.M.T. or thin wall conduit will be approved, when
National Electrical Code approved watertight fittings are used, for burial in concrete or masonry, but will not be
approved for burial in earth fill, such as laid beneath slabs in dirt, caliche, etc.
(b) Direct burial cables. When cable (approved for such installations) are buried in dirt or earth fills, they shall be
buried at a minimum depth from the finished surface of at least twenty-four (24) inches. (For other installations see table
300.5 2008 NEC.)
(c) Rigid nonmetallic conduit. Gray schedule 40 PVC may be used as an underground conduit when buried in the
earth at a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches measured from the top of the conduit. (Table 300.5 2008 NEC)
Schedule 80 PVC may be used to penetrate a concrete slab or footing. A separate continuous grounding conductor shall
be provided when using a nonmetallic raceway as provided in this section. PVC shall not be used as a general use
raceway in open air.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-140), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.178 Fire damage
(a) Inspection of premises. Where, in the opinion of the fire marshal or electrical inspector, a fire originated due to
faulty electrical wiring, overloading of wiring or equipment or any unauthorized electrical installation, it shall be the
duty of the electrical inspector to inspect the premises involved.
(b) Reconnection of service when lines cut for firefighting. Where lines or electrical services have been cut in the
firefighting process, no electrical service shall be reinstated or reconnected until the premises conform to the provisions
of this article.
(c) Authority to disconnect service where hazardous conditions exist. Where the lines have not been cut in the
firefighting process, and the fire marshal or electrical inspector deems such premises to be dangerous or hazardous to life
and property, he shall order the electrical service to be disconnected immediately and remain disconnected until such
defects have been corrected to the satisfaction of the electrical inspector.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-141)
Sec. 3.04.179 Fluorescent fixtures
(a) Wiring generally. When fluorescent strip lighting or multi-tube fixtures of any type are installed end to end, no
wiring except the circuits supplying current to the fixtures may be installed, using fixtures for wireways.
(b) Number of circuits. A maximum of three (3) circuits shall be permitted in such installation.
(c) Insulation temperature rating. Wire used through fixture raceways must have an insulation temperature rating of at
least seventy-five (75) degrees centigrade or one hundred and sixty-five (165) degrees Fahrenheit.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-142)
Sec. 3.04.180 Recessed fixtures
Recessed lighting fixtures for incandescent lamps not equipped with attached splice boxes must be connected to a pull
box set especially for such fixture with asbestos covered or other approved wire to withstand up to one hundred and fifty
(150) degrees centigrade. Outlet boxes to be set at least twelve (12) inches from fixture and connection to fixture with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/507
flexible metal conduit must be at least four (4) feet in length and not exceeding six (6) feet. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I
(10-143), adopted 1/20/11)
Secs. 3.04.181–3.04.210 Reserved
Division 7. Offenses and Penalties
Sec. 3.04.211 Doing electrical work without license
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to do, or undertake to do, any electrical work within the corporate limits of the
city unless licensed under the provisions of this article, except where such person is expressly exempted from the
licensing provisions of this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any citation in any manner other than as
provided by law.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-151), adopted 1/20/11)
Sec. 3.04.212 Doing work not covered by license; false claims regarding compliance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any licensed electrician to perform or hold himself out as being able to perform any type or
class of electrical work not expressly included under coverage of his license.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to advertise or hold out or to state to the public or to any
customer, either directly or indirectly, that any electrical work or installation complies with the city electrical code unless
such work has in fact been inspected and approved by the city electrical inspector.
(2000 Code, sec. 10-152)
Sec. 3.04.213 Allowing unlicensed electrician to work at jobsite
It shall be unlawful for any licensed electrician to allow any unlicensed electrician or unregistered apprentice to work at
any jobsite or electrical installation project under his control or supervision. (2000 Code, sec. 10-153)
Sec. 3.04.214 Violations
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons who installs or causes to be installed, maintains or causes to be maintained, electric
wiring, devices, or equipment used in connection with the installation of and/or maintenance of electric wiring, devices,
and equipment in violation of the provisions of this article, or who fails to do any act required hereby shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009, of this code.
Each and every day of continuance thereof shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any terms or provisions of this article by
any corporation or association shall subject officers and agents of such corporation or association to the penalty provided
in this section.
(c) Criminal charges. The building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative is empowered to
cause criminal charges to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the enforcement of this article.
(Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-154), adopted 1/20/11)
Secs. 3.04.215–3.04.240 Reserved
Division 8. Search Warrants
Sec. 3.04.241 Procedures
See article 1.09 of this code. (Ordinance 11-3541, sec. I (10-161), adopted 1/20/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/507
ARTICLE 3.05 PLUMBING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.05.001 State law adopted; administration and enforcement
(a) Before any person shall do any work or make any connections with the sewer system or the gas system in the city,
or do any plumbing work connected or intended to be connected with the sewer or gas system, he shall be licensed as
provided in the Plumbing License Law, as amended, the same being V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1301.
(b) The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be vested in the city plumbing inspector,
who will be under the supervision of the building official of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 20-1)
State law references–Authority to appoint plumbing inspector, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.011; Plumbing License Law,
V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1301.
Sec. 3.05.002 Title; compliance
(a) This article shall be known as the plumbing ordinance of the city, and may be cited as such.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, copartnership or corporation to engage in the business
of plumbing, or perform any plumbing as defined in this article, without first having procured the necessary licenses and
permits as hereinafter provided for, and all plumbing, plumbing work and workmanship and materials shall meet the
requirements of this article and shall pass all inspections required in this article in regard to the work done.
(2000 Code, sec. 20-11)
Sec. 3.05.003 Purpose
For the protection and preservation of life and the public health, safety, property and the general welfare of the people,
the following provisions are enacted relating to the installation, alteration or repair of pipes, fittings, and fixtures for
water, sewage and natural gas in all buildings and structures and on all property now erected or to be erected, changed,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered in the city and outside the city if same be connected to either the city
water, gas or sewage systems. The intent and purpose of this article is to regulate the construction, erection, enlargement,
alteration, maintenance or repair of all piping, fittings, fixtures, etc., used for the conduction of water, sewage and
natural gas in or on and about any and all premises in the city and outside the boundaries of the city, if same be
connected to either the city water, gas or sewage systems. (2000 Code, sec. 20-21)
Sec. 3.05.004 Area of applicability
This article shall apply to all plumbing as herein defined within the boundaries of the city. Any plumbing outside the
boundaries of the city connecting to either the city water or sewage system shall meet all the requirements of this article
as to methods of installation and materials and shall be inspected by the city plumbing inspector. (2000 Code, sec. 20-31)
Sec. 3.05.005 Exclusions
This article shall not apply to that work done by authorized employees of the city in the laying of city water mains and
services and city sewer mains and services, nor to the installation of gas distributing mains and services in the streets and
alleys by authorized employees of any gas distributing company. (2000 Code, sec. 20-32)
Sec. 3.05.006 Definitions
Definitions pertaining to plumbing are located in title 8, Occupations Code, chapter 1301, Plumbers (effective
September 1, 2003). (Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-41), adopted 1/25/11)
Secs. 3.05.007–3.05.030 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/507
Division 2. License
Sec. 3.05.031 Required
All persons who engage in or work at the actual installation, alteration, repair and renovating of plumbing shall posses
the appropriate license in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Law License. (Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-
51), adopted 1/25/11)
Secs. 3.05.032–3.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Plumbing Appeals and Advisory Board
Sec. 3.05.061 Procedures
See article 3.02 of this code for procedures regarding the building trades and fire code board of appeals. (Ordinance 11-
3542, sec. II (20-81), adopted 1/25/11)
Sec. 3.05.062 Appeals
(a) Notice of appeal. The board shall require notice of appeal in writing stating grounds for appeal and other such
matters. A person directly interested, affected, or aggrieved in decisions made by the director or the director's
subordinates pertaining to the administration of this article may request an appeal of such decision before the board. The
appellant and the building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative shall be given reasonable notice
of the time and place of appeal.
(b) Appeals from board's actions. Any action of the board may be appealed by a person directly interested, affected, or
aggrieved in the action by written petition filed with the board and the city secretary within twenty-one (21) days of such
action for a hearing before the city council.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-82), adopted 1/25/11)
Secs. 3.05.063–3.05.080 Reserved
Division 4. Permits, Fees and Inspections
Sec. 3.05.081 Transfer of permit
Each permit issued under this code shall be personal to the permittee. No such permit shall be assigned or transferred to
another person and no person shall permit another person to obtain a permit in his name, or permit any plumbing or
gasfitting work to be performed under his permit by any person other than the person authorized to do the same. (2000
Code, sec. 20-96)
Sec. 3.05.082 Making false statement to obtain permit; bad faith or unreasonable delay in performing work
Any person who shall willfully make any false statement in order to obtain a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to the penalty provided herein. Bad faith or unreasonable delay in the performance of plumbing work shall
be deemed a sufficient reason for subjecting the plumber so offending to a suspension of the permit, and no further
permit shall be issued until such act of bad faith or unreasonable delay has been corrected. (2000 Code, sec. 20-97)
Sec. 3.05.083 Fees
Applications for permits either by phone or in person by the contractor must be secured prior to commencement of any
work. Contractors may pay in advance or apply for an account to be paid once a month. Contractors will be billed
monthly. If an approved contractor fails to pay their accounts within 15 days after the date of the billing statement, no
permits can be issued to the contractor until the past due account has been paid in full. Fees are as follows:
(1) New commercial or residential construction:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/507
(A) Drain and vent system: $0.04 sq. ft.
(B) Water system: $0.04 sq. ft.
(C) Gas system: $0.04 sq. ft.
(2) New construction additions to existing buildings:
(A) Drain and vent system: $0.04 sq. ft.
(B) Water system: $0.04 sq. ft.
(C) Gas system: $0.04 sq. ft.
(3) Minimum permit fee: $25.00.
(4) Alterations to existing buildings: $5.00 ea. fix. or $25.00 min.
(5) Sewer line or tap (repair or replace): $25.00.
(6) Gas piping system (repair or replace): $25.00.
(7) Water service (repair or replace): $25.00.
(8) Lawn irrigation system (includes backflow device): $25.00.
(9) Backflow installation: $25.00.
(10) Water heater: $ 5.00.
(11) Reinspection or red tag fee: $25.00.
(12) After-hours inspections: $25.00. After-hours inspections are between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. Monday through Friday and all day on weekends and city-recognized holidays.
(13) Any inspection not listed: $25.00.
(14) Minimum permit fee is $90.00 for the first 75 heads plus $0.50 per head thereafter.
(2000 Code, sec. 20-99; Ordinance 09-3512, sec. III (20-99), adopted 3/10/09)
Secs. 3.05.084–3.05.120 Reserved
Division 5. Plumbing Code and General Regulations
Sec. 3.05.121 Plumbing code adopted
All installation hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the city shall be done in a first class workmanlike
manner in accordance with the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing Code as adopted by the International Code
Council, and said International Plumbing Code and incorporated references and appendixes is made of part of this
article, with the additions and deviations therefrom contained in this code.
Charter reference–Adoption of code of technical regulations, sec. 2.15.
State law reference–Adoption of plumbing codes and amendment of codes by municipality, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1301.255.
Sec. 3.05.122 Conformance with plumbing code
All plumbing systems hereafter installed shall conform with the provisions of the 2015 edition of the International
Plumbing Code, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/507
(Ordinance 17-3650, sec. II, adopted 3/28/17)
Sec. 3.05.123 Amendments
Amendments to the 2015 International Plumbing Code shall be as follows:
Section 101. Title. Insert “City of Plainview.”
Section 106.6.2. Fee schedule. Change to read as follows: The fee for each permit shall be set forth in section 3.05.083
of the Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.6.3. Fee refunds. Insert “zero (0)” percent at section 106.6.3.2 and “fifty (50)” percent at section 106.6.3.3.
Section 108.4. Violation penalties. Insert:
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons, who erects, installs, alters, or repairs plumbing work in violation of the
provisions of this article, or who fails to do any act required hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction hereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances,
“general penalty; continuing violations.” Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any of the terms or provisions
of this article by any corporation or association shall be subject to the penalty provided in this section.
(c) Revocation of licenses or certification. Conviction under the provisions of this article shall be deemed
just cause for the revocation of any certification, registration, or license which such person may have or hold
under the provisions of this article and examinations for reissue of such certification or license shall be at the
discretion of the board.
(d) Enforcement. The building official, and their assistants shall be empowered to cause criminal charges
to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the enforcement of this article.
Section 108.5. Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any plumbing system that is being done
contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The
notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official
shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine as specified in section 1.01.009 of the City of
Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section 109. Means of appeal. Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following wording: In order to hear
and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, an appeal must be filed with the Building Trades and Fire Code Board of Appeals in
accordance with article 3.02 in the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section 305.4.1. Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) below grade.
Section 312.2. Drainage and vent water test. A water test shall be applied to the drainage system either in its entirety or
in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening,
and the system shall be filled with water to the point of overflow. If the system is tested in sections, each opening shall
be tightly plugged except the highest openings of the section under test, and each section shall be filled with water, but
no section shall be tested with less than a 5 foot (1524 mm) head of water. In testing successive sections, a lowest
opening head test at each floor level if multiple floors shall be tested at the plumbing rough-in inspection. This test shall
be held for not less than 15 minutes.
Section 312.10.1. Inspections. Annual inspections shall be made of all backflow prevention assemblies and air gaps to
determine whether they are operable. In the absence of local provisions, the owner is responsible to ensure that testing is
performed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/507
Section 312.10.2. Testing. Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer assemblies, double check-valve assemblies,
pressure vacuum breaker assemblies, reduced pressure detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies, double
check detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies, hose connection backflow preventers, and spill-proof
vacuum breakers shall be tested at the time of installation, immediately after repairs or relocation and at least annually.
The testing procedure shall be performed in accordance with applicable local provisions. In the absence of local
provisions, the owner is responsible to ensure that testing is done in accordance with one of the following standards:
ASSE 5013, ASSE 5015, ASSE 5020, ASSE 5047, ASSE 5048, ASSE 5052, ASSE 5056, CSA B64.10 or CSA
B64.10.1 or CSA B64.10.1.
Section 702.1. Above-ground sanitary drainage and vent pipe. Above-ground soil, waste and vent pipe shall conform to
one of the standards listed in table 702.1.
TABLE 702.1 ABOVE-GROUND DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPE
Pipe Standard
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters,
including schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid
cellular core or composite wall
ASTM D 2661; ASTM F 628; ASTM F
1488; CSA B181.1
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; CISPI 301; ASTM A 888
Copper or copper-alloy pipe ASTM B 42; ASTM B 302
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K, L, M or DWV) ASTM B 75; ASTM B 88; ASTM B 251;
ASTM B 306
Galvanized steel pipe ASTM A 53
Polyolefin pipe CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid cellular
core or composite wall
ASTM D 2665; ASTM F 891; CSA
B181.2; ASTM F 1488
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid
cellular core or composite wall
ASTM D 2949; ASTM F 1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Types 304 and 316L ASME A 112.3.1
Section 702.2. Underground building sanitary drainage and vent pipe. Underground building sanitary drainage and vent
pipe shall conform to one of the standards listed in table 702.2.
TABLE 702.2 UNDERGROUND BUILDING DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/507
Pipe Standard
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters,
including schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid
cellular core or composite wall
ASTM D 2661; ASTM F 628; ASTM F
1488; CSA B181.1
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; CISPI 301; ASTM A 888
Copper or copper alloy tubing (Type K, L, M or DWV) ASTM B 75; ASTM B 88; ASTM B 251;
ASTM B 306
Polyolefin pipe ASTM F 1412; CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid cellular
core or composite wall
ASTM D 2665; ASTM F 891; ASTM F
1488; CSA B181.2
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid
cellular core or composite wall
ASTM D 2949; ASTM F 1488
Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) plastic pipe ASTM F 1673; CSA B181.3
Stainless steel drainage systems, Type 316L ASME A 112.3.1
Section 702.3. Building sewer pipe. Building sewer pipe shall conform to one of the standards listed in table 702.3.
TABLE 702.3 BUILDING SEWER PIPE
MATERIAL STANDARD
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters,
including schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a
solid, cellular core or composite wall
ASTM D 2661; ASTM F 628; ASTM F
1488
Cast-iron pipe ASTM A 74; ASTM A 888; CISPI 301
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in sewer and drain
diameters, including SDR 42 (PS 20), PS35, SDR 35 (PS 45), PS50,
PS100, PS140, SDR 23.5 (PS 150) and PS200; with a solid cellular core
or composite wall
ASTM F 1488; ASTM D 2751
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/507
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in sewer and drain diameters,
including PS 25, SDR 41 (PS 28), PS 35, SDR 35 (PS 46), PS 50, PS
100, SDR 26 (PS 115), PS140 and PS 200; with a solid cellular core or
composite wall
ASTM F 891; ASTM F 1488; ASTM D
3034; CSA B182.2; CSA B182.4
Concrete pipe ASTM C 14; ASTM C 76; CSA
A257.1M; CSA A257.2M
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K or L) ASTM B 75; ASTM B 88; ASTM B 251
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe (SDR-PR) ASTM F 714
Polyolefin pipe ASTM F 1412; CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with solid cellular
core or composite wall
ASTM D 2665; ASTM D 2949; ASTM D
3034; ASTM F 1412; CSA B182.2; CSA
B182.4
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid
cellular core or composite wall
ASTM D 2949, ASTM F 1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Types 304 and 316L ASME A 112.3.1
Section 903.1. Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches (305
mm) above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent
extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-132), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance 17-3650, sec. II, adopted 3/28/17)
Secs. 3.05.124–3.05.140 Reserved
Division 6. Materials
Sec. 3.05.141 Minimum standards
The materials used shall conform with the standards set forth in the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing Code,
unless amended in this article.
Sec. 3.05.142 Materials not listed
Materials other than those listed in the 2015 International Plumbing Code may be permitted upon approval of the
building trades and fire code board of appeals.
(Ordinance 17-3650, sec. II, adopted 3/28/17)
Sec. 3.05.143 Prohibited materials
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/507
The use of lead pipes, solder and flux is prohibited when used in the installation or repair of any public water system or
any plumbing in a residential or nonresidential water system providing water for human consumption. This prohibition
does not apply to leaded joints necessary for repair of cast-iron pipes. For the purpose of this prohibition, the definition
of “lead-free” shall be:
(1) When used with respect to solder and flux it refers to solder and flux containing not more than 0.2%
lead; and
(2) When used with respect to pipes and pipe fittings it refers to pipe and pipe fittings containing not more
than 8.0% lead.
(2000 Code, sec. 20-144)
Secs. 3.05.144–3.05.170 Reserved
Division 7. Contractor Registration
Sec. 3.05.171 License requirements; general insurance
(a) A person, firm, or corporation shall not perform work requiring a plumbing license under title 8, Occupations
Code, chapter 1301. Except as provided by section 1301, a person, firm, or corporation may not perform or offer to
perform plumbing work unless the person or business holds an appropriate license issued or recognized under this
article.
(b) A licensed applicant or licensee shall file with the city a completed certificate of insurance or other evidence
satisfactory to the city when applying for initial and renewal licenses and upon request of the city.
(c) Each successful applicant for a plumber's license shall maintain and furnish to the city the following general
liability and completed operation insurance:
(1) In addition to all other insurance requirements, the master plumber of record and the firm for whom the
master is holding the master's license must continuously maintain on file with the building official evidence
in the form of a certificate that the holder of the master's license carries the following types and amounts of
insurance: license holders shall have bodily injury liability insurance of at least three hundred thousand and
no/100 dollars ($300,000.00) and property damage liability insurance of at least three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for both general liability and completed operations insurance. This amount shall equal
the same amount as the state, should requirements be changed by the state.
(2) If the person holding a master's license severs the connection with a firm that is jointly covered by the
same insurance, a new certificate showing proper coverage will be required of both parties.
(3) The holder of any master's license is responsible for providing evidence of a new or renewal policy of
any required insurance coverage upon termination or renewal of any policy.
(d) Such applicant shall furnish the building official with a certificate of insurance on an industry standard certificate
of insurance form with a thirty-day cancellation notice.
(e) A licensed contractor shall furnish the name of the insurance carrier, policy number, name, address, and telephone
number of the insurance agent with whom the contracting company is insured to any customer who requests it.
(f) Insurance must be obtained from an admitted company or an eligible surplus lines carrier, as defined in the Texas
Insurance Code, chapter 981, or other insurance companies that are rated by A.M. Best Company as B+ or higher.
(g) The insurance policy shall include a provision that in the event such coverage is cancelled or reduced, the
insurance company shall notify the building official at least prior to such cancellation or reduction in coverage.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-121), adopted 1/25/11)
Secs. 3.05.172–3.05.200 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/507
Division 8. Landscape Irrigation
Sec. 3.05.201 Definitions
The following words and terms, when used in this division, have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
Air gap. A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and
an open or nonpressure receiving vessel.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of
water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve
falls and forms a check against backsiphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and
satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly.
Backflow prevention. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or backsiphonage, of nonpotable water from an
irrigation system into the potable water source.
Backflow prevention assembly. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of
assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition.
Completion of irrigation system installation. When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum
standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly.
Consulting. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems.
Cross-connection. An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may
contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment
process.
Design. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited
to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs,
selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying
any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will
result in an irrigation plan.
Design pressure. The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated
by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an
emission device to the water source.
Double check valve. An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including
tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located
resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly.
Emission device. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common
emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip
irrigation emitters.
Employed. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design,
installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an
employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, section 3212(d)
based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment
related tasks.
Head-to-head spacing. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head.
Health hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance
that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of
causing such effects.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/507
Hydraulics. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and
pressure requirements of an irrigation system.
Inspector. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who
inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or
as a contractor.
Installer. A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system
or any water supply, who is licensed according to title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Irrigation inspector. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality
or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas Administrative
Code, chapter 30.
Irrigation plan. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the
project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system.
Irrigation services. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing
consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
Irrigation system. An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and
conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control
erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Texas
Agricultural Code, section 251.002.
Irrigation technician. A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair,
service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or
public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Irrigation zone. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type
(such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and
soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control.
Irrigator. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or
supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or
potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas Administrative
Code, chapter 30.
Irrigator-in-charge. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including
but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation
technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system.
Landscape irrigation. The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of
plant material or turf.
License. An occupational license that is issued by the state commission on environmental quality under title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by
title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Mainline. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves.
Maintenance checklist. A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that
contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to:
checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor,
cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the
precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from
the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/507
evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each
zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed.
Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation
main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to,
repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a
manner that opens the system to the atmosphere.
Master valve. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the
irrigation system mainline.
Matched precipitation rate. The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same
rate.
New installation. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist.
Pass-through contract. A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business
owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system.
Potable water. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
Pressure vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an
independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a pressure
vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly.
Reclaimed water. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such
as landscape irrigation.
Records of landscape irrigation activities. The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of
permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape
irrigation system.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. An assembly containing two independently acting approved
check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the two check valves and below the first check valve.
Static water pressure. The pressure of water when it is not moving.
Supervision. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional
responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also, a licensed installer
working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working
under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system.
Water conservation. The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the
waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to
maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion.
Zone flow. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve,
calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For
design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure.
Zone valve. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-316), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.202 Valid license required
(a) Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid license, as defined by title 30, Texas Administrative
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/507
Code, chapter 30 and required by Texas Occupations Code, title 12, chapter 1903, or as defined by title 22, Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 365 and required by the Texas Occupations Code, chapter 1301.
(b) All irrigators or irrigation technicians must hold a valid state license, register with the city, pay an annual city
registration fee of thirty and no/100 dollars ($30.00), and provide either a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand and
no/100 dollars ($10,000.00) or general liability insurance in the amount of three hundred thousand and no/100 dollars
($300,000.00).
(c) Exemptions: A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with Texas Occupations Code, title 12,
section 1903.002(c)(1), if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by
the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards
contained in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 344, regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over
impervious materials, rain and freeze sensors, backflow prevention, and isolation valves. The city may, at any point,
adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation system. See Texas
Occupations Code, title 12, section 1903.002, for other exemptions to the licensing requirement.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-317), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.203 Permit required
(a) Any person or homeowner installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city is required to obtain a permit from the city. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the
requirements of this article.
(b) Exemptions:
(1) An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by the Texas Health and
Safety Code, section 355.002;
(2) An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by the Texas Agriculture Code,
section 251.002; or
(3) An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-318), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.204 Backflow prevention methods and devices
(a) Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow
prevention method approved by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention
device must be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers; or the Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California; or the International Plumbing Code; or any other
laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention
assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards, or if
the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations.
(b) If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow:
(1) An air gap may be used if:
(A) There is an unobstructed physical separation; and
(B) The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or
assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of the water supply
outlet, whichever is greater.
(2) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if:
(A) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will ensure that
the assembly will not be submerged; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/507
(B) Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve.
(3) Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if:
(A) No back-pressure condition will occur; and
(B) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the highest
downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the
sprinkler.
(4) Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if:
(A) No back-pressure will be present;
(B) There are not shutoff valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker;
(C) The device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and the highest
downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the
sprinkler;
(D) There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for more
than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and
(E) A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation
control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls.
(c) Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon installation and
annually thereafter.
(d) If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be
used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks are used for testing only.
(e) If a double check valve is installed below ground:
(1) Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested;
(2) Test cock plugs must be threaded, water-tight, and made of nonferrous material;
(3) A y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve;
(4) There must be a clearance between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to allow
space for testing and repair; and
(5) There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check valve.
(f) If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed
backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed.
(g) If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum
breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the
automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly.
(h) The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow prevention assembly
tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the local water purveyor and the irrigation system's
owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention device.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-319), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.205 Specific conditions and cross-connection control
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/507
(a) Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system
must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap.
(b) Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can
only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly or an air gap.
(c) Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system
connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device.
(d) If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined
in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 285, then:
(1) All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage facilities
system as required for a private water line in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 285.91(10);
(2) Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water
system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.50; and
(3) Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the on-site
sewage facility must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of
any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the on-site sewage
facilities system from operating effectively.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-320), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.206 Water conservation
All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that
will promote water conservation as defined in the definitions section of this division. (Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-
321), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.207 Irrigation plan design; minimum standards
(a) An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or
electronic copy of the irrigation plans must be on the jobsite at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A
drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation
system installations. Further, a copy of such plan design should also be submitted to the building official for review and
be placed in a file for any further discussion of that particular irrigation system. During the installation of the irrigations
system, variances from the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does
not:
(1) Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
(2) Violate any requirements of this division; and
(3) Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
(b) The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide
complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
(c) All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
(2) All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered;
(3) A north arrow;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/507
(4) A legend;
(5) The zone flow measurement for each zone;
(6) Location and type of each:
(A) Controller; and
(B) Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze);
(7) Location, type, and size of each:
(A) Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection;
(B) Backflow prevention device;
(C) Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quickcouplers,
bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays;
(D) Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves;
(E) Pressure regulation component; and
(F) Main line and lateral piping;
(8) The scale used; and
(9) The design pressure.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-322), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.208 Design and installation; minimum requirements
(a) No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way
which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component.
(b) Spacing.
(1) The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius
or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published
specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure.
(2) New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less
than 48 inches, not including the impervious surfaces, in either length or width and which contain impervious
pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler
heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent
surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, including, but not limited to, a
building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar.
(3) Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries,
parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a
landscaped area.
(c) Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum
sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to
achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or
pressure compensating spray heads.
(d) Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not
exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/507
(e) Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors,
topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements.
(f) Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone
irrigate at the same precipitation rate.
(g) Impervious materials. Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick,
wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks,
streets, etc.
(h) Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention
device on all new installations.
(i) PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed
with a purple primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the International Plumbing Code, section 605.
(j) Rain and freeze sensors.
(1) Any commercial, industrial, multifamily, or residential customer class irrigation system installed within
the city on or after January 1, 2009, must be equipped with rain and freeze sensors.
(2) Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller must
include a rain and freeze sensor designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during
periods of freezing temperatures and rainfall.
(3) All rain and freeze sensors shall be installed according to the manufacturer's published
recommendations.
(k) Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include a lockable isolation valve between the water meter and the
backflow prevention device.
(l) Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's
published specifications for depth coverage of piping.
(1) If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be
installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and
the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be
noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill
may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the
irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address safety issues.
(2) If a utility, manmade structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth
coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two inches of select
backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil.
(3) All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and
compacted to the original grade.
(m) Wiring irrigation systems.
(1) Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of
the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground.
(2) Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized
according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
(3) Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire
splice manufacturer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/507
(4) Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the
irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill.
(n) Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be nonpotable. No drinking or domestic
water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an
irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation
system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using quick coupler
key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must
be labeled “nonpotable, not safe for drinking.” An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler
connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system.
(o) Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on site at all times
while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not on site, the irrigator shall be responsible
for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-323), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.209 Completion of irrigation system installation
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site
installation shall be required to complete four items:
(1) A final “walk-through” with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the
operation of the system;
(2) The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of
the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist,
the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's
representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the
original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the
irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include, but are not limited to:
(A) The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic;
(B) A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time
evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly
effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors;
(C) A list of components, such as the nozzle, pump filters, and other such components, that require
maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and
(D) The statement, “This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state
and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it
has been installed according to the irrigation plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient
application of water at this time.”
(3) A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone
number, and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the
irrigator or the irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the
original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink.
(4) The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation
system's owner or owner representative.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-324), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.210 Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/507
(a) The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible
for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same
irrigation system.
(b) All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be
returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill.
(c) Purple PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair,
or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the International Plumbing Code, section 605.
(d) When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water
meter or backflow prevention device, a lockable isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present. A
copy of all tests run must be provided to the homeowner and the city building official.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-325), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.211 Reclaimed water
Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if:
(1) There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption;
(2) The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the irrigation
system's owner;
(3) The irrigation system is installed using purple components;
(4) The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device, in accordance with title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 290.47(i);
(5) A minimum of an eight inch by eight inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the
area that is being irrigated, that reads, “RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK” and “AQUA DE
RECUPERACIÓN - NO BEBER”; and
(6) Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the regulations of
the city's water provider.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-326), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.212 Advertisement requirements
(a) All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must
display the irrigator's license number in the form of “LI_____” in a contrasting color of block letters at least two inches
high, on both sides of the vehicle.
(b) All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license
number in the form of “LI____.” Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and estimates which displays an
entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator
and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display the irrigator's license
number.
(c) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a legible
sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where irrigation
business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-327), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.213 Contracts
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/507
(a) All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify the
irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each party signed
the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the statement, “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website
is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.” All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date.
(b) All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation system(s)
must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone number(s), and the
statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O.
Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative
Code, section 344.30 shall hold an irrigator license issued under title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30, unless
the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.1(36). If a passthrough
contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract can only be performed by a
licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract, the irrigator shall still be
responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a copy of the warranty and all other
documents required under this article. A pass-through contract must identify by name and license number the irrigator
that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator or irrigation system warranty
work.
(d) The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-328), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.214 Warranties for systems
(a) On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's
representative with a written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation of the irrigation
system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the
manufacturer's warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide the irrigation system's owner or the
owner's representative with applicable information regarding the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty must
include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is part of an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty
document is not required.
(b) An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business address, and
business telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative
confirming receipt of the warranty and must include the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website
is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or services to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative [with] a written document that identifies the materials furnished in
the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. If a warranty is provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The
warranty document must include the irrigator's name and business contact information.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-329), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.215 Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors
A licensed irrigation inspector shall enforce the ordinances of the city, and shall be responsible for:
(1) Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator
and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed;
(2) Inspecting the irrigation system;
(3) Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this article;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/507
(4) A customer service inspection to ensure that cross connections do not exist on the property, which
includes the inside and outside hydrants and faucets;
(5) Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test results
provided to the city;
(6) Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alterations, repairs, or
services of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and
(7) Maintaining records according to this article.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-330), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.216 Items not covered by this division
Any item not covered by this division and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas
Water Code, title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statute or state commission on
environmental quality rule. (Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-331), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.217 Matters not covered; fees
The city council may create a schedule of fees for obtaining and renewing an irrigation permit. These fees will be in
amounts sufficient to cover the city's costs in issuing and renewing the permits, including, but not limited to, staff time
and other overhead costs. This schedule is included in section 3.05.083, permit and inspection fees. (Ordinance 09-3512,
sec. II (20-332), adopted 3/10/09)
Sec. 3.05.218 Enforcement
(a) The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this division as may be required by
governing law. Any person, firm, corporation, or agent who shall violate a provision of this division, or fails to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for
criminal violations. Any violation of any provision of this division is declared to be a nuisance.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding
$2,000.00. Each day that a provision of this division is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this
division is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00.
(c) Nothing in this division shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the
provisions of this division and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this division or to require specific conduct that
is necessary for compliance with this division; and
(2) Other available relief.
(Ordinance 09-3512, sec. II (20-333), adopted 3/10/09)
ARTICLE 3.06 MECHANICAL WORK
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.06.001 Mechanical license law adopted; administration and enforcement
(a) Before any person shall do any work or make any connections to an air conditioning or refrigeration system in the
city, or do any work connected or intended to be connected to an air conditioning or refrigeration system, she/he shall be
licensed as provided in the “Texas Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contract License Law,” as amended, the same
being the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, Texas Occupations Code, chapter 51.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/507
(b) Administration. The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be vested in the chief
building official of the city or his designee.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-151), adopted 1/25/11)
Sec. 3.06.002 Title
This article shall be known as the mechanical ordinance of the city, and may be cited as such. (Ordinance 04-3431, sec.
III (20-161), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.06.003 Compliance
It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, copartnership or corporation to engage in the business of air
conditioning and refrigeration contracting or perform any air conditioning or refrigeration contracting as defined in
section 3.06.032 of this article without first having procured the necessary licenses and permits as hereinafter provided
for, and all mechanical work and workmanship and materials shall meet the requirements of this article and shall pass all
inspections required in this article in regard to the work done. (Ordinance 04-3431, sec. III (20-161), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.06.004 Purpose
For the protection and preservation of life and the public health, safety, property and the general welfare of the people,
the following provisions are enacted relating to the installation, alteration, repair, design, construction, quality of
materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling, and refrigeration systems,
incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances in all buildings and structures and on all property now
erected or to be erected, changed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered within the city. The intent and purpose
of this article is to regulate the construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, maintenance or repair of all mechanical
systems used for the purpose of environmental air conditioning, commercial refrigeration or process heating and cooling
systems in or on and about any and all premises in the city. (Ordinance 04-3431, sec. III (20-171), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.06.005 Applicability
This article shall apply to all mechanical systems, as herein defined, within the boundaries of the city. (Ordinance 04-
3431, sec. III (20-181), adopted 10/26/04)
Secs. 3.06.006–3.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. License*
Sec. 3.06.031 Required
An air conditioning and refrigeration contracting company must employ full time in each permanent office a license
holder whose license is assigned to that company. Unless a person is exempted under the exemptions listed in section
3.06.033, a person may not perform air conditioning and refrigeration contracting without a license. (Ordinance 04-3431,
sec. III (20-191), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.06.032 Definition of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting
“Air conditioning and refrigeration contracting” shall mean to perform or offer to perform the design, installation,
construction, maintenance, service, repair, alteration, or modification of a product or of equipment in environmental air
conditioning, commercial refrigeration, or process cooling or heating systems. (Ordinance 04-3431, sec. III (20-192),
adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.06.033 Exemptions from licensing requirement
(a) A property owner is not required to be licensed under this article to perform air conditioning and refrigeration in
the property owner's homestead providing the property owner performs the work themselves. If the property owner hires
an individual to perform the actual air conditioning and refrigeration work on any part of the air conditioning and
refrigeration system the property owner must secure the services of an air conditioning and refrigeration contractor.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-193), adopted 1/25/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/507
(b) A person who performs air conditioning or refrigeration maintenance work if:
(1) The person is a maintenance person or maintenance engineer who is a regular bona fide employee of
the property owner, the property lessee, or the management company managing the property where the
maintenance work is being performed;
(2) The work is performed in connection with the business in which the person is employed; and
(3) The person and the person's employer referred to in subsection (1) above do not engage in the
occupation of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting for the general public.
(c) A person who performs air conditioning and refrigeration contracting and is regularly employed by a regulated
electric or gas utility.
(d) A person who is licensed as a professional engineer under the Texas Engineering Practice Act (V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code, chapter 1001), performs work in connection with the business in which the person is employed, and
does not engage in the practice of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting for the general public.
(e) A person who performs process cooling or heating work for an industrial operation such as a chemical plant,
petrochemical plant, refinery, natural gas plant, or natural gas treating plant when employed by that operation.
(f) A person who performs air conditioning and refrigeration contracting on:
(1) A portable or self-contained ductless air conditioning product that has a cooling capacity of three (3)
tons or less;
(2) A portable or self-contained heating product that does not require the forced movement of air outside
the heating unit;
(3) Environmental air conditioning equipment that is intended for temporary use and is not fixed in place;
or
(4) Residential refrigerators, freezers, and ice machines.
(g) A person who performs air conditioning services only on a motor vehicle or MVAC-like appliance air conditioner
or who employs a person who performs air conditioning services only on a motor vehicle or MVAC-like appliance air
conditioner. For the purposes of this article, “MVAC-like appliance” has the meaning as that term is defined in 40 CFR
section 82.152.
(h) A person who assists in the performance of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting work under the
supervision of a licensee is not required to be licensed.
(i) A person who installs, repairs, or removes a vent hood of the type commonly used in residential and commercial
kitchens.
(Ordinance 04-3431, sec. III (20-193), adopted 10/26/04; Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-193), adopted 1/25/11)
Secs. 3.06.034–3.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Mechanical Code
Sec. 3.06.061 Adopted
All installation hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the city shall be done in a first class workmanlike
manner in accordance with the 2015 edition of the International Mechanical Code and appendixes as published by the
International Code Council, and said International Mechanical Code is made part of this article, with additions and
deviations therefrom contained in this code.
Charter reference–Adoption of code of technical regulations, sec. 2.15.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/507
Sec. 3.06.062 Conformance with code
All mechanical systems hereafter installed shall conform with the provisions of the 2015 International Mechanical Code
and any amendments.
(Ordinance 17-3656, sec. I, adopted 5/9/17)
Sec. 3.06.063 Amendments
The 2015 International Mechanical Code is amended as follows:
Section 101. Title. Insert “City of Plainview.”
Section 106.5.2. Fee schedule. Change to read as follows: The fee for mechanical work shall be set forth in section
3.05.083 of the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.5.3. Fee refunds. Insert “zero percent” at section 106.5.3.2 and “fifty percent” at section 106.5.3.3.
Insert after Section 106.5.3: The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written
application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
Section 108.4 Violations. Insert:
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons, who erects, installs, alters, or repairs work in violation of the
provisions of this article, or who fails to do any act required hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction hereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances,
“general penalty; continuing violations.” Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any of the terms or provisions
of this article by any corporation or association shall be subject to the penalty provided in this section.
(c) Revocation of licenses or certification. Conviction under the provisions of this section shall be deemed
just cause for the revocation of any certification, registration, or license which such person may have or hold
under the provisions of this section and examinations for reissue of such certification or license shall be at the
discretion of the board.
(d) Enforcement. The chief building official, and their assistants shall be empowered to cause criminal
charges to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the enforcement of this article.
Sec. 108.5. Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code officials that mechanical work is being performed contrary to
the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's authorized agent, or to the person doing the
work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the
code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any
work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine as specified in section 1.01.009 of the City of
Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 109. Means of appeal. Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following wording: In order to hear and
decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, an appeal must be filed with the Building Trades and Fire Code Board of Appeals in
accordance with article 3.02 in the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-213), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance 17-3656, sec. I, adopted 5/9/17)
Secs. 3.06.064–3.06.090 Reserved
Division 4. Contractor Registration
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/507
Sec. 3.06.091 Requirements
All licensed air conditioning and refrigeration contractors and companies shall register with the code enforcement
department. A copy of the certificate of insurance as indicated below must be provided along with a copy of the
contractor license and driver's license of each contractor. An annual registration fee of $30.00 shall be paid at the time of
registration.
(1) A person, firm, or corporation shall not perform work requiring a license under the state department of
licensing and regulation in accordance with title 2, Occupations Code, chapter 51. Except as provided by
chapter 51, a person, firm, or corporation may not perform or offer to perform work as required under chapter
51 unless the person or business holds an appropriate license issued or recognized under this section.
(2) A licensed applicant or licensee shall file with the city a completed certificate of insurance or other
evidence satisfactory to the city when applying for initial and renewal licenses and upon request of the city.
(3) Each successful applicant for this license shall maintain and furnish to the city the following general
liability and completed operation insurance:
(A) License holders shall have bodily injury liability insurance of at least three hundred thousand and
no/100 dollars ($300,000.00) and property damage liability insurance of at least three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for both general liability and completed operations insurance. This amount shall
equal the same amount as the state, should requirements be changed by the state.
(B) If the person holding a license severs the connection with a firm that is jointly covered by the
same insurance, a new certificate showing proper coverage will be required of both parties.
(C) The holder of any license is responsible for providing evidence of a new or renewal policy of any
required insurance coverage upon termination or renewal of any policy.
(4) Such applicant shall furnish the chief building official with a certificate of insurance on an industry
standard certificate of insurance form with a thirty-day cancellation notice.
(5) A licensed contractor shall furnish the name of the insurance carrier, policy number, name, address, and
telephone number of the insurance agent with whom the contracting company is insured to any customer who
requests it.
(6) Insurance must be obtained from an admitted company or an eligible surplus lines carrier, as defined in
the Texas Insurance Code, chapter 981, or other insurance companies that are rated by A.M. Best Company
as B+ or higher.
(7) The insurance policy shall include a provision that in the event such coverage is cancelled or reduced,
the insurance company shall notify the chief building official at least prior to such cancellation or reduction in
coverage.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-201), adopted 1/25/11)
ARTICLE 3.07 HEALTH CARE FACILITIES CODE
Sec. 3.07.001 Adopted
All installation hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the city shall follow the rules and regulations of the
NFPA 99 (Health Care Facilities Code) (2015 edition) and the 2015 Medical Gas and Vacuum Systems Installation
Handbook as published by the National Fire Protection Association. All installations hereafter installed within the
corporate limits of the city shall be done in a first class workmanlike manner in accordance with these publications.
Sec. 3.07.002 Conformance with code
All systems hereafter installed shall conform with the provisions of the NFPA 99 (2015 edition) and the 2015 Medical
Gas and Vacuum Systems Installation Handbook, and any amendments to said codes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/507
(Ordinance 17-3656, sec. II, adopted 5/9/17)
ARTICLE 3.08 FUEL GAS
Sec. 3.08.001 Code adopted
All installation hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the city shall be done in a first class workmanlike
manner in accordance with the 2015 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code and appendixes as published by the
International Code Council and said International Fuel Gas Code is made part of this article, with the additions and
deviations therefrom contained in this code.
Sec. 3.08.002 Conformance with code
All fuel gas systems hereafter installed shall conform with the provisions of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code and
any amendments to that code.
(Ordinance 17-3656, sec. III, adopted 5/9/17)
Sec. 3.08.003 Amendments
The 2015 International Fuel Gas Code is amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Plainview.”
Section 106.6.2. Fee schedule. Change to read as follows: The fee for each permit shall be set forth in section 3.05.083
of the Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Section 106.6.3. Fee refunds. Insert: “zero percent” and “fifty percent” in the respective blanks.
Section 108.4. Violation penalties. Insert:
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons, who erects, installs, alters, or repairs work in violation of the
provisions of this article, or who fails to do any act required hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction hereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances,
“general penalty; continuing violations.” Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any of the terms or provisions
of this article by any corporation or association shall be subject to the penalty provided in this section.
(c) Revocation of licenses or certification. Conviction under the provisions of this section shall be deemed
just cause for the revocation of any certification, registration, or license which such person may have or hold
under the provisions of this section and examinations for reissue of such certification or license shall be at the
discretion of the board.
(d) Enforcement. The chief building official, and their assistants shall be empowered to cause criminal
charges to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the enforcement of this article.
Section 108.5. Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code officials that work is being done contrary to the provisions
of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's authorized agent, or to the person doing the work. The
notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official
shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine as specified in section 1.01.009 of the City of
Plainview Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 412.1. General. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities for LP-gas fuel shall be in accordance with Railroad Commission of
Texas rules, this section and the International Fire Code. The operation of LP-gas motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall
be regulated by the International Fire Code and in accordance with Railroad Commission of Texas rules.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/507
Sec. 413.1. General. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities for CNG fuel shall be in accordance with Railroad Commission of
Texas rules, this section and the International Fire Code. The operation of CNG fuel-dispensing facilities shall be
regulated by the International Fire Code and in accordance with Railroad Commission of Texas rules.
(Ordinance 11-3542, sec. II (20-253), adopted 1/25/11; Ordinance 17-3656, sec. III, adopted 5/9/17)
ARTICLE 3.09 MINIMUM HOUSING/DANGEROUS BUILDING CODE*
Division 1. Generally*
Sec. 3.09.001 Property maintenance code adoptedand chapter 214 adopted
(a) The International Property Maintenance Code, as copyrighted in 2015, by the International Code Council, Inc., as
hereinafter amended, is specifically adopted as the minimum housing/dangerous building code for the city, and a copy is
attached to Ordinance 04-03432 and incorporated herein by reference as though set out completely in detail.
Additionally, chapter 214, subchapter A, of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, is also adopted. This article
and chapter 214 shall be read in conjunction with one another but if any provision of this article as outlined in article
3.09 conflicts with chapter 214, subchapter A, the provisions chapter 214 shall control. Likewise, if any provision of
chapter 214, subchapter A has been omitted from this article, the city shall be entitled to pursue its remedies in
conformity with state law, as amended. (Ordinance 19-3687, sec. 2, adopted 3/12/19)
(b) A copy of said International Property Maintenance Code shall be filed with the city secretary and a copy
maintained in the office of the building official of the city, all such copies to be open to public inspection during business
hours of the offices where they are maintained, with amendments thereto. (Ordinance 04-3432, sec. I (13-16), adopted
10/26/04)
Charter reference–Adoption of code of technical regulations, sec. 2.15.
Sec. 3.09.002 Amendments to property maintenance code
101.1, Title. These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the City of Plainview, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
101.3 Intent. Amend as follows: This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public
health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and
premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a
minimum level of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing
buildings shall comply with the adopted codes and ordinances of the city.
103.5, Fees. At the end of section add: The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out
its responsibilities under this code shall be as set and approved by the city council and incorporated into the City of
Plainview Code of Ordinances.
107.3, Method of service. Change 1, 2 and 3 to read as follows:
1. Delivered personally; or
2. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address, and if the United States Postal
Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered delivered; or
3. A copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
(Ordinance 04-3432, sec. III (13-31), adopted 10/26/04; Ordinance 17-3656, sec. IV, adopted 5/9/17)
110.3, Failure to comply. Add the following sections:
110.3.1. Cost. The cost of such work shall be paid for and made a special assessment against the property as
provided for in Article 3.09 of the City of Plainview's Code of Ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/507
110.3.2. Administrative fee. In addition to collection of the costs and expenses incurred by correcting the
violations of the city code, upon abatement by the city, the city may [charge] an administrative fee as outlined
in the City of Plainview's Code of Ordinances. The administrative fee will be charged per lot, tract, parcel of
land, or across the adjacent sidewalk, parkway or alley, which is hereby found to be the cost to the city of
administering the terms of the provision. The fee can be adjusted upon annual review to correspond to the
actual cost of providing the applicable services.
111.1 through 111.8. Delete sections 111.1 through 111.8 and replace with the following:
111.1. Hearing. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued
under this code shall have the right to a hearing before the city minimum housing standards board. All
hearings before the board shall be open to the public.
111.2. Appeals to the decision of the board. Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property jointly
or severally aggrieved by an order of the board may appeal the decision in accordance with the procedures
outlined in Article 3.09 of the City of Plainview's Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance 19-3687, sec. 3, adopted 3/12/19)
302.4, Weeds. Change first sentence as follows:
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth that is unsightly
or excessive.
Insert the following after the first sentence:
Noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation,
other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of
a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section 106.3 and section
1.01.009 of the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall
be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon,
and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
302.8, Motor vehicles. Delete section 302.8 and exception.
Section 303, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. Delete all of section 303.
304.3, Premises identification. Change as follows:
Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible
from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. In
addition, commercial buildings shall be required to have the approved address placed on a rear door.
304.14, Insect screens. Delete section 304.14 and exception.
404.4, Bedroom requirements. Delete sections 404.4 through 404.7 and table 404.5, Minimum Area Requirements.
502.4, Employee's facilities. Add exception to the end:
Exception: Temporary commercial occupancies with 3 or less employees.
602.2, Residential occupancies. Change as follows:
Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68
degrees F (20 degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall
not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/507
602.3, Heat supply. Delete date requirement and exceptions as follows:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming
units, dormitories or guestrooms on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees F (20 degrees C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilets.
602.4, Occupiable work space. Delete section 602.4 and exceptions.
604.2, Service. Change wording as follows and delete the last sentence:
The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with the currently adopted version of the National Electrical Code.
605.2, Receptacles. Delete sentence to read as follows:
Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets.
Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground
fault circuit interrupter. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter
protection.
Chapter 8, Referenced Standards. Change table to read as follows:
ICC International Code Council
500 New Jersey Avenue, NW
6th Floor
Washington, D.C. 2001
Standard
reference
number
Title Referenced in code section
number
IBC-15 International Building Code® 102.3, 201.3, 401.3, 702.3
IEBC-15 International Existing Building Code ® 305.1.1, 306.1.1
IFC-15 International Fire Code® 201.3, 604.3.1.1, 604.3.2.1,
702.1, 702.2, 704.1, 704.2
IFGC-15 International Fuel Gas Code ® 102.3
IMC-15 International Mechanical Code® 102.3, 201.3
IPC-15 International Plumbing Code® 201.3, 505.1, 602.2, 602.3,
IRC-15 International Residential Code® 201.3
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/507
IZC-15 International Zoning Code ®
Zoning, chapter 14, City of Plainview Code of
Ordinances
102.3, 201.3
(Ordinance 04-3432, sec. III (13-31), adopted 10/26/04; Ordinance 17-3656, sec. IV, adopted 5/9/17)
Sec. 3.09.003 Substandard buildings declared public nuisance; abatement required
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as defined in this code are hereby declared to
be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified in this code. (Ordinance 04-3432, sec. II (13-27), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 3.09.004 Violations
No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any order issued by the code
enforcement officer hereunder. (2000 Code, sec. 13-29)
Secs. 3.09.005–3.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Board of Minimum Housing Standards
Sec. 3.09.031 Established; purpose; membership
In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of this code and to hear appeals provided for hereunder, the
board of minimum housing standards will serve as the appeal board for minimum requirements of the minimum
housing/dangerous building code. There is hereby established a board of minimum housing standards consisting of the
city council.
Sec. 3.09.032 Chairman; secretary; ex officio members
The board shall select a chairman, vice chairman and secretary of the board. The chairman shall preside over meetings
and shall have the same voting rights as other members. One (1) member of the planning and zoning department of the
city, one (1) representative from the county health department, and one (1) representative of the fire department of the
city, shall serve as ex officio members of the board, but such members shall not have any voting rights or privileges.
Sec. 3.09.033 Meeting dates and times
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine.
Sec. 3.09.034 Notice of meetings
Each meeting of the board shall be legally posted as required by Tex. Gov't Code sec. 551.001 et seq., and the ex officio
members and members of the board shall be notified in writing not less than five (5) days prior to the date of any
meeting.
Sec. 3.09.035 Rules and regulations; appeal procedure
The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the code enforcement officer. Appeals to the board and alleged
violations of this division shall be in writing. Copies of all rules and regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered
to the city secretary, who shall make them freely accessible to the public.
Sec. 3.09.036 Notice to property owners and others of public hearing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/507
(a) Whenever a violation of this division has been determined and reported by the building inspector or his/her
designee, a public hearing shall be held by the board to determine whether a building or structure complies with the
standards set out in this division. A diligent effort shall be made by the city to determine all owner(s), lienholder(s)
and/or mortgagee(s). Once identified, a notice of the hearing shall be sent to the occupant, if any, and all record
owner(s), lienholder(s) and/or mortgagee(s). Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or
by certified mail return receipt requested. Additionally, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the front door of each
affected structure situated on the property or as close to the front door as practicable. It is not necessary that the notice to
the occupant of the property list an occupant by name. Service of the notice may be accomplished by the first-class U.S.
mail or by personal delivery to any occupant of the property who is above the age of eighteen (18) years. The notice
shall include:
(1) The names of all persons to whom the notice is being served;
(2) The street address or legal description of the premises;
(3) The date of the inspection;
(4) The nature of the violation;
(5) The date, time and location of the public hearing; and
(6) A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgage will be required to submit at the hearing proof of
the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this division and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
(b) If the city mails a notice in accordance with this division to a property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee and the
United States postal service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and
the notice is considered delivered.
(c) The city satisfies the requirements of this division to make a diligent effort, to use its best efforts, or to make a
reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if the city searches the
following records:
(1) County real property records;
(2) County appraisal district records;
(3) Records of the secretary of state;
(4) Assumed name records of the county;
(5) Tax records of the city; and
(6) Utility records of any utility doing business in the city.
Sec. 3.09.037 Date of public hearing
The date of the public hearing before the board shall not be fewer than thirty (30) days from the date of personal service
or deposit of same in the U.S. mail, whichever is earliest.
Sec. 3.09.038 Filing of notice of public hearing in public records
The city secretary shall file a notice of public hearing in the county real property records at least ten (10) days before the
date of the public hearing. The notice of public hearing shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the affected real property, if that information can be determined
from a reasonable search of the instruments on file with the county clerk;
(2) A legal description of the property; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/507
(3) A description of the hearing.
Sec. 3.09.039 Effect of filing of notice in public records
The filing of the notice of public hearing under section 3.09.038 of this division shall be binding upon subsequent
grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of any interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the
notice and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such
interest after the filing of the notice.
Sec. 3.09.040 Conduct of public hearing
The board shall conduct the public hearing to determine compliance with the standards set out in this division. At the
public hearing, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work
that may be required to comply with this division and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
Sec. 3.09.041 Orders and notice after public hearing
(a) If, after a public hearing, the board finds that a nuisance exists pursuant to this division, the board shall require the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the real property, building, structure or premises to within thirty (30) days:
(1) Secure the offending building or agricultural structure from unauthorized entry; or
(2) Abate the nuisance or repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner, mortgagee or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within the thirty (30) days
allowed. The board shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the
work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from
unauthorized entry while the work is being performed.
(b) If, after the public hearing, a building, structure or premises is found to be in violation of the standards set forth in
this division, the board may order that the building, structure, or premises be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or
demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as provided by this section. The board also may order that the
occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, at the cost of the owner. The board reserves the right to determine what
is a reasonable amount of time to perform the ordered work or a reasonable amount of time to relocate occupants. In the
event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner, the board may order any
of the mortgagees or lienholders of the building, structure, or premises to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or
demolished to comply with the order within a reasonable time as provided by this section. The board also may order that
the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, at the cost of any of the mortgagees or lienholders. Under this
section, the city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the
event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action.
(c) If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee establishes at the public hearing that the work cannot be reasonably
completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work, and if the owner, lienholder or
mortgagee has submitted at the hearing a detailed plan and time schedule, and the board allows the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work required to abate the nuisance or repair, remove
or demolish the building or agricultural structure, the board shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly
submit progress reports to the board through the building official to demonstrate compliance with time schedules for
commencement and performance of the work and may require appearance before the building official, the board, or their
designees, to demonstrate compliance. If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures or
improvements on property, within the city's boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the board may require
the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing,
removing, or demolishing a building under this subsection. In lieu of a bond, the board may require the owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party
approved by the board. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third-party guaranty provided, not later than
the 30th day after the date the city issues the order.
(d) Within ten (10) days after the date that the order is issued, the city secretary shall:
(1) File a copy of the order in the city secretary's office; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/507
(2) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing:
(A) The street address or legal description of the property;
(B) The date of the hearing;
(C) Brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(D) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(e) After the public hearing, the city secretary shall promptly mail by certified mail with return receipt requested,
deliver by the United States postal service using signature confirmation service, or personally deliver a copy of the order
to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city shall use its best efforts to
determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building, structure or premises.
(f) If the building, structure or premises is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants
are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants at its own expense. This subsection does not limit the ability of the city to collect on a bond or other financial
guaranty that may be required by subsection (c) of this section.
Sec. 3.09.042 Repair, vacation or demolition
The following standards shall be followed by the board in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any building,
structure, or premises, and any building, structure, or premises declared a nuisance under this division shall be made to
comply with one or more of the following:
(1) The building, structure, or premises shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or
other current codes applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair.
(2) Repairs shall be deemed feasible only if less than fifty percent (50%) of the building or agricultural
structure must be repaired or replaced, and the repairs amount to less than fifty percent (50%) of the building
or agricultural structure's value.
(3) If the building or agricultural structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health,
safety and welfare of the occupants, it shall be ordered vacated and secured from unlawful entry.
(4) If the building or agricultural structure requires repairs over greater than fifty percent (50%) of its
surface or amounting to greater than fifty percent (50%) of its value, it shall be demolished. Further, if a
building or agricultural structure cannot be repaired so that it will be brought into compliance with this
division, it shall be demolished. Additionally, if the building or agricultural structure as it stands presents an
incurable fire hazard in violation of the terms of this division or any ordinance of the city or statute of the
state, it shall be demolished. For the purpose of this division, the term “demolished” includes the cleaning
and grading of the property and the removal of all debris and trash.
(5) If the building or agricultural structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the
occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the
building or agricultural structure or relocate the occupants at its own expense, and may thereafter assess
expenses, and establish a lien against the property, as set forth in section 3.09.048 of this division.
(6) If, after the expiration of the time allotted under section 3.09.041 of this division, the owner, lienholder
or mortgagee fails to comply, the city may do or cause to be done the repairs necessary to bring the building
into compliance with this division and only if the building is a residential building with ten (10) or fewer
dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds the minimum
standards, as defined by this division, and expenses may be assessed as provided in section 3.09.048 of this
division.
Sec. 3.09.043 Designation of enforcement officer
The code enforcement officer, or his designated representative(s), are hereby directed and authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this division. Nothing contained herein is meant to limit discretion of any enforcement officer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/507
in evaluating and directing compliance with this division.
Sec. 3.09.044 Enforcement authority and liability
The code enforcement officer, or his designated representative(s), acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against
the code enforcement officer, or his designated representative(s), because of such act or omission performed in the
enforcement of any provision of this division, shall be defended by legal counsel provided by the city until final
termination of such proceedings.
Sec. 3.09.045 Twenty-four-hour abatement under certain circumstances
Nothing in this division shall prohibit the requirement for abatement within twenty-four (24) hours, or a period of time
less than as prescribed herein for public hearings, notice thereof, or the recovery of costs and establishment of liens,
when a nuisance has been declared an immediate threat to health and safety by any enforcement personnel.
Sec. 3.09.046 Remedies
To enforce any requirement of this division, any enforcement personnel may gain compliance by any or all of the
following:
(1) Taking such action as the code enforcement officer deems appropriate within the authorization provided
for in this division or any other ordinances of the city.
(2) Causing appropriate action to be instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) Ordering the abatement of the nuisance and assessing the costs of abatement against the property if the
owner of the property does not abate same after the required notice.
(4) Any other remedies permitted or authorized at law or in equity.
Sec. 3.09.047 Contracting for abatement
Whenever the property owner, agent, or tenant fails to abate the nuisance within the time allowed, the code enforcement
officer is hereby authorized to contract with a contractor to perform such work as may be required to abate the nuisance.
Sec. 3.09.048 Recovery of costs
(a) Whenever the city enters upon the premises and causes any work to be performed to abate a nuisance, or if the
building or agricultural structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or if the occupants are not
relocated within the allotted time, the city may take such action at its own expense, and a charge will be made to the
property owner, agent, or tenant to recover the costs associated with the abatement. The charge shall be the actual cost of
abatement, plus applicable sales taxes.
(b) An administrative fee of $200.00 shall be assessed for each such charge.
(c) If the actual charge and the administrative fee are not paid to the city within thirty (30) days after billing, the city
shall file a lien against the property. Said lien shall be filed in the deed records of the county. The charges shown on the
lien shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum from the due date until paid. The lien shall be
collected under the same terms and provisions of law as on city ad valorem taxes. The lien may be extinguished prior to
foreclosure if the owner or other person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for its
expenses. If the notice is given pursuant to section 3.09.041, and the opportunity to abate the nuisance or repair, remove,
or demolish the building or agricultural structure is afforded to each mortgagee or lienholder under said section 3.09.041
of this division, the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens as authorized by Texas Local Government Code
sec. 214.001(o).
Sec. 3.09.049 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/507
(a) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision, requirement or order issued pursuant to this division
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this
code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply
occurs or continues to occur.
(b) In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this
division pursuant to the applicable provisions of Texas Local Government Code, chapter 54, which chapter provides for
the enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(c) Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this
division.
Sec. 3.09.050 Judicial review
(a) Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee aggrieved by an order of the board issued under this ordinance shall be
entitled to appeal the decision to a state district court pursuant to sec. 214.0012 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended. A notice of appeal must be filed with the district court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the order
is personally delivered or mailed (in accordance with sec. 214.0012 of the Texas Local Government Code) to the
owner(s), lienholder(s), or mortgagee(s), as provided herein. Upon the expiration of the thirty (30) calendar day period,
the decision of the board shall be come final. If applicable, the city shall be entitled to an award of attorney's fees, costs
and expenses, and judgment therefore, pursuant to and as authorized by sec. 214.0012(h) of the Texas Local Government
Code.
(b) Municipal court proceedings not affected. Action taken by the city pursuant to this division shall not affect the
ability of the city to proceed under the jurisdiction of the city's municipal court.
(Ordinance 19-3687, sec. 5, adopted 3/12/19)
Secs. 3.09.051–3.09.060 Reserved
Division 3. Search Warrants
Sec. 3.09.061 General regulations
See article 1.09 of this code. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.09.062 Warrants required; issuance
Except as provided herein, inspectors are hereby authorized and directed to seek and obtain search warrants from the
magistrate, as provided in this code, before making any inspection incidental to the enforcement of the provisions of any
ordinance of the city. The magistrate is hereby authorized to issue such warrants subject to the requirements of this code.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-136(b))
Sec. 3.09.063 Circumstances where warrant not required
Search warrants shall not be required under the following circumstances:
(1) When permission to inspect has been granted by someone apparently having charge or control of those
premises; for the purpose of this subsection, permission to inspect may be granted either verbally, in writing
or by some other action indicating consent;
(2) When there exists an imminent danger or peril to human life, limb or property and any delays resulting
from the application for a search warrant would materially increase the likelihood of loss from such danger or
peril; or
(3) When the inspection can be executed by a person who is an invitee on premises held open to the
general public. For the purposes of this subsection, a person ceases to be an invitee when he has been
instructed to leave the premises or otherwise terminate his inspection by someone having charge or control of
those premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/507
(2000 Code, sec. 13-136(c))
Sec. 3.09.064 Determination of probable cause
No search warrant shall be issued pursuant to this article except on the presentation of evidence of probable cause to
believe that a violation or violations are present in the premises sought to be inspected. In determining probable cause,
the magistrate is not limited to evidence of specific knowledge, but may consider any of the following:
(1) The age and general condition of the premises;
(2) Previous violations or hazards found present in the premises;
(3) The type of premises;
(4) The purposes for which the premises are used; and
(5) The presence of hazards or violations in and the general condition of premises near the premises sought
to be inspected.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-136(d))
Sec. 3.09.065 Execution procedures
An inspector to whom a search warrant is delivered shall execute it without delay and forthwith return it to the
magistrate. It must be executed within three (3) days from the time of its issuance and shall be executed within a shorter
period if so directed in the warrant by the magistrate. The inspector shall, upon going to the place ordered to be
inspected, give notice of his purpose to the person who has charge of or is an occupant of the place described in the
warrant. If such persons cannot be found, upon execution of the search warrant, a copy of said warrant shall be affixed to
the front door of the building or premises inspected. In every instance, entry shall be effected using the minimum force
necessary according to the circumstances. (2000 Code, sec. 13-136(g))
Sec. 3.09.066 Time allowed for execution
The time allowed for the execution of a search warrant shall be three (3) whole days, exclusive of the day of its issuance
and of the day of its execution. The magistrate issuing a search warrant under the provisions of this division shall
endorse on such search warrant the date and hours of the issuance of same. (2000 Code, sec. 13-136(h))
Sec. 3.09.067 Power of inspector executing warrant to call for aid from citizens
In the execution of a search warrant, the inspector may call to his aid any number of citizens in this city, who shall be
bound to aid in the execution of same. (2000 Code, sec. 13-136(i))
Sec. 3.09.068 Warrant does not include authority to seize goods or make arrests
The execution of a search warrant issued pursuant to this division shall not include any authority to make arrests or to
seize tangible goods of a violation. (2000 Code, sec. 13-136(j))
Sec. 3.09.069 Records
The magistrate shall keep a record of all proceedings had before him in the cases of search warrants as a part of the
official records of his court. (2000 Code, sec. 13-136(l))
Sec. 3.09.070 Conflicts with state or federal law
Nothing in this division shall be construed to conflict with any state or federal law, and this division shall be in addition
to any rights granted thereby. (2000 Code, sec. 13-136(m))
Sec. 3.09.071 Violations; penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/507
Any person interfering with the execution of a lawful search warrant issued pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
(2000 Code, sec. 13-137)
ARTICLE 3.10 MOBILE HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.10.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Hard surface. A weatherproofed surface that shall not soften when exposed to water and shall be of sufficient thickness
to withstand normal wheel loads.
Mobile home. Any vehicle or similar portable structure, including expanding and double-width units, designed for longterm
occupancy, which arrives at a mobile home site as a complete dwelling. Such unit shall be ten (10) feet or more in
width and more than thirty-five (35) feet in length.
Mobile home or vacation travel trailer space. A plot of land within a mobile home or vacation travel trailer park
designated for the accommodation of a single mobile home or vacation travel trailer.
Mobile home or vacation travel trailer stand. That hard-surfaced area of a mobile home or vacation travel trailer space
that is reserved for the placement of a mobile home or vacation travel trailer. Each mobile home stand shall be provided
with adequate “tie-downs” to secure the superstructures against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning.
Mobile home park. Any tract of land under single ownership, eight (8) acres or more, where accommodation is provided
for nontransient mobile home use.
Space width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point
midway between the front and rear lot lines.
Vacation travel trailer. A vehicular portable structure designed for temporary or short-term occupancy for travel,
recreational or vacation uses. Such vehicle shall include a vacation travel trailer, pickup camper, converted bus, tenttrailer,
or similar device used for temporary portable housing. These units shall be eight (8) feet or less in width and
thirty-five (35) feet or less in length.
Vacation travel trailer park. Any tract of land under single ownership, two (2) acres or more, where accommodation is
provided for transient trailer use.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-1)
Sec. 3.10.002 Location restricted
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a mobile home park or vacation travel trailer park within the city except as
provided in the city's zoning ordinance. All new construction permitted hereby shall comply with the requirements of
applicable provisions of this code and city ordinances. (2000 Code, sec. 15-16)
Sec. 3.10.003 Applicability to existing parks
Mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks in existence on March 2, 1970, shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this code and city ordinances when updating their existing facilities. “Updating” shall mean major
remodeling or replacement of existing facilities, but shall not include normal maintenance. (2000 Code, sec. 15-17)
Sec. 3.10.004 Supervision
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/507
A responsible attendant or supervisor, owner or operator shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home and
vacation travel trailer park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and he shall be
answerable, with the licensee, for any violation of the provisions of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 15-18)
Sec. 3.10.005 Register of occupants
It shall be the duty of the park licensee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home and vacation travel
trailer owners and occupants located within the park. This register shall be kept for a period of seven (7) years and be
readily available for inspection by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties
necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of each occupant;
(2) Make, model and year, license number and state of registration of all automobiles, mobile homes and
vacation travel trailers;
(3) Date of arrival and departure of each mobile home and vacation travel trailer.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-19)
Secs. 3.10.006–3.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Specifications
Sec. 3.10.031 Compliance
All mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks constructed in whole or in part after March 2, 1970, shall
conform to the provisions of this division. (2000 Code, sec. 15-41)
Sec. 3.10.032 Minimum size of mobile home parks
Initial development of any mobile home park shall not be less than eight (8) acres fully improved with serviced spaces.
All site plans shall define the initial development area. (2000 Code, sec. 15-42)
Sec. 3.10.033 Density
The following maximum densities shall apply to mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks:
(1) Mobile homes, per acre: 7.
(2) Vacation travel trailers, per acre: 12.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-43)
Sec. 3.10.034 Setbacks; spacing
Mobile home and vacation travel trailer park minimum setback and spacing requirements shall be as follows:
Mobile Home Vacation Travel
Trailer
(1) Spacing:
(A) Between mobile structures 15' 10'
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/507
(B) End-to-end parking 10' 6'
(2) Setbacks:
(A) From permanent structures
(excluding individual storage
structures, patio roofs and
carports)
10' 5'
(B) From patio roof or carport of one
mobile structure to adjacent
mobile structures
3' 3'
(C) Rear and side park property lines 10' 5'
(D) Front park property lines 25' 13'
(E) From interior streets 15' 10'
(F) From cul-de-sac streets 25' 10'
(3) Space width 35' 25'
(2000 Code, sec. 15-44)
Sec. 3.10.035 Tenant storage
Mobile home parks shall provide storage facilities of one hundred twenty (120) cubic feet minimum on each mobile
home space. (2000 Code, sec. 15-45)
Sec. 3.10.036 Patio roofs and carports
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/507
Mobile home and vacation travel trailer spaces may have open unenclosed patio roofs and carports of metal, fiberglass or
other incombustible materials. (2000 Code, sec. 15-46)
Sec. 3.10.037 Water supply
An adequate supply of potable water for domestic and fire protection purposes shall be supplied to meet the
requirements of the park. Mobile home and vacation travel trailer spaces shall be provided with a water hookup at least
four (4) inches above the ground and a hose connection for lawn maintenance. (2000 Code, sec. 15-47)
Sec. 3.10.038 Sewage disposal
Waste from showers, bathtubs, toilets, and lavatories in mobile homes, vacation travel trailers, and service or other
buildings within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances. In the
event public services are not available, such waste shall be discharged into a private disposal system approved by the
city-county health unit. (2000 Code, sec. 15-48)
Sec. 3.10.039 Natural gas hookups
Mobile home and vacation travel trailer spaces shall be provided with a natural gas hookup at least four (4) inches above
the ground. (2000 Code, sec. 15-49)
Sec. 3.10.040 Electrical service
Underground service shall be provided throughout mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks, and service to
individual mobile homes and vacation travel trailers shall meet the requirements as set out and provided in the electrical
code (article 3.04 of this chapter) of the city. All electric meters shall be permanently installed in a location accessible
from an interior street, alley or all-weather walkway. (2000 Code, sec. 15-50)
Sec. 3.10.041 Lighting
(a) Entrances and exits to mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks shall be lighted with one or more
luminaires (or fixtures) totaling 7700 lumens.
(b) The interior area of the mobile home park or vacation travel trailer park shall be lighted to five-tenths (0.5)
footcandle average maintained. All luminaires shall be mounted fifteen (15) feet to twenty-five (25) feet above ground
level.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-51)
Sec. 3.10.042 Walks
All interior walks of mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks shall be all-weather and not less than four (4)
feet in width. Walks provided adjacent to interior streets shall be three-foot concrete gutter-walks. (2000 Code, sec. 15-
52)
Sec. 3.10.043 Interior streets
(a) Interior asphalt streets shall be provided to service each mobile home and vacation travel trailer space. All spaces
shall abut upon such paved interior street, which shall connect with a public street. Interior streets where on-street
parking is permitted shall not be less than thirty-five (35) feet in width.
(b) In mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks where no on-street parking is permitted, the interior streets
shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width.
(c) All streets shall have standard curb and gutter except where three-foot gutter-walks or drives are stipulated.
(d) No cul-de-sac street shall be over two hundred fifty (250) feet from the center of the turnaround to the nearest
curbline of the street it abuts. At the end of each cul-de-sac, a six-foot-wide open, unobstructed firefighting easement
shall be provided. This easement shall not be more than two hundred (200) feet in length and shall abut and open onto a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/507
private or public street other than a cul-de-sac. Gates may be installed in such opening, provided breakaway locks are
used.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-53)
Sec. 3.10.044 Ingress and egress
All mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks shall have a double drive entrance separated by a thirty-foot
median and a secondary access street at least three hundred (300) feet from this double entrance. Such streets shall have
standard curb and gutter and shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. A secondary access street can be chained
for control as long as a breakaway lock is used. (2000 Code, sec. 15-54)
Sec. 3.10.045 Driveways or accessways to individual stands
A driveway or accessway shall be reserved from the street to the mobile home or vacation travel trailer stand. (2000
Code, sec. 15-55)
Sec. 3.10.046 Parking
(a) Two (2) off-street paved parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home space and two (2) additional guest
paved parking spaces shall be provided in a common area for each three (3) mobile homes in the park. Such parking
spaces shall not be over three hundred (300) feet from the mobile homes they serve.
(b) Vacation travel trailer parks shall provide one automobile parking space for each vacation travel trailer space, and
one additional guest parking space shall be provided in a common area for each four (4) vacation travel trailer spaces in
the park. Such parking spaces shall not be over two hundred (200) feet from the travel trailer they serve.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-56)
Sec. 3.10.047 Recreation area
A landscaped recreation area or areas totaling not less than eight percent (8%) of the total mobile home park site shall be
provided. Such recreation area shall be provided in a central location where possible, and may be divided so as not to
exceed one such recreation area per five acres of gross mobile home park area. Regardless of location, each recreation
area's smallest dimension shall be not less than fifty (50) feet. Community buildings and community use facilities, adult
recreation and child play areas and swimming pools may be included in these recreation areas. This area shall be
protected from traffic hazards. (2000 Code, sec. 15-57)
Sec. 3.10.048 Sanitation facilities for travel trailer parks
Vacation travel trailer parks shall provide toilets, baths or showers, and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to
the following requirements:
(1) Service buildings. The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be either in
separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. Such service buildings
shall be well-lighted and ventilated at all times with screened openings. These service buildings shall be
maintained in clean, slightly condition and kept free of any condition that could menace the health of any
occupant. Service buildings shall be located not closer than five (5) feet nor farther than two hundred (200)
feet from any vacation travel trailer space.
(2) Hot water. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in any required service
buildings, and for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities.
(3) Toilet facilities and showers.
(A) Males. Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for every fifteen
(15) vacation travel trailers, one urinal for every fifteen (15) vacation travel trailers, and one shower
with individual dressing accommodations for every ten (10) vacation travel trailers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/507
(B) Females. Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than one flush toilet for every ten
(10) vacation travel trailers, and one shower with individual dressing accommodations for every ten
(10) vacation travel trailers.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-58)
Sec. 3.10.049 Disposal of garbage and rubbish
Mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks shall provide a sufficient number of dumpsters to handle the refuse
generated by their occupants. Such dumpsters shall be located in designated areas where pickup will be made by the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-59)
Sec. 3.10.050 Fire protection
(a) Mobile homes.
(1) Each mobile home shall contain a five-pound CO2 fire extinguisher at all times.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be installed so that no mobile home space will be over three hundred (300) feet from
a hydrant setting on a water main.
(3) There shall not be any storage under the mobile home.
(4) Fences around mobile homes shall not be over thirty (30) inches high within the required front yard.
(b) Vacation travel trailers.
(1) Each vacation travel trailer shall contain a five-pound CO2 fire extinguisher at all times.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be installed so that no vacation travel trailer space will be over two hundred (200)
feet from a hydrant setting on a water main.
(3) There shall not be any storage under the vacation travel trailer.
(c) Inspections. The mobile home park and vacation travel park licensee shall be responsible for maintaining the
conditions of this section. The city fire marshal shall make periodic inspections of these parks to insure the above
conditions are maintained.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-60)
Sec. 3.10.051 Pads and piers
A concrete pad, four (4) inches thick, is to be placed at the location of the wheels of each mobile home or vacation travel
trailer. The size of the pad will be determined by the location and spacing of the wheels. A pier is to be located at each
corner of the building. The pier hole is to be at least eight (8) inches in diameter and three (3) feet deep. It is to be filled
with concrete and an eyelet embedded in the concrete. The trailer is to be connected to each eyelet by a cable or some
other device, thus securing the structure and insuring its stability. (2000 Code, sec. 15-61)
Secs. 3.10.052–3.10.070 Reserved
Division 3. Appeals and Variances
Sec. 3.10.071 Board of appeals designated
In order to interpret this article and to grant such variances as may be deemed necessary, the building code board of
appeals shall serve as the board of appeals for this article. (2000 Code, sec. 15-71)
Sec. 3.10.072 Rules and meetings of board of appeals
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/507
The board of appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this
article. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. (2000 Code, sec.
15-72)
Sec. 3.10.073 Appeal procedure
Any person aggrieved or any official or department of the governing body of the city affected by a decision or judgment
of the building official concerning interpretation or administration of this article may appeal such decision or judgment
to the board of appeals. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time as may be provided by the rules of the
board of appeals, by filing with the building official and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal. (2000 Code, sec.
15-73)
Sec. 3.10.074 Application for variance
A written application for a variance from the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by an accurate legal
description, maps, site plans, drawings and any necessary data, demonstrating that:
(1) Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building
involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
(2) Literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this article;
(3) The special conditions and circumstances do not result from actions of the applicant;
(4) Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by
this article to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-74)
Sec. 3.10.075 Nonconforming uses or uses permitted in other districts not grounds for variance
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands,
structures or buildings in other districts, shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance. (2000 Code, sec. 15-75)
Sec. 3.10.076 Findings for granting variance
(a) The board of appeals shall make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the
variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building
and structure.
(b) The board of appeals shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this article, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the
public welfare.
(2000 Code, sec. 15-76)
Sec. 3.10.077 Limitations on variances
In granting any variance, the board of appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with
this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the exception is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article. The board of appeals shall prescribe a time limit within which the
action for which the exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both,
such action within the time limit set shall void the exception. (2000 Code, sec. 15-77)
ARTICLE 3.11 SIGNS
Sec. 3.11.001 Sign code adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/507
The 1997 edition, Uniform Sign Code, as copyrighted in 1997 by the International Conference of Building Officials,
Whittier, California, as hereinafter amended, is specifically adopted as the sign code of the city, and a copy is attached to
the ordinance codified in this article and incorporated herein by reference as though set out completely in detail. A copy
of said Uniform Sign Code shall be filed with the city secretary and a copy maintained in the office of the building
official of the city. All such copies shall be open to public inspection during business hours of the offices in which they
are maintained. (2000 Code, sec. 19-81)
Charter reference–Adoption of code of technical regulations, sec. 2.15.
Sec. 3.11.002 Amendments to sign code
The sign code adopted by the provisions of this article is hereby amended, altered and changed in the following respects:
Section 103.3, Board of appeals, is hereby amended to add the following sentence:
See article 3.02 of the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances for means of appeal.
Section 103.4 of the 1997 edition, Uniform Sign Code, shall hereafter read as follows:
Section 103.4 Violation and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any
sign or structure in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of
the provisions of this code.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed,
continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000).
Section 303, Exemptions. 3, Signs less than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section 304 of the sign code is hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 304.1 Fee schedule. A sign permit fee shall be paid at the time application is made for erection
of a sign. Sign permit fees are as follows:
All signs (to include billboard, wall, pole, marquee,
portable, ground, roof, temporary and projecting signs)
$25.00 each
Reinspection or red tag fee
$25.00
After-hours inspections (After-hours inspections are
between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday
through Friday and all day on weekends and city-recognized
holidays.)
$25.00
Any inspection not listed
$25.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/507
Section 304.2 Investigation fees: Work without a permit.
Section 304.2.1. Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit
may be issued for such work.
Section 304.2.2. Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or
not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the
permit fee required by this code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person
from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
Chapter 3 of the sign code is hereby amended by adding the following sections thereto, reading as follows:
Section 307. Signs–Special Definitions.
Banner, flag or pennant. Any sign exposed to the weather and which is made from or on cloth or other
limp material. A flag shall be any such sign which is flown from one flagstaff. Any sign made from or
on cloth or other limp material and which is displayed behind glass and within a building shall be
deemed a wall sign.
Billboard. Any structure or portion thereof upon which are outdoor advertising signs which advertise,
promote or otherwise disseminate information pertaining to goods, products or services, including
charitable services or appeals and political services or appeals, and which are not related to goods,
products or services comprising a primary use on the premises on which the sign is located, being
either:
(a) Poster panels or bulletins normally mounted on a building wall or freestanding structure and advertising
copy in the form of pasted paper; or
(b) Multi-prism signs–same as above, and alternating advertising messages on the one display area; or
(c) Painted bulletins, where the advertiser's message is painted directly on the background of a wallmounted
or freestanding display area.
Sign. A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to or represented
directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, institution, or business. A “sign” is not a display of official court or public
office notices, nor is it a flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, political unit, school, or religious group.
A “sign” shall not include a sign located completely within an enclosed building.
Sign area. The area of any freestanding sign or billboard shall be the sum of the areas enclosed by the
minimum imaginary rectangles, triangles, or circles which fully contain all extremities of the sign,
including the frame, but excluding any supports. Sign area for all other signs shall be the sum of the
areas of the minimum imaginary rectangles, triangles, or circle which fully contain all words, numbers,
figures, devices, designs, or trademarks by which anything is made known.
Sign, auxiliary. Any sign indicating general information, such as pricing, trading stamps, credit cards,
official notices or services required by law, trade associations, and signs giving directions to offices,
restrooms, exits and like facilities.
Sign, billboard. See “billboard.”
Sign, business. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity,
service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises.
Sign, community service. Any sign which solicits support for or advertises a nonprofit community use,
public use, or social institution. Such signs may include, but shall not be limited to, seasonal holidays,
such as Christmas or Easter, school activities, charitable programs, or religious activities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/507
Sign, flashing. An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or in
constant intensity or color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this code any
revolving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
Sign, freestanding. Any sign permanently affixed to the ground and which is not affixed to a building
and which is not used for off-premises advertising.
Sign, governmental. Any sign indicating public works projects, public services or other programs or
activities conducted or required by an governmental subdivision.
Sign height. Sign height shall be the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its
supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the average established ground level beneath the sign.
Sign, illuminated. Any sign designed to give forth any artificial light, or designed to reflect light from
one or more sources, natural or artificial.
Sign, portable. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building and which is designed
to permit removal and reuse.
Sign, realty. Any sign used to advertise a real estate development site or to advertise that real estate is
for sale or lease.
Sign, roof. Any signs which are affixed to building roofs, except sloping roofs.
Sign setback. Sign setback shall be the horizontal distance between a sign and the front lot line, as
measured from that part of the sign, including its extremities and supports, nearest to any point on an
imaginary vertical plane projecting from the front lot line.
Sign, sloping. Any sign affixed to a sloping roof.
Sign, temporary business promotion. Any sign which is designed to produce revenue by advertising
services, sales, or other temporary promotional programs which have a limited duration.
Sign, wall. Any sign affixed flat against and parallel to a building wall. For the purposes of this
definition, “wall” shall include window areas.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to
something having a location on the ground.
All terms not defined in the sign code or other codes of the city shall be defined by the common usage
as determined by the building official.
Section 308. Locations permitted and prohibited.
a. A billboard, signboard or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use in any A, R-1L, R-
1, R-2, 2F, SF-A, MF-1, MF-2, MH-1, MH-2 or U zoning district.
Exceptions:
(1) The placing of an unilluminated “for sale” or “for rent” sign not more than six (6) square feet in
area may be permitted as an accessway use in any zoning district.
(2) Churches and other institutions may display signs showing name, activities, and services therein
provided. Buildings on these premises may also have signage identifying their name or usage.
(3) At any location where a garage sale is a permitted use, one (1) unlighted sign not exceeding
twelve (12) square feet in area shall be permitted. Said sign shall pertain to the garage sale only and
shall be located on the property. Said sign shall be permitted for the three-day period of the sale.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/507
(4) During construction activities on any building in any zoning district, an unilluminated sign
advertising contractors or architects (one (1) each) on such premises shall be permitted, provided that
such sign shall be removed upon completion of the work.
(5) A sign identifying the street address and/or occupants of a premises is permitted in any district.
(6) Permitted uses in MF-1, MF-2, MH-1 and MH-2 districts may display signs showing names,
activities and other necessary information provided on their premises.
b. Signs (advertising) used in connection with and on the same lot as the business establishments or other
permitted uses to which they refer in any O or C-1 district are permitted, except that they shall not be placed
within any required yard nor within twenty-five (25) feet of any R district. Freestanding signs are not to
exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet or thirty-five (35) feet in height.
c. Sign (advertising) used in connection with and on the same lot as the business establishment or other
permitted uses to which they refer and sign (advertising) or billboard (which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere that upon the same lot) are
permitted in any C-2, CB, C-3, M-1, or M-2 district.
d. Signage may be approved as part of any site plan in any PD or D-H district or as part of a specific use
permit.
e. Entrance, exit, and all other small message-type signs are permitted in all districts.
f. Special temporary development and promotion signs not exceeding two hundred forty (240) square feet
in area may be erected upon approval of the building official, provided they advertise a development or
promotion legally permitted in the district where they are located and provided they are located on the
property being developed. The building official shall control the location and duration of such sign use to
require that the occupancy and use of adjacent lots are not interfered with and that no safety hazard is created.
Such special development sign must be removed at the direction of the building official, or after completion
of ninety percent (90%) of the project advertised in any event.
g. Height requirements for pole signs will be 70' maximum, measured from surrounding natural grade to
the furthest point at the top of the sign structure. In the event that the natural grade is above the nearest
adjacent street curbline, the curbline will be the measuring point. Minimum height clearance on pole signs
will be 8' measured from the lowest projecting point on the sign to the natural grade or curbline, whichever
point is highest.
Section 403.1, General. Tables 4-B and 4-C are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Sections 403.5, 403.6, 503.1, 803.1, 903.2, 1003.1, 1003.2, 1103.1, and 1103.2 are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Section 1402.3, Clearance, is hereby amended by deleting the second paragraph.
(2000 Code, sec. 19-82)
ARTICLE 3.12 WET WEATHER LAKE AREAS
Sec. 3.12.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city does ordain as follows. (2000 Code, sec. 19-26)
Sec. 3.12.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/507
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in
flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to
other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(2000 Code, sec. 19-27)
Sec. 3.12.003 Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and
sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in
such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas.
(2000 Code, sec. 19-28)
Sec. 3.12.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purpose, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against
flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are
involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will increase flood hazards to other lands.
(2000 Code, sec. 19-29)
Sec. 3.12.005 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall be applicable:
High-water level. That contour line within any natural stormwater lake area in which there is sufficient water storage
capacity to contain a rainfall of seven (7) inches off the areas drained into the lake reduced by a runoff factor of seventy
percent (70%) of the one-hundred-year floodplain boundary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Federal Insurance Administration, whichever is the highest elevation.
Wet weather lake area. That portion of any natural stormwater lake area below the high-water elevation plus one foot.
The term “wet weather lake area” as used in this article and the term “playa lake” as used in other ordinances of the city
are synonymous.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/507
(2000 Code, sec. 19-30)
Sec. 3.12.006 Dumping, excavation and construction prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in violation of this article, to:
(1) Dump or place any dirt, debris or other solid material in any wet weather lake area;
(2) Transport or direct the transportation of any dirt, debris or other material over any of the streets or
alleys in the city for the purpose of dumping or otherwise placing any such material in any wet weather lake
area;
(3) Knowingly allow any dirt, debris or other material to be placed in any wet weather lake area to remain
there for one day or more;
(4) Excavate or alter any wet weather lake area;
(5) Transport or direct the transportation of any dirt, debris or other material over any of the streets or
alleys in the city for the purpose of or excavating or altering any wet weather lake area;
(6) Allow the excavation or alteration of any wet weather lake area;
(7) Erect or permit the erection of any improvements or structures within any wet weather lake area.
(2000 Code, sec. 19-31)
Sec. 3.12.007 Violations declared nuisance
The dumping, excavating, altering or placing of any dirt, debris or other solid material, or its transportation or
maintenance as provided in section 3.12.006 above is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (2000 Code, sec. 19-32)
Sec. 3.12.008 Issuance of building permits
The building official is hereby prohibited from issuing any building permit or building permits for any structure or
structures within any wet weather lake area, and that part of every ordinance authorizing the issuance of building permits
insofar as the same may relate to land within any wet weather lake area is hereby repealed. (2000 Code, sec. 19-33)
Sec. 3.12.009 Approval of subdivision plats
The city council shall refuse to approve any subdivision plat or replat within its jurisdiction until the city engineer and
the planning and zoning commission have certified that no part of the area proposed to be platted is within a wet weather
lake area. (2000 Code, sec. 19-34)
Sec. 3.12.010 Permitted excavation
Nothing in this article shall prevent an excavation of wet weather lake areas or the use of such excavated materials to
make fills in the wet weather lake area for the purpose of contracting the high-water level contour line in any natural
stormwater lake area to the end of salvaging a reasonable amount of usable land; provided, however, the planning and
zoning commission shall not approve any plat on filled land without the certificate required in section 3.12.009 hereof
and unless the filled land has an elevation above the high-water level contour line sufficient to permit construction of
curb and gutter with a minimum grade of zero point two of one percent (0.002%) for the drainage of stormwater to the
storage area, and provided further that this requirement shall be waived in the event stormwater drainage systems are
installed and of sufficient capacity to transport storm drainage to the storage areas. (2000 Code, sec. 19-35)
Sec. 3.12.011 Submission of contour map
If required by the city engineer, the owner or land developer shall submit with his plat or replat a contour map showing
the proposed plat and its relation to any wet weather lake area in the vicinity of the land sought to be platted. The map
shall show the high-water level and the entire wet weather lake area together with the land sought to be platted, showing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/507
elevations in detail with contour elevation lines of no greater than one foot of vertical measurement. (2000 Code, sec.
19-36)
Sec. 3.12.012 Appeals
In the event that any person affected by this article desires to appeal the decision of the city building official, the city
engineer or the planning and zoning commission, the appeal shall be made to the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 19-37)
Sec. 3.12.013 Exemptions
This article shall not prohibit the construction of any public work, the extension of any public utilities or the paving of
any roadway or the location and improvement of any public park in any wet weather lake area where the project is
planned or the contract is approved by or is done under the supervision of the city engineer and the project, public work,
extension of public utility or paving is not designed or calculated to decrease the water-holding capacity of the lake area
involved. (2000 Code, sec. 19-38)
Sec. 3.12.014 Methods of improvement
Wet weather lake areas may be improved by any of the following methods:
(1) Wet weather lake areas may be dedicated for park purposes by the owner or land developer provided
that said wet weather lake area shall have a completed grade not to exceed twenty to one (20 to 1: one foot
vertical, twenty (20) feet horizontal) and providing that not less than five (5) acres or twenty percent (20%) of
the dedicated area, whichever is greater, is above the established high-water level. The city may accept said
dedicated property and upon acceptance may assume the pro rata costs for water and sewer charges, curb and
gutter costs, paving costs, street name and traffic signs and street lighting costs abutting the wet weather lake
area as consideration for dedication of said wet weather lake area for park and recreational purposes.
(2) The land developer may plat said wet weather lake area as a single lot. Said lot shall abut street
frontage on all sides, which shall be curbed, guttered, paved and all pro rata charges paid. This lot shall have
no final grade in excess of twenty to one slope (20 to 1: one foot vertical, twenty (20) feet horizontal) and
shall have storm sewers and/or concrete drainage ditches of sufficient capacity to transport storm drainage as
set forth in section 3.12.010 of this article to the lowest portion of the wet weather lake basin. Said storm
sewers and/or concrete drainage ditches must be installed or their installation assured prior to final plat
approval as recommended by the planning commission and approved by the city council.
(3) The land developer may plat said wet weather lake area as a single lot. Said lot shall abut concrete curb
and gutter with a minimum five-foot concrete walk abutting said curb and gutter. Said lot shall be completely
enclosed by a permanent six-foot man-proof galvanized chainlink fence or equal, four (4) feet from the curb
and gutter, and all pro rata charges paid. This lot shall have no final grade in excess of ten to one slope (10 to
1: one foot vertical, ten (10) feet horizontal), except as provided herein, and shall have storm sewers and/or
concrete drainage ditches of sufficient capacity to transport storm drainage as set forth in section 3.12.010 of
this article to the lowest portion of the wet weather lake basin. Said storm sewers and/or concrete drainage
ditches must be installed or their installation assured prior to final plat approval by the city council. All banks
or slopes in excess of that set forth herein shall have concrete riprap with a minimum of four-inch-thick
concrete reinforced with six by six (6 x 6) by number ten by ten (10 x 10) gauge welded wire mesh.
(2000 Code, sec. 19-39)
ARTICLE 3.13 FLOOD PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.13.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has, in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city
council does ordain as follows. This article shall be known and may be cited as the flood prevention ordinance of the city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/507
and shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the city's jurisdiction. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-51), adopted
2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in
flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood and hazardous to
other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-52), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.003 Statement of purpose; Methods of reducing flood losses
(a) It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in special flood hazard areas. This article is designed to regulate restrict uses of
land that cause increases in flood heights or velocities and to prevent the construction of barriers which will divert
floodwaters and subject other lands to greater flood hazards. Provisions of this article are designed to do the following:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and
sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in
such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(b) In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against
flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are
involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-53), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.004 Cumulativeness
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/507
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-54), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the
apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and
unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan
becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appeal. A request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request
for a variance.
Appeals board. The city building trades and fire code board of appeals.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and
the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent annual chance (100-year)
flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After
detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones
A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given
year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and
construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection
provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above
ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/507
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing
construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Existing structures. For the purpose of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM being February 18, 2011.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The parent organization for the Federal Insurance Administration.
Fill or filling. The increase of elevation in any area by the addition of material to the surface of such area.
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or floodrelated
erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances, (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of
flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and
their contents.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and
expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a
system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Floodway fringe. The portion of the regulatory floodplain lying outside the floodway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/507
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department
of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure
and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcel) of land divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Master drainage plan. The plan adopted and approved by the city council that established an estimated peak water
surface elevation for playa lakes and rates of overflow between lakes for certain areas studied within the corporate city
limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/507
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources
Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, additional placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that
is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirement
see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/507
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of 44 CFR, National
Flood Insurance Program regulations, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum,
where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-55), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.006 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I
(19-56), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.007 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a current scientific and
engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Hale County, Texas and Incorporated Areas,” dated
February 18, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or
FBFM) dated February 18, 2011, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
incorporated as a part of this article. The chief building official shall obtain, review, and utilize other base flood
elevations and floodway data which might become available from federal, state, local, or private sources as criteria for
requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development within the city's jurisdiction complies
with this article. The studies shall be maintained on file in the office of public works and used as a basis for changes in
requirements of this article recommended by the city council. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-57), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.008 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance
11-3544, sec. I (19-58), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of
this article and other applicable regulations. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-59), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.010 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-60), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.011 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on
the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-61), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.012 Penalties for noncompliance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/507
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with
the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply
with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day on
which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this article.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-73), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.013 Copies of flood hazard map
(a) When available, there shall be furnished to persons requesting same, a copy of the city flood hazard boundary map.
(b) To cover the city's cost, there shall be charged for each said map a sum of five and no/100 dollars ($5.00) payable
to the city.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-74), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.014 Severability
Severability is intended throughout and within this article. If any provision, including any section, paragraph, sentence,
clause, phrase or word or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, unconstitutional, or
unenforceable by a court of law or administrative agency with jurisdiction over the matter, such action shall not be
construed to affect any other valid portion of this article. A constitutional construction hereof is intended and shall be
given. There is not intent herein to violate either of the Texas Constitution or the Constitution of the United States.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-75), adopted 2/17/11)
Secs. 3.13.015–3.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.13.031 Designation of the floodplain administrator
(a) The chief building official is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits, required by section 3.13.008 of this
article, and determine whether proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will
be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(4) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(5) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the state
water development board (TWDB) and also the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ), prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(6) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/507
(7) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.13.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division
3.
(8) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(9) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's
FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that
the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-62), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.032 Permit development procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement
of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the
following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.13.063(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.13.031(b).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance
and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/507
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding, or erosion damage, for the proposed
use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-63), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.033 Variance procedures
(a) The building trades and fire code board of appeals shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from
the requirements of this article.
(b) The building trades and fire code board of appeals shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the building trades and fire code board of appeals may appeal
such decision to the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to
the federal emergency management agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the
remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing the relevant factors in section 3.13.032(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeals board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article.
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/507
(3) Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the
base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-64), adopted 2/17/11; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.13.034–3.13.060 Reserved
Division 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.13.061 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with material resistant to flood
damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding; and
(8) All new construction or substantial improvement shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-65), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.062 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be
consistent with sections 3.13.002 and 3.13.003 of this article as well as meet development permit requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/507
(b) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including
the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.13.007 or section 3.13.031(b)(7) of this article.
(c) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure of flood hazards.
(d) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-66), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.063 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 3.13.007,
section 3.13.031(b)(7) or section 3.13.062(b), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator
that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 3.13.032(a)(1) is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that
below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of
such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1)
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided
that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or
FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of
this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of the over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/507
(B) Require that all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM on the following sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood,
Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM
that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: (i) the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or (ii) the manufactured
home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and
AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.13.032(a) and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-67), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.064 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH ZONES)
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.13.007, are areas designated as shallow flooding.
These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number
is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM
(at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified
flood depth level in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, the structure is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/507
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.13.032(a)(3), are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-68), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.065 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.13.007 are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and
erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above, is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 3.13.061 through 3.13.065.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would
result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the
provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-69), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.066 Increased flood heights; liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on
the part of the city, any official, or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-70), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.067 Building permits
Except as provided in the following section, the building official is prohibited from issuing building permits for
structures within any playa lake area. (Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-71), adopted 2/17/11)
Sec. 3.13.068 Development and platting
(a) The chief building official is authorized to issue permits to owners to make uniform fills in playa lake areas below
the estimated high-water line; provided, that such fills are made by dirt excavated from below the estimated high-water
line, and the fills produce a ground surface above the estimated high-water lever, for all and in such areas intended to be
improved for human habitation if the plans have been approved by planning and zoning commission, and the water
holding capacity of the lake area is not thereby decreased. The perimeter shown on such plats of any such lake area shall
be modified to conform to such fills, and building permits may be issued when the ground surface has in fact been raised
to an elevation above the estimated high-water level.
(b) When the planning and zoning commission approves any plat or replat of any tract of land in a playa lake area
affected by an estimated high-water line, and such plat is supported by plans and specifications for making uniform fills
below the estimated high-water level by using dirt excavated from below the estimated high-water level and the fills will
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/507
produce a ground surface above the estimated high-water level for all land intended to be improved for human habitation
and the water-holding capacity of the lake area will not be thereby decreased. The perimeter of such lake area plat shall
be modified to conform thereto, and building permits may be issued when the ground surface has in fact been raised to
an elevation above the estimated high-water level.
(Ordinance 11-3544, sec. I (19-72), adopted 2/17/11)
ARTICLE 3.14 PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.14.001 Entrances and driveways
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any entrance or driveway, or otherwise remove any curb and gutter, without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the city engineer. (2000 Code, sec. 21-1)
Sec. 3.14.002 Damaging or altering curb and gutter; altering sidewalk grade
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully break, tear down, change or injure any curb or gutter or change the grade
or plane of any sidewalk on, along, or by the side of any paved street in the city. (2000 Code, sec. 21-2)
Sec. 3.14.003 Adoption of state law relative to street improvements
The provisions of chapter 106, 40th Legislature, the first called session, Acts of 1927, now known as V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, chapter 313, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city as controlling the establishment,
construction and repair of street improvements within the city. (2000 Code, sec. 21-3)
State law reference–Street improvements and assessments in municipalities with population of more than 1,000, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
ch. 313.
Sec. 3.14.004 Conformance with specifications of city engineer
All streets, curbs and/or gutters and sidewalks, or extensions and appurtenances thereto, shall be constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications as determined by the city engineer. (2000 Code, sec. 21-4)
Sec. 3.14.005 Temporary culverts prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or build a culvert of wood or other temporary materials across any street
gutter or drainageway. (2000 Code, sec. 21-5)
Sec. 3.14.006 Interfering with public improvements
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct any public improvements authorized by the city council,
the mayor or other city officials by means of threats, coercion, duress or any other method whatsoever, either directly or
indirectly. (2000 Code, sec. 21-6)
Sec. 3.14.007 Manner of work; cleanliness of premises
All work done or performed under the provisions of this article shall be done or performed in a good workmanlike
manner. Such work shall not be accepted or approved by the city until the premises thereof have been cleaned and
cleared of all debris, trash and rubbish which may have accumulated during such work. (2000 Code, sec. 21-7)
Sec. 3.14.008 Maintenance of vegetation by abutting property owners
(a) It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of premises within the city to keep the vegetation which grows upon
or within an adjoining alley, easement, or other public way maintained in such a manner as to not constitute a nuisance
or hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/507
(b) Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine as set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code, pursuant to
law.
(2000 Code, sec. 21-8)
Secs. 3.14.009–3.14.030 Reserved
Division 2. Sidewalks*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.14.031 Duty of abutting owners and occupants to maintain sidewalks
It shall be the duty and obligation of all owners, occupants and users of real property abutting upon streets in the city, at
their own cost and expense, to maintain and keep the sidewalks and paving laid thereon bordering their property at curbgrade
and level and free of depressions, excavating, deviations, inequalities, obstacles, obstructions or encroachments,
natural or artificial, above or below ground level, or which overlap, impinge upon or appropriate any part of the sidewalk
area or the space eight (8) feet above it; and generally and in every manner to keep such sidewalks in a safe, adequate
and indefective condition, so that they are easily accessible to and may be freely and safely used by the public for travel
by foot. (2000 Code, sec. 21-22)
Sec. 3.14.032 Liability for injury or damage caused by failure to maintain
Where and when, by reason of a violation of any of the foregoing provisions, injury or damage is occasioned or inflicted
upon any person, whether on the sidewalk or in the street, primary liability for all such injury or damage shall rest upon
the owner, occupant and user of the property abutting upon such defective sidewalk. (2000 Code, sec. 21-21)
Secs. 3.14.033–3.14.060 Reserved
Part II. Obstructions
Sec. 3.14.061 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for a person to, in any manner, obstruct the view of a pedestrian of any sidewalk, public easement or
street in the city by placing, depositing, or suffering to remain thereon, or permitting any of his servants, employees, or
persons under his control to deposit, place or suffer to remain thereon, any goods, wares, merchandise, material, vehicle,
or other objects whatever, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager. (2000 Code, sec. 21-23)
Sec. 3.14.062 Application for permit; duration of permit
Any such application for permit shall be filed with the city manager seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date that said
permit is to be issued in order that the city manager may have sufficient time to investigate the feasibility of issuing said
permit. Any permit issued under this section shall expire seventy-two (72) hours after it has been issued. (2000 Code,
sec. 21-24)
Sec. 3.14.063 Appeals
Any person who disagrees with the decision of the city manager may appeal such, in writing, to the city council within
ten (10) days after the permit was denied or granted. (2000 Code, sec. 21-25)
Sec. 3.14.064 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/507
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this part shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2000 Code, sec. 21-26)
Secs. 3.14.065–3.14.090 Reserved
Division 3. Excavations*
Sec. 3.14.091 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or opening in any street, alley or public highway of the city
without first having obtained a permit from the city engineer to do so. (2000 Code, sec. 21-36)
Sec. 3.14.092 Application for permit
The application for a permit to make any excavation or opening in any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the
city shall be made to the city engineer and state clearly the name of the street or highway in which it is proposed to make
such an opening, the exact location in said highway wherein it is proposed to make such opening, the purpose of making
the opening, and the name of the person who proposes to make such excavation or opening. (2000 Code, sec. 21-37)
Sec. 3.14.093 Bond
The city engineer shall estimate the probable cost of replacing the soil and improvements which may be removed from
such public street or highway, and shall require the applicant to file written bond in an amount sufficient to cover such
cost, with two (2) or more sufficient sureties, conditioned that the street shall be restored in as good condition as it was
before the excavation or opening therein was made. Such bond shall be received and approved by the city engineer. If
the applicant elects so to do, he may make a cash deposit in any sum as may have been fixed by the city engineer in lieu
of the written bond. (2000 Code, sec. 21-38)
Sec. 3.14.094 Issuance of permit
When the bond or deposit required in section 3.14.093 shall have been accepted by the city engineer, he shall then issue
a permit for the excavation or opening named in the application, and the applicant may then proceed with the work in the
exact location named in his application, and in no other place. (2000 Code, sec. 21-39)
Sec. 3.14.095 Protection of public
It shall be the duty of any person making an excavation in the streets of the city to adequately and sufficiently protect all
such excavations by barricades or other obstructions, including not less than one flashing amber or red light on each side
of such excavation during the nighttime, so as to prevent accidents or injury to persons or property until such time as
such excavation is resurfaced and approved by the city engineer. (2000 Code, sec. 21-40)
Sec. 3.14.096 Supervision of work
All the work of excavating or making any character of opening in any of the streets, alleys or highways of the city shall
at all times be under the supervision of the city engineer, and the person or persons doing such work shall do the same in
the manner directed by him to the end that the streets and highways of the city shall not be unduly disturbed and traffic
thereon obstructed. (2000 Code, sec. 21-41)
Sec. 3.14.097 Duties upon completion of work
After the excavation or opening shall have been made, the person so making it shall backfill the excavation with such
materials and in such manner as the city engineer may require, and leave the street or highway in the same condition as it
was before the opening therein was made. (2000 Code, sec. 21-42)
Sec. 3.14.098 Acceptance of completed work; failure to complete work
The conditions of the bond required by section 3.14.093 shall not be considered to have been complied with until the city
engineer shall have accepted the street or highway as being in good condition. In the event that the person making the
opening shall fail to leave the highway in a good state of repair, satisfactory to the city engineer, then the city engineer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/507
shall call upon the bondsmen to pay for the cost of repairing such highway; provided, however, that in the event of a
cash deposit instead of a bond, the city engineer may proceed to have the street or highway put in good condition, paying
for same out of the deposit made with him, and if there be any remainder of the deposit after paying for such work, such
remainder shall be refunded to the person making the deposit. (2000 Code, sec. 21-43)
Sec. 3.14.099 Right of city to require boring
Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, the city engineer may require work to be accomplished under this
division to be performed by boring under the streets, alleys, public highways or sidewalks in this city. (2000 Code, sec.
21-44)
Secs. 3.14.100–3.14.120 Reserved
Division 4. Encumbrances
Sec. 3.14.121 Definitions
Alley. A minor way which is used primarily for installation of public utilities and for vehicular service access to the back
side or the side of the property otherwise abutting the street.
Easement. A right held by the city to be used for access, drainage, or the placement of utilities such as, but not limited to,
water, sewer, gas, telephone, cable television, and electrical lines.
Franchise. A grant of authority by the city to utilize the public right-of-way under certain specific terms and conditions
given by ordinance.
Right-of-way. Any strip or area of land, including surface, overhead or air space, or underground or subsurface space,
which is used or intended to be used or dedicated to be used wholly or in part as a public street or alley or as the location
of public walkways and utility or drainage facilities or installations.
Sidewalk. The concrete or asphalt surfaced portion of a street between either the curbline or roadway and the adjacent
property line intended for pedestrian use.
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way, other than an alley, publicly maintained, when
any part of it is opened to the public for vehicular use.
Other definitions. Definitions not expressly described herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in
municipal planning and engineering practices.
(2000 Code, sec. 21-71)
Sec. 3.14.122 Penalty
Any person, individual, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provisions of section 1.01.009 of this code, and each and
every day that a provision of this division is violated shall constitute a separate offense. (2000 Code, sec. 21-83)
Sec. 3.14.123 Unlawful activities, uses and conditions
The following activities, uses, conditions, or occurrences on public right-of-way shall be deemed unlawful:
(1) To operate any machinery having tracks or feet or pulling lugs over or along any paved streets or alleys.
(2) The hauling of gravel, brick, sand, concrete, ready-mix concrete or mortar in such a manner to scatter
or waste these substances onto any streets, alleys, or sidewalks.
(3) To drop, spill, or allow to leak out of any tank or vessel, whether connected with a motor vehicle or
otherwise, any gasoline or other oil or petroleum-base substance onto any street, alley, or sidewalk.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/507
(4) The discharging of any odorous water, sewage, wastewater, waste oils, kitchen grease, kitchen slop
water, mop water, or other offensive or hazardous substance on to any public right-of-way.
(5) To place, locate, store, construct, install, or maintain any structure, building, object, vehicle, device,
fence, wall or other material on or within any public right-of-way. Trees and other living domesticated
vegetation located within the parkway area of a paved street and mailboxes are exempt from this prohibition.
Provided, however, the city, or its authorized agents, shall not be required to replace any obstruction on or
within any public way that must be removed during the course of maintenance, construction and/or
reconstruction on or within the public way.
(6) To cast, place, or store any animal, offal, garbage, trash, refuse, or debris into or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, street gutter or other public right-of-way.
(7) To construct or place any temporary or permanent structure within, on, or over any public utility or
drainage easement except for utilities or other facilities associated with drainage. The property owner may
place removable section type fencing, asphalt or concrete paving, or landscaping within any dedicated public
utility easement. Provided, however, that the city or any franchised utility of the city shall not be required to
replace anything that must be removed during the course of maintenance, construction or reconstruction
within any public utility or drainage easement.
(8) To obstruct, close up or fill any street gutter or public drainageway of any kind for any purpose.
(9) To place or maintain a sign of any kind designed for the purpose of advertising of any product or
business, or any other kind of article or structure for the purpose of advertising, on the right-of-way of any
street or highway within the city.
(10) To place or maintain any manmade structure or article of any kind on any right-of-way of any street or
highway of the city without the express permission of the city council as expressed by resolution passed by
the council in regular session.
(2000 Code, sec. 21-72)
Sec. 3.14.124 License required; conditions
The following shall control the consideration of requests for encumbrances on, over, under, or through public rights-ofway:
(1) The right to encumber the public right-of-way may be granted only by license and every grantee of a
license shall agree to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all damages to persons or property,
or both, arising in any manner out of the use of the licensed premises. Each applicant for a license shall
submit a nonrefundable deposit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to cover the expenses of the processing
costs associated therewith. The total deposit shall be credited toward the issuance of the first-year license fee,
should the applicant be approved for a license. The application must be accompanied by plans or drawings
showing the area to be used and a statement of the purpose for which the right-of-way is to be used. The
applicant is responsible for the establishment of the fair market value in the area of consideration for license.
Fair market value shall be established by a competent appraiser and in accordance with customary practices
in real estate appraisal.
(2) No individual, person, firm, or corporation shall be granted a license for an encumbrance of the public
right-of-way that would adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the city.
(3) Subject to the exemptions set forth in section 3.14.125, no license shall be issued or granted for an
encumbrance of the public right-of-way for less than a three-foot width.
(4) Subject to the exemptions set forth in section 3.14.125, a licensee shall pay a license fee depending
upon the amount of right-of-way encumbered as set out below. In no event shall a license fee be less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a period of one year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/507
(A) For a private license authorizing a surface encroachment at the ground level, the annual license
fee shall be 7% of the fair market value times the square footage of encumbrance.
(B) For a private license authorizing an airspace encroachment above the ground level, the annual
license fee shall be 7% of the fair market value times the square footage of encumbrance.
(C) For a private license to encumber subsurface area, the annual license fee shall be 2% of the fair
market value times the square footage of encumbrance.
(5) Said license fee for each license shall be subject to annual review by the city council and is subject to
change.
(6) The total deposit shall be credited towards the license fee for the issuance of the first year of a license
should such be granted. Any individual, person, firm or corporation wishing to encumber the public right-ofway
in any manner shall submit a license application and required deposit to the director of municipal
services. Upon receipt and normal review by various city departments and public utility companies of such
application, the director of municipal services shall forward the request to the city manager for approval.
(7) Any license granted hereunder shall be drafted by the city attorney's office.
(8) In the event any individual, firm, person, or corporation is denied a license, he shall have the right to
appeal such denial to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city secretary no later than
five (5) days from his/her receipt of notice of the denial of the request.
(9) The city council shall hear the applicant's request within 30 days of notice of appeal and shall
determine whether or not to uphold the denial, to grant the request as presented or to modify it.
(2000 Code, sec. 21-73)
Sec. 3.14.125 Exemptions
(a) Any applicant who wishes to encumber public rights-of-way for installation of a private water line with a diameter
of one inch (1") or less and for a distance of not more than three hundred feet (300'), a private sewer line with a diameter
of four inches (4") or less and for a distance of not more than three hundred feet (300'), and an overhead line for a
distance of not more than three hundred feet (300'), or for an encroachment by a building, is hereby exempt from the
annual license fee and shall be subject to a one-time license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(b) An applicant who wishes to encumber the public right-of-way adjacent to the applicant's private property for the
purpose of installation of a private lawn sprinkler or irrigation system is hereby exempt from the license fee
requirements of this division.
(2000 Code, sec. 21-74)
Sec. 3.14.126 Obstructing use of public property
The applicant shall not, unnecessarily or for an unreasonable period of time, obstruct or interfere with the public use of
any streets, roads, highways, alleys or public ways owned or controlled by the city. (2000 Code, sec. 21-75)
Sec. 3.14.127 Repair of damages
The applicant shall repair any and all damages caused by the applicant to any real property owned or controlled by the
city and shall restore such real property to substantially its condition immediately prior to the incident causing such
damage. The applicant shall commence such repairs immediately upon completion of the work or activity in which the
applicant was involved at the time the damage occurred and shall complete such repairs as promptly as possible. The
applicant shall maintain the repairs to the satisfaction of the city for one year from the date the surface of said street,
road, highway, alley or public way is broken for such construction or maintenance work, after which time responsibility
for the maintenance shall become the duty of the city. The city may, from time to time, adopt reasonable ordinances
regulating such work. (2000 Code, sec. 21-76)
Sec. 3.14.128 Conduct of work and activities
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/507
The applicant shall use reasonable care in conducting its work and activities in order to prevent injury to any person and
unnecessary damage to any real or personal property. (2000 Code, sec. 21-77)
Sec. 3.14.129 Use of alleys
The applicant shall attempt to utilize the alleys of the city insofar as is reasonably practical in conducting its work and
activities hereunder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the applicant may, when approved by the city, utilize the
streets and any other public ways owned or controlled by the city to perform such work and activities. (2000 Code, sec.
21-78)
Sec. 3.14.130 Changes in encroachments
(a) The applicant shall, upon written request from the city, change the location, position, route, depth or height of any
encroachment or other components of the encroachment if and when such change becomes reasonably necessary
because of a change in the grade of any street, road, highway, alley, public way, or other real property owned or
controlled by the city or because of any change in the location of, or in the manner of maintaining, constructing, laying,
repairing, removing, replacing, installing, or operating, any pavement, curbs, gutters, or underground or aboveground
wires, cable or water or sewer pipes owned or controlled by the city. The city's written request for such change must set
forth, in detail, all of the essential elements and specifications of the requested change.
(b) All of the changes in location, position, route, depth or height described in the immediately foregoing subsection
shall be made at the applicant's sole expense; provided, however, that the applicant may seek payment from any
governmental entity or agency (except the city), person, or party of any amount to which applicant may lawfully be
entitled because of such change in location, position, route, depth, or height, or because of the abandonment of any
encumbrances or other component of the encumbrances regardless of whether such encumbrances or component is
wholly or partially located in any public or private way or right-of-way.
(2000 Code, sec. 21-79)
Sec. 3.14.131 Maps of licensee's facilities
The applicant shall, at all times, keep on file with the city engineer a map or maps showing the current location of all
encumbrances and other components of applicant's facilities located in the city. (2000 Code, sec. 21-80)
Sec. 3.14.132 Jurisdiction
Any agreement shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the state, and all obligations of the parties
hereunder are performable in the county. (2000 Code, sec. 21-81)
Sec. 3.14.133 Conflicting regulations
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this division and any other provision of the city code or other
ordinance, this division shall control; provided, however, that nothing in this division shall affect the rights of a holder of
a lawfully granted franchise. (2000 Code, sec. 21-82)
ARTICLE 3.15 SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
Sec. 3.15.001 Adopted
All installation hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the city shall be done in a professional, workmanlike
manner in accordance with the 2015 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code and appendixes as
published by the International Code Council, Inc. and said International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is made part of
this chapter, with the additions and deviations therefrom contained in this code. This article shall be known and may be
cited as the building regulations for swimming pools and spas ordinance of the city. For health and sanitation regulations
of swimming pools and spas, see the Swimming Pools Ordinance, article 6.04 of this Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 3.15.002 Amendments
The 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/507
SECTION 101. GENERAL
101.1. Title. Insert “City of Plainview”.
SECTION 102. APPLICABILITY
102.9. Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state, or federal
law, included but not limited to the following:
1. Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS); Standards for Public Pools and Spas; sec. 285.181
through sec. 285.208, (TDSHS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two-family dwellings).
2. Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR); Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS), TAS
provide the scoping and technical requirements for accessibility for swimming pools, wading pools, and spas
and shall comply with TAS, section 242. (TAS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two-family
dwellings).
Exception: Elements regulated under Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and built in accordance
with TDLR-approved plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the TDLR, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 103. DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
103.1. Creation of enforcement agency. The department of building safety is hereby created and the official in charge
thereof shall be known as the code official. The Plainview-Hale County Health Department is responsible for the
regulation of any public swimming pool and for such purposes shall be known as the code official responsible for
regulation of any public swimming pool in accordance with this code, local, and state law. For the health and sanitation
of swimming pools and spas, the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances at article 6.04 addresses those regulations.
SECTION 105. PERMITS
105.6.2. Fee schedule. The fees for all work shall be set forth in section 3.05.083 of the City of Plainview Code of
Ordinances.
SECTION 107. VIOLATIONS
107.4. Violation penalties. Delete in its entirety and insert the following: Any person or persons, who is found to be in
violation of the provisions of this article, or who fails to do any act required hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction hereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of the City of Plainview
Code of Ordinances, “General penalty; continuing violations.” Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
107.5. Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any system that is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the property owner, or the owner's agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the
conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required
to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to move a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as specified in the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances at section
1.01.009.
SECTION 108. MEANS OF APPEAL
108.1. Application for appeal. Delete this section in its entirety and insert the following: In order to hear and decide
appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation
of this code, an appeal must be filed with the Building Trades and Fire Code Board of Appeals in accordance with article
3.02 in the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 202. DEFINITIONS. Insert the following definition:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/507
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Plainview-Hale County Health Department regulates the operation of swimming pools
and spas. Routine inspections on pools and spas are conducted to document compliance with the standards set forth in
state law and the City of Plainview Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 305. BARRIER REQUIREMENTS
305.1. General. Change to read as follows: The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of barriers for all
aquatic training vessels or spas. These design controls are intended to provide protection against the potential drowning
and near drowning by restricting access to such vessels or spas. These requirements provide an integrated level of
protection against potential drowning through the use of physical barriers and warning devices.
Exceptions: One- and two-family dwellings provided with the following:
1. Spas and hot tubs with a lockable safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346.
2. Swimming pools with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346.
305.2. Outdoor swimming pools and spas. Change to read as follows: All outdoor aquatic vessels or spas and indoor
swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies with sections 305.2.1 through 305.7, and in accordance
with the 25 Texas Administrative Code at chapter 265, subchapter L, Texas Health and Safety Code at 757, and those
sections of article 6.04 of the Plainview Code of Ordinances for public pools.
305.2.7. Chain link dimensions. The maximum opening formed by a chain link fence shall be not more than 1.75 inches
(44 mm). Where the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top and bottom which reduces the openings, such
openings shall be not more than 1.75 inches (44 mm).
305.2.7.1. Chain link fencing prohibited. Chain link fencing is not permitted as a barrier in public schools built after
October 1, 2004.
Exception: Class B public pools.
305.6. Natural barriers used in a one- and two-family dwelling. In the case where the vessel area abuts the edge of a lake
or other natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend
to and beyond the water's edge a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm), a barrier is not required between the natural body of
water shoreline and the vessel.
SECTION 310. SUCTION ENTRAPMENT AVOIDANCE.
Delete in its entirety and insert the following:
310.1. General. Suction entrapment avoidance for aquatic vessels or spas shall be provided in accordance with APSP 7.
Suction entrapment avoidance for public and residential swimming pools will be in accordance with the State of Texas
Rules for Public Swimming Pools and Spas at 25 TAC chapter 265, subchapter L, sec. 265.190.
Exception: Portable residential spas and portable residential exercise spas listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1563
or CSA C22.2 No. 218.1.
SECTION 313. PUMPS AND MOTORS
313.7. Emergency shutoff switch for spas and hot tubs. Delete in its entirety and insert the following: A clearly labeled
emergency shutoff or control switch on spas and hot tubs for the purpose of stopping the motor(s) that provide power to
the recirculation system and jet system shall be installed at a point readily accessible to the users and not less than 1.5 m
(5 ft.) away, adjacent to, and within sight of the spa or hot tub. This requirement shall not apply to single-family
dwellings.
SECTION 402. DIVING
402.12. Water envelopes. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in accordance with table 402.12.
Table 402.12
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/507
MINIMUM DIVING WATER ENVELOPES
(See Figure 402.12)
Type Minimum dimensions Minimum width of pool
at:
D1 D2 RD3 L1 L2 L3 L4 L5 Pt. A Pt. B Pt. C
VI 7'-0"
8'-6"
8'-6"
9'-0"
5'-6"
4'-0"
2'-6"
4'-0"
8'-0"
12'-0"
10'-6"
14'-0"
7'-0"
4'-0"
28'-0"
34'-0"
16'-0" 18'-0" 18'-0"
VII 7'-6"
11'-2"
9'-0"
10'-10"
6'-0" 3'-0"
5'-0"
9'-0"
16'-5"
12'-0"
13'-2"
4'-0" 28'-0"
38'-7"
18'-0" 20'-0" 20'-0"
VIII 8'-6"
12'-2"
10'-0"
11'-10"
7'-0"
6'-0"
4'-0"
6'-0"
10'-0"
19'-9"
15'-0"
13'-11"
2'-0" 31'-0"
41'-8"
20'-0" 22'-0"
23'-0"
22'-0"
23'-0"
IX 11'-0" 12'-0" 8'-6" 6'-0" 10'-6" 21'-0" 0 37'-6" 22'-0" 24'-0" 24'-0"
FIGURE 402.12
402.13. Ladders for diving equipment. Ladders shall be provided with two grab rails or two handrails. There shall be a
uniform distance between ladder treads, with a 7 inch (178 mm minimum) distance and 12 inch (305 mm) maximum
distance. Supports, platforms, steps, and ladders for diving equipment shall be designed to carry the anticipated loads.
Steps and ladders shall be of corrosion-resistant material, easily cleanable and with slip-resistant tread.
Insert following exception: The distance between treads for the top and bottom riser can vary.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/507
SECTION 411. SPECIAL FEATURES
411.2. Pool stairs. The design and construction of stairs extending into the pool in either shallow or deep water, including
recessed pool stairs, shall comply with sections 411.2.1 through 411.2.4.
411.2.1. Tread dimensions and area. Treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth (i.e., horizontal run) of
12 inches and a minimum width of 20 inches.
411.2.2. Risers. Risers for steps shall have a maximum uniform height of 10 inches, with the bottom riser height allowed
to taper to zero.
411.5.1.4. Swimouts: Change to read as follows: The leading edge shall be provided with a horizontal solid or broken
stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step. This stripe shall be plainly visible
to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the background on which it is applied, and the
color shall be permanent in nature and shall be a slip-resistant surface.
411.5.2.5. Underwater seats and benches. Change to read as follows: The leading edge shall be provided with a
horizontal solid or broken stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step. This
stripe shall be plainly visible to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the background on
which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature and shall be a slip-resistant surface.
SECTION 603. MARKINGS AND INDICATORS
603.2. Class A and B pools: Delete in its entirety and change to read as follows: Class A and B pools over 5 feet deep:
the transition point of the pool from the shallow area to the deep area of the pool shall be visually set apart with a 4-inch
minimum width row of floor tile, a painted line, or similar means using a color contrasting with the bottom; and a rope
and float line shall be provided between 1 foot and 2 feet on the shallow side of the 5-foot depth along and parallel to
this depth from one side of the pool to the other side. The floats shall be spaced at not greater than 7-foot intervals; and
the floats shall be secured so they will not slide or bunch up. The stretched float line shall be of sufficient size and
strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by users. If the owner or operator of the pool
knows or should have known in the exercise of ordinary care that a rope or float is missing, broken, or defective, the
problem shall be promptly remedied.
SECTION 610. SPECIAL FEATURES
610.5.1. Uniform height of 10 inches. Insert “9 inches” for “10 inches (54 mm)” in title and in text.
ANSI/APSP\ICC-7 2013. American National Standard for Suction Entrapment Avoidance in Swimming Pools,
Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs And Catch Basins
4.6.1. Dual outlets. Insert the following: The flow rating for each listed cover/grate shall be greater than the maximum
flow as determined in accordance with 4.4.1.
4.7. Dual cover/grate separation. Insert the following: Dual cover/grates shall be separated by a minimum of 3 feet (914
mm) but not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) measured from center to center of the suction pipes suction outlet cover inside
edge to inside edge (see figures 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10) or located on two (2) different planes, i.e., one (1) on the bottom
and one (1) on the vertical wall, or one (1) each on two (2) separate walls. (See figures 7 and 14.)
5.3.2. Dual outlet separation. Change to read as follows: Dual outlets shall be separated by a minimum of 3 feet (914
mm) but not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) measured from center to center of the suction pipes (see figures 4, 5, and 6) or
located on two (2) different planes, i.e., one (1) on the bottom and one (1) on the vertical wall, or one (1) each on two (2)
separate walls. (See figures 7 and 14.)
(Ordinance 17-3658, sec. I, adopted 7/25/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/507
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 ADVERTISING
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Marking or painting on streets or sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or attempt to advertise, by marking or painting on any of the streets or
sidewalks within the city. (2000 Code, sec. 7-1)
Sec. 4.02.002 Loudspeakers generally
Any person owning or having charge of any loudspeaker or any machine, instrument or contrivance for reproducing
sound, or who shall own, be in possession of, or be lessee of any room, house or building in which any business is
transacted and in which any such loudspeaker, machine, instrument or contrivance for reproducing sound is situated,
who shall operate or permit such instrument to be operated in such manner or with such volume as may or as is
calculated to disturb any person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (2000 Code, sec. 7-2)
Sec. 4.02.003 Amplifying equipment on vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by the use of any
amplifying equipment used by or mounted on any vehicle without first having obtained a permit therefor from the
director of municipal services. (2000 Code, sec. 7-3)
Sec. 4.02.004 Posting generally
No person shall post any bills, signs, posters or advertisements on any buildings, fences, poles or other property
belonging to another without the consent of the owner thereof. Such consent shall be secured in writing, and such written
consent shall be exhibited by the person having the same to any police officer on demand. (2000 Code, sec. 7-4)
Sec. 4.02.005 Destroying lawful posters
It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully and maliciously tear down, deface or cover up any posted
advertisement or bill of any person when the same is lawfully posted and put up and during the time such sign or
advertisement shall be of value. (2000 Code, sec. 7-5)
Sec. 4.02.006 Attaching stickers to vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any gummed sticker to any vehicle within the city without the consent of the
owner of such vehicle. (2000 Code, sec. 7-7)
Secs. 4.02.007–4.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Distribution of Handbills
Sec. 4.02.031 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/507
Handbill. Any printed or written matter, sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, or booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature.
Newspaper. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post
office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public, and
shall mean and include any other copyrighted material.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-21)
Sec. 4.02.032 Depositing on inhabited private premises
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by
handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, such person, unless
requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such premises
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifting about some
premises as sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited
by federal postal law or regulation. (2000 Code, sec. 7-22)
Sec. 4.02.033 Depositing on posted property
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to
do so, or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: “no trespassing,” “no peddlers or agents,” “no
Advertisement,” or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have
their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such premises. (2000 Code, sec. 7-23)
Sec. 4.02.034 Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are
uninhabited or vacant. (2000 Code, sec. 7-24)
Sec. 4.02.035 Placing on or in vehicles
No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. (2000 Code, sec. 7-25)
Sec. 4.02.036 Distributing in public places
It shall be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place, except that a handbill
may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept the same. (2000 Code, sec. 7-26)
Sec. 4.02.037 Exemption for mail and newspapers
The provisions of this division shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except
that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (2000 Code, sec. 7-27)
ARTICLE 4.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/507
Alcoholic beverages. Alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume,
which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted.
Central business district. A compact and contiguous geographical area of a municipality used for commercial purposes
that has historically been the primary location in the municipality where business has been transacted.
Child-care facility. In accordance with the Texas Human Resources Code Ann, section 42.002 (Vernon's 2001), this
facility must be licensed, certified, or registered by the state department of human services to provide assessment, care,
training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for a child who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to
the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the 24-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or
charges for the services it offers.
Day-care center. In accordance with the Texas Human Resources Code Ann., section 42.002 (Vernon's 2001), this
facility is a child-care facility that provides care for more than 12 children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a
day.
Homeless shelter. A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter or other facility that is designed to provide
temporary living accommodations to individuals who lack a fixed regular and adequate residence.
Open container. A container that is no longer sealed or the meaning assigned by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code
Ann., section 109.35 (Vernon's 2007).
Private school. In accordance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code Ann., section 109.33 (Vernon's 2007), a private
school, including a parochial school, that does the following:
(1) Offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12;
and
(2) Has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
Public school. In accordance with the Texas Government Code Ann., section 821.001 (Vernon's 2004), a public school is
an educational institution or organization in this state that is entitled by law to be supported in whole or in part by state,
county, school district, or other municipal corporation funds.
(Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-1), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.002 Alcoholic Beverage Code adopted
The city hereby adopts the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, which code is made a part of this article by reference for all
purposes as though fully set out herein. (Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-2), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.003 No vested right conferred; conflict with law not allowed
The sale of alcoholic beverages is a privilege, and this article is not intended to give any person a vested right to engage
in such business nor is such article intended to be in conflict in any manner with the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code. (Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-3), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.004 Hours of consumption, possession, and sale
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to consume any alcoholic beverage in any
public place or for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage for the purpose of consuming the same in such public
place at any time on Sundays between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon, and on all other days at any time between
the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person who shall hold a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license or mixed
beverages late hours permit issued under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code to sell any alcoholic
beverage or offer the same for sale:
(1) On Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., except that alcoholic beverages
served to a customer between 10:00 a.m. and 12 noon on Sunday must be served with food to the customer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/507
(2) On any day except Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person who shall not hold a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license or a mixed
beverages late hours permit issued under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code to sell any alcoholic
beverage or offer the same for sale:
(1) On Sunday at any time between the hours of midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 12:00 noon and
midnight.
(2) On any day except Sunday at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(d) Private clubs located within the city holding a private club late hours permit issued by the provisions of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code may not permit persons to consume or be served alcoholic beverages on club premises on
Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and on any day except Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m. with the provision that customers served between 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday must be served
with food to the customer.
(e) Violation of the above restrictions is punishable as a violation of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-4), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.005 Unlawful sales
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell any alcoholic beverage except as designated by the schedule of uses as set
forth in the zoning ordinances. (Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-5), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.006 Certificate of occupancy
When applying for an original state license or state permit, any person seeking to have a business within the city that is
required to be licensed under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code shall first obtain from the building official either a
certificate of occupancy or a building permit for the establishment. (Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-6), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.007 License and permit fees
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, each holder of a state permit or license
issued pursuant to this code shall pay to the city a fee equal to one-half the fee paid to the state for such permit or
license.
(b) All fees levied by this section are due and payable at the time in which the state license and permit fees are due.
(c) Code enforcement shall notify the state liquor control board of any person failing or refusing to pay the license fee
and request cancellation of the license of such person in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code Ann., section
61.36 (Vernon's 2007).
(Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-7), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.008 Sales near churches, schools, public hospitals and day-care/child-care facilities
(a) No person shall sell alcoholic beverages if the place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of any church,
public school or public hospital.
(b) No person shall sell alcoholic beverages, if the place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of any private
school, except that this subsection does not apply to the holder of the following:
(1) A license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate; or
(2) A permit for a package store.
(c) No person shall sell alcoholic beverages in a place of business within one thousand (1,000) feet of any private
school, if the city council has by resolution adopted a request from the governing body of the private school to prohibit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/507
such sales, except that this paragraph does not apply to the holder of:
(1) A retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts
for the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages;
(2) A retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts
for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of
alcoholic beverages;
(3) A wholesaler's, distributor's, brewer's, distiller's and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's or manufacturer's
permit or license, or any license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are ordinarily
used and understood in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, chapter 102;
(4) A license or permit issued under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, chapters 27 (temporary and
special wine and beer retailer's permit), 31 (caterer's permit), or 72 (temporary license) that operates on the
premises of the private school; or
(5) A permit for a package store.
(d) This subsection establishes additional criteria regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages and shall apply only to a
permit or license holder, under the following chapters of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, who does not hold a food
and beverage certificate: chapter 25 (wine and beer retailer's permit), chapter 28 (mixed beverage permit), chapter 32
(private club registration permit), chapter 69 (retail dealer's on-premises license), or chapter 74 (brewpub license).
Except as provided in this subsection, no person shall sell alcoholic beverages in a place of business within three
hundred (300) feet of a day-care or child-care facility, excluding the holder of the following:
(1) The permit or license holder and the day-care or child-care facility are located on different stories of a
multistory building; or
(2) The permit or license holder and the day-care or child-care facility are located in separate buildings and
either the permit or license holder or the day-care center/child-care facility is located on the second story or
higher of a multistory building.
A day-care or child-care facility does not apply to foster group homes, foster family homes, family homes, agency group
homes, or agency homes as those terms are defined in the Texas Human Resources Code Ann., section 42.002 (Vernon's
2001).
(e) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or
public hospital, day-care or child-care facility shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to
front door, and in direct line across intersections.
(f) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a public or
private school shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business and in a direct line across intersections, except that where the permit or license holder is located on or
above the fifth story of a multistory building, measurement shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public or
private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the
building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(g) This section shall not be construed to permit or authorize that which is prohibited by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code or any other law.
(Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-8), adopted 2/12/08)
Sec. 4.03.009 Possession or consumption near homeless shelters or substance abuse centers
(a) No person may possess an open container or consume an alcoholic beverage on a public street, public alley, or
public sidewalk within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of a homeless shelter that is not located in a central
business district or a substance abuse treatment center that is not located in the central business district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/507
(b) Special temporary events/activities/festivals approved by the city council and events/activities/festivals lasting no
longer than three (3) days that are open to the public for the purpose of providing entertainment/food and/or sales of
merchandise are exempt from the provisions of subsection (a).
(Ordinance 08-3497, sec. I (3-9), adopted 2/12/08)
ARTICLE 4.04 AMUSEMENTS
Sec. 4.04.001 Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides
No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride
operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business without first filing with the city
secretary and/or his or her designee a certificate of liability insurance, in an amount as provided by the state Tort Claims
Act, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. This section shall apply
to all persons, whether or not a license is required by any other provision of this code. (2000 Code, sec. 7-31; Ordinance
adopting Code)
State law reference–Regulation of amusement rides, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 2151.
ARTICLE 4.05 JUNK DEALERS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Junk. Old or scrap iron, chains, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals, old rope, bags, rags, clothes, wastepaper,
paper clippings, clips, bagging, rubber, glass, empty bottles, bones or old parts of motor vehicles, or any other articles
which have been discarded or are no longer used for the purpose for which they were manufactured. The term “junk”
shall also include unserviceable or secondhand automobiles purchased from the general public for the purpose of being
dismantled, together with the purchase of unserviceable or used parts and accessories, not including tires and tubes.
Junk dealer. Any person who, irregularly or continually, either at wholesale or retail, buys, sells or deals in junk,
whether as an itinerant or at a fixed place of business.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-91)
Sec. 4.05.002 Enclosure of premises
Every place, other than a building, where any junk dealer carries on his business shall be enclosed by a suitable fence or
other structure so constructed and maintained as to prevent any junk on such premises from being visible from the street.
The enclosure shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and no junk shall be piled or placed within the same so
as in any manner to protrude above the enclosure. (2000 Code, sec. 7-92)
Sec. 4.05.003 Inspections
The place of business of each junk dealer shall be subject to inspection by the proper municipal authorities at all
reasonable times, and the contents thereof shall be arranged in an orderly manner, with all similar things located together
so as to facilitate such inspection. (2000 Code, sec. 7-93)
Sec. 4.05.004 Register of purchases
Every junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods, shall keep at his place of business a register
in which he shall enter in writing a minute description of all property taken, purchased or received by him, together with
the time, name and place of residence (giving the street number if within the city) of the person from whom the property
is purchased, which register shall be kept clean and legible. He shall make such entry within one hour of the receipt or
purchase of such property. Every entry shall be made in ink and shall not in any manner be obliterated or erased. (2000
Code, sec. 7-94)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/507
Sec. 4.05.005 Reports to police
It shall be the duty of every junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods, to make out and deliver
to the chief of police every day, before the hour of 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy from the register of personal
property purchased during the preceding day, together with the time when received or purchased, and a description of the
person or persons from whom the same was purchased; provided that no junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop, or dealer
in secondhand goods, shall be required to furnish such description of household goods purchased from persons at their
residences or of any property purchased from persons having an established place of business in the city, or goods sold at
public sale, but such goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase and
must be shown to any member of the police department when demanded. (2000 Code, sec. 7-95)
Sec. 4.05.006 Access to records
The register required by this article to be kept shall at all times during business hours be kept open to the inspection of
the chief of police and sheriff, or the deputy of either, or any officer of the police force of the city, the chief of police, the
city attorney, the county prosecuting attorney and anyone authorized in writing for the purpose by the chief of police,
which authority shall be exhibited to the junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods. The junk
dealer or keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods, shall upon request show and exhibit to such person or
officer for inspection any articles purchased by him. (2000 Code, sec. 7-96)
Sec. 4.05.007 Additional information required in records of motor vehicle parts
In the case of parts of motor vehicles, in addition to the information required to be entered in the register of purchases,
such record shall contain all serial numbers, engine numbers or other identifying numbers and the make, style, model,
color and license number of the automobile from which the same were taken. (2000 Code, sec. 7-97)
Sec. 4.05.008 Motor vehicles or parts with identification mark removed
No junk dealer shall buy, receive, sell or otherwise dispose of any motor vehicle, or part thereof, from which the
manufacturer's serial number or other identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed. Any
junk dealer to whom is offered for sale or delivery any motor vehicle, or part thereof, from which has been removed,
defaced, covered, altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or other identification mark shall immediately
notify the chief of police to that effect. (2000 Code, sec. 7-98)
Sec. 4.05.009 Retention period before disposing of junk
All junk received by any junk dealer shall be retained for a period of forty-eight (48) hours before it is disposed of by the
dealer, but this provision shall not apply to old rags or paper. (2000 Code, sec. 7-99)
Sec. 4.05.010 Retention period for motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts
No person doing business under this article, or his employee, shall wreck, tear down, paint or otherwise destroy the
identity of any secondhand motor vehicle, nor allow the same, or any part thereof, to be taken out of his possession until
forty-eight (48) hours after the report provided for by this article has been made to the chief of police; provided,
however, that the chief of police may, after a proper report has been duly made to him, grant a special permit allowing
the secondhand motor vehicle, or part thereof, to be sold or disposed of and delivered to another within a period of time
less than forty-eight (48) hours after the chief of police has satisfied himself that there is no question as to the ownership
of such motor vehicle or part thereof. (2000 Code, sec. 7-100)
Sec. 4.05.011 Purchases from minors; purchasing stolen property
No junk dealer or keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods, shall purchase or receive any article of property
of or from a minor or owned by a minor, or stolen property or property which for any cause he may have reason to
believe or suspect cannot be lawfully or rightfully sold by the person offering it. (2000 Code, sec. 7-101)
Secs. 4.05.012–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/507
Sec. 4.05.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a junk dealer within the city without first obtaining a license
so to do. (2000 Code, sec. 7-111)
Sec. 4.05.032 Application
Every applicant for a license as a junk dealer shall file with the city secretary a written application upon a form prepared
and provided by the city, signed and sworn to by the applicant. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and residence of each applicant, if an individual or partnership; if a corporation, its name,
principal place of business and the address of each of the following officers: president, vice-president,
secretary, treasurer and general manager;
(2) The length of time each applicant, if a person or partnership, has resided in the city, the business or
occupation pursued by him during the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of such application,
giving the place where such business or occupation was followed, whether he is married or single, and
whether he has ever been convicted either of a felony or of a misdemeanor, and, if so, giving the nature of the
offense and the court in which the conviction was had. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
contain the same information with respect to each of the following officials thereof: president, vice-president,
secretary, treasurer and general manager;
(3) Whether the applicant, or the enumerated officers, if the applicant is a corporation, has ever been
employed by a junk dealer or has ever been engaged in the business of a junk dealer, and, if so, the time when
engaged in business as a junk dealer or when employed by a junk dealer;
(4) A detailed statement of the nature of the business to be conducted, and the kind of junk to be collected,
bought, sold or otherwise dealt in;
(5) The place where such business is to be located or carried on.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-112)
Sec. 4.05.033 Conditions
Each application for a license required by the provisions of this division shall contain a stipulation to the effect that the
applicant accepts the license, if granted, upon the condition that it may be suspended for good cause at any time by the
city manager or other proper official designated by the city council; provided, however, that the applicant shall have the
right to appeal and a hearing before the city council. If the city council concurs in the action of the city manager or other
designated officer in suspending the license, its decision shall be final. (2000 Code, sec. 7-113)
Sec. 4.05.034 Bond
Each application for a license required by this division shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00), payable to the city, with at least two (2) good and sufficient sureties of sufficient collateral security,
approved by the city manager, conditioned that during the term of the license the applicant will duly observe all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations which are now in force or which may hereafter become applicable to junk dealers.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-114)
Sec. 4.05.035 Approval of proposed premises
When any application has been made for a license under this division, the city secretary shall at once report the same to
the chief of police, city health officer, fire chief and building inspector. It shall thereupon become the duty of each of the
city officials to inspect or cause to be inspected the place where the business of such junk dealer is to be carried on, and
to determine whether such place of business complies with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The
place where such junk dealer conducts his business, and all buildings situated thereon, shall be so constructed and
maintained that such junk dealer may carry on his business in a sanitary manner. No fire hazard shall be contained
thereon, and the place of business shall be so arranged that a proper inspection may be made at any time by the duly
authorized health, fire, building and police authorities. (2000 Code, sec. 7-115)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/507
Sec. 4.05.036 Fee
Each junk dealer shall pay an annual license fee, to be set by resolution of the city council, for each license issued under
this division. (2000 Code, sec. 7-116)
Sec. 4.05.037 Issuance
When an application and bond have been filed as provided for in this division, the city manager shall make an
investigation of the applicant, and if the applicant is found to be a suitable person to carry on the business of a junk
dealer, and if the bond is found to be good and sufficient, a license shall be issued to the applicant to engage in the
business of a junk dealer after payment has been made by him to the city of the required license fee. No license shall be
refused except for good cause. (2000 Code, sec. 7-117)
Sec. 4.05.038 Denial
(a) If any application for a license as junk dealer shall be or has been refused, the applicant shall be privileged to make
another application at any time thereafter upon showing that the reason for such rejection of the application no longer
exists.
(b) No license as a junk dealer shall be granted to any person who shall have been convicted within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the application of any violation of this article, or who has within such period been
convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor other than of a misdemeanor growing out of and arising from the violation
of some traffic law. No license as a junk dealer shall be issued to any corporation if any of the before-named officers
thereof have been convicted of any of the stated offenses.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-118)
Sec. 4.05.039 Duration
No license shall be issued under this article for a period of more than one year, and all licenses shall terminate on the
first day of January next succeeding the issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked or suspended as provided for herein.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-119)
Sec. 4.05.040 Contents
All licenses issued under this article shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued, shall state the location of
the place of business of the junk dealer, shall state the date of issuance, shall state the date of expiration of the license,
and shall state the name and address of the licensee. (2000 Code, sec. 7-120)
Sec. 4.05.041 Location of business
Each junk dealer's license shall designate the place where the business of the junk dealer is to be carried on. No licensee
shall move his place of business from the place designated in the license until a written permit authorizing such move
has been secured from the city manager. In the event a permit is granted to move the place of business to another
location, all signs required by this article shall be correspondingly altered. No license shall be issued for operation of the
business in any residential area of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 7-121)
Sec. 4.05.042 Display
Each holder of a junk dealer's license shall at all times cause the same to be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises described in the application for such license for such period of time as the license may remain in full force and
effect. No person shall post the license upon any property or premises other than those described in the application
therefor, and no person shall knowingly permit the license to be defaced or destroyed. (2000 Code, sec. 7-122)
Sec. 4.05.043 Duplicates
In the event a license issued under this article is lost or destroyed, it shall be the duty of the city secretary to issue a
duplicate thereof in lieu of the original license upon the filing of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances surrounding
the loss or destruction of the license, upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the city council. (2000 Code,
sec. 7-123)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/507
Sec. 4.05.044 Identification of vehicles; business identification sign
Each vehicle kept or used by a junk dealer in the pursuit of his business shall be plainly marked on each side with the
name of the licensee, the name and number of the street where his business is located, the words “junk dealer,” the term
“City of Plainview, Texas,” and his license number, in plain letters and figures at least two (2) inches high and of such
color as to be plainly legible at a distance of sixty (60) feet. The same information shall be contained in and displayed on
a sign to be placed at the front of the place where each junk dealer carries on his business. (2000 Code, sec. 7-124)
Sec. 4.05.045 Suspension or revocation
Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked by the city manager or city council
for the violation by the licensee, or his employees or agents, of any applicable provision of this code, state law or city
ordinance, rule or regulation. (2000 Code, sec. 7-125)
ARTICLE 4.06 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by
this section:
Massage. Any process consisting of kneading, rubbing or otherwise manipulating the skin of the body of a human being,
either with the hand or by means of electrical instruments or apparatus or other special apparatus.
Massage establishment. Any building, room, place or establishment other than a regularly licensed hospital where
manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly licensed
physician, whether with or without use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish
bathhouses.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-131)
Sec. 4.06.002 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to the following:
(1) A licensed physical therapist, a licensed athletic trainer, a licensed cosmetologist, or a licensed barber
performing functions authorized under the license held, a licensed physician or chiropractor, or any individual
working under the direct supervision of a licensed physician or chiropractor, while engaged in practicing the
healing arts.
(2) The administration of massage for therapeutic purposes in a hospital, nursing home or other health care
facility.
(3) A massage establishment operated by a nonprofit corporation, provided that such massage
establishment is not the sole or principal activity of the nonprofit corporation.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-132)
Secs. 4.06.003–4.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.06.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without first having obtained a license from the
department of state health services in accordance with the Texas Occupations Code, chapter 455, and paying a permit fee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/507
as provided for in section 4.06.035. (2000 Code, sec. 7-141; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.032 Display
The license required by this division shall be exhibited at all times in such establishments. (2000 Code, sec. 7-142)
Sec. 4.06.033 Investigation of applicant
After an application has been made for an original permit or a renewal of an existing permit to operate a massage
establishment as defined herein, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's character
and whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude in any state, municipal or
federal court, or whether the applicant is a person of unfit character, or whether the holder of a permit for such an
establishment, or any employee of such establishment, committed any lewd, indecent or other act contrary to human
decency during the last licensing period, or such an establishment employs any person convicted of any crime involving
moral turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court, or whether such an establishment employs a woman who has
been convicted of prostitution, or who is a known prostitute. (2000 Code, sec. 7-143; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.034 Employee medical certificates
At the time of making application for the permit required by this division, each applicant shall furnish to the health
department of the city the names and addresses of all employees of its massage establishment, and each such employee
of massage establishments shall be required to secure from the health department a medical certificate certifying that
such employee has been examined and that such examination discloses the fact that such person employed, or to be
employed, by such establishment is free from any infectious or communicable disease. Such medical certificate shall be
renewed annually by the health inspector. (2000 Code, sec. 7-144)
Sec. 4.06.035 Fee
The annual permit fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such establishment. If the permit is obtained
between January 1 and June 30 of any year, the full amount of such fees shall be paid. If such permit is obtained between
July 1 and December 31 of any year, the fee shall be one-half (1/2) of such amount. No refund shall ever be made of any
such permit fees. (2000 Code, sec. 7-145; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.036 Grounds for denial
The chief of police shall refuse to approve the issuance or renewal of any permit required by this division to any
applicant who has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court; or
where the applicant is a person of unfit character; or where the holder of a permit for such an establishment or any
employee of such an establishment committed any lewd, indecent or other act contrary to common decency during the
last permit period; or where any such establishment employs any person convicted of any crime involving moral
turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court, or employs a woman who has been convicted of prostitution or who is
a known prostitute. (2000 Code, sec. 7-146; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.037 Appeal of denial
(a) In the event the chief of police shall refuse to approve the issuance of an original permit or the renewal of a permit
to any applicant under this division, the action of the chief of police shall be final unless the applicant shall, within ten
(10) days after the refusal to approve the issuance of or the renewal of a permit, file a written appeal with the city
secretary, addressed to the city council, requesting a hearing by the city upon the question as to whether or not his
application shall be granted.
(b) In the event such appeal is filed, the chief of police shall provide the city council with a record of all proceedings
theretofore had with reference to the application in question, including the written application, together with the action
of the chief of police and the reasons for such action. The city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing
thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police, at which hearing the city council may make such
investigation as it may see fit, whether all the pertinent facts appear in the application or not, and the city council shall
determine whether or not such permit shall be granted or refused, and such action as the city council shall take thereon
shall be final and conclusive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/507
(2000 Code, sec. 7-147; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.038 Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice of revocation
Any permit issued by the city secretary after approval in writing by the health inspector and the chief of police, pursuant
to this division, may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police when it shall appear that the business of the person
to whom such permit was issued has been conducted in a disorderly or improper manner, or in violation of any statute of
the state, any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city, or that the person conducting such business is of unfit
character to conduct same, or that the purposes for which such permit has been issued are being abused to the detriment
of the public, or that the permit is being used for a purpose different from that for which it was issued to the permit
holder. Such notice of revocation shall be given by the chief of police in writing and shall be addressed to the permit
holder's last known business address. (2000 Code, sec. 7-148; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.039 Appeal of revocation
(a) In the event the chief of police revokes the permit issued to any permit holder under this division, the action of the
chief of police shall be final unless the permit holder shall, within ten (10) days after the receipt of written notice of such
revocation, file a written appeal with the city secretary addressed to the city council requesting a hearing by the council
upon the question as to whether or not such permit should have been revoked.
(b) In the event such appeal is filed, the chief of police shall provide the city council with a record of all the
proceedings theretofore had with reference to the revocation of the permit in question, together with the action of the
chief of police and the reason for such action. The city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to
determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police, at which hearing the city council may make such
investigation as it may see fit, and the city council shall determine whether or not the action of the chief of police should
be ratified and confirmed, or should be set aside, and such decision of the city council, after such hearing, shall be final
and conclusive as to all parties.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-149; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 4.06.040–4.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Operating Regulations
Sec. 4.06.061 Hours of operation; connection with living or sleeping quarters
No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., and no
such establishment shall be operated or conducted in connection with any place used for living or sleeping quarters.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-161)
Sec. 4.06.062 Right of inspection; interference with inspectors
(a) The officers of the police and health departments of the city are hereby authorized and empowered to enter, for the
purpose of inspection, and to inspect at any time massage establishments in the city, for the preservation of law and order
and decency, and are further empowered to, at any time, make such examinations through the licensed physicians of the
department of health of the city as are necessary to determine whether or not such employees are infected with any
infectious disease.
(b) It shall be grounds for the revocation of a permit issued under this article to interfere with the inspection of such
premises.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-162; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.06.063 Employing prostitutes prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person operating such an establishment to employ a known prostitute in any capacity therein.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-163)
Sec. 4.06.064 List of employees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/507
The manager or person in charge of massage establishments shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all
employees, both on duty and off duty, and such list shall be shown to all proper authorities of the police and health
departments upon request. (2000 Code, sec. 7-165)
Sec. 4.06.065 Operation in residential area prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to be operated in any section of the city which is zoned for residential
purposes. (2000 Code, sec. 7-166)
Sec. 4.06.066 Sanitation requirements
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a
clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic, and bathing devices, or parts thereof, that
come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization before
initial use, and any such instruments and devices, or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron, shall be
sterilized before being used on another. All towels and linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be furnished for
use of another until thoroughly laundered. (2000 Code, sec. 7-167)
Sec. 4.06.067 Administering massage to person of opposite sex
It shall be unlawful for any person to administer a massage in any massage establishment to any person of the opposite
sex; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to a licensed chiropractor, nor shall it apply to any registered
physical therapist or registered nurse operating under the direction of a physician. (2000 Code, sec. 7-168)
Sec. 4.06.068 Disorderly conduct
Permittees or employees of massage establishments who commit any lewd, immoral or indecent act will be charged with
the offense of disorderly conduct. (2000 Code, sec. 7-169; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 4.07 PEDDLERS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND SOLICITORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
Charitable organization or organization. An entity that the United States Internal Revenue Service recognizes to be a
charitable organization or a church.
Commercial printed matter. Any printed or written matter, whether a sample, device, leaflet, circular, pamphlet, paper, or
booklet, whether printed, or reproduced, or copied, which:
(1) Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or service;
(2) Directs attention to a business or commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting sales;
(3) Directs attention to or advertises a meeting, performance, exhibition, or event for which an admission
fee is charged for private gain or profit, but this does not include a meeting, performance, exhibition, or event
for which an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up only for the purpose of deferring expenses;
or
(4) While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an
advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
Contribution. Currency, coin, or check.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/507
Goods. Any goods, wares, merchandise, livestock, poultry, or other wild or domestic creatures, and all other tangible
personal property of any nature whatsoever, but shall not include natural, botanical, and agricultural products, food and
beverages intended for human consumption, and securities, policies of insurance and other intangibles.
Itinerant vendor. Any person (whether or not a resident of the city) who engages in the transient business of selling
goods or services within the city. The term “itinerant vendor” shall include any agent, independent contractor, employee,
or other representative of any such person and peddlers or solicitors.
Location. The approaches to an intersection equipped with a traffic-control signal light and within one hundred (100)
feet of such an intersection.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-201)
Peddler. A person, or the agent, consignee, or employee of a person, who carries goods upon a truck or other vehicle on
the streets of the city for the purpose of exhibiting, selling, or offering for sale such goods from such truck or other
vehicle or who within the city goes door to door of residences, offices, or places of business to display, sell, or offer for
sale, or take orders for the sale of goods or to exhibit brochures, sales literature, or price lists for the purpose of taking
orders for the sale of goods. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity.
Public property. Any property open or devoted to public use or owned by the city, county, state or federal government,
including but not limited to parks, buildings, sidewalks, streets, and public parkways.
Sale or selling. The exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or services in exchange for consideration, or the offer,
exhibition, solicitation, or taking of orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services, or the distribution of
commercial printed matter in aid of any such sale.
Services. Work, labor or service purchased or leased for use, including services furnished in connection with the sale or
repair of goods.
Transient business. The sale of goods or services in or on any real property within the city not owned, leased, or rented
by such a vendor for a period of at least sixty (60) consecutive days.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-201)
Sec. 4.07.002 Penalty; enforcement
(a) Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided in section 1.01.009 for each offense.
(b) Each sale, offer, exhibition, solicitation, taking of orders or distribution of commercial matter in aid of the sale of
goods in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) The chief of police, his/her authorized designee, any officer of the city police department or any code enforcement
officer is authorized to issue a summons and citation as applicable for violations of this article.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-210)
Sec. 4.07.003 Soliciting in street or highway
(a) In order to solicit contributions while standing in a street or highway, a charitable organization must comply with
all of the permit requirements.
(b) Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date desired for soliciting, a complete application shall be submitted to
the city police chief or designee for a permit. The application form shall require the name of the charitable organization;
a point of contact for the organization (meaning the name and phone number of the individual seeking the permit for the
organization); the desired date(s) and specific location(s) for soliciting; the name, address, phone number and age of
each individual who may solicit contributions on behalf of the organization; and an agreement of the organization
indemnifying the city and holding it harmless from any and all claims, suits, demands, damages, and attorney fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/507
arising out of or related to the acts or omissions of persons soliciting for the organization. The form may require further
information that is reasonably necessary to the direct enforcement of this section and the purposes of this article. The
form will inform the applicant of all costs and all required documentation and set forth time limitations and all other
requirements.
(c) The solicitation of, or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle
without a city-issued permit on a street in the city is prohibited.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-201a)
State law references–Solicitation by pedestrian, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.007; local authorization for solicitation by pedestrian,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.0071.
Sec. 4.07.004 Itinerant vendors prohibited on public property; exceptions
(a) Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell any goods on public property or to
display or distribute commercial printed matter in aid of any such sale.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person selling goods on public property was:
(1) Doing so in connection with official government business;
(2) Doing so by authority of a contract, lease, or other agreement with the city, county, state or federal
government to operate a business or concession on a designated area of public property; or
(3) Doing so under the authority of some other valid permit issued by the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-202)
Sec. 4.07.005 Entering upon posted premises; refusal to leave premises
(a) It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to enter upon any private premises when such premises have posted a
sign stating “No Peddlers Allowed” or “No Solicitations Allowed” or other words to such effect.
(b) Any itinerant vendor who enters upon premises owned, leased, or rented by another and refuses to leave such
premises, after having been notified by the owner of such premises, or his/her agent, to leave the same and not return to
such premises, shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c) It is expressly provided that violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension and/or revocation of a permit.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-206; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.07.006 Exemptions
This article shall not apply to the following activities:
(1) Nonretail sales. Sale of goods by a manufacturer or wholesaler to a retailer or to another wholesaler
having a permanent place of business within the city;
(2) Religious and charitable sales. Sale of goods by any religious, charitable, philanthropic, scholastic, or
eleemosynary institution, organization or association;
(3) Arts and crafts fairs. Sale of goods at an arts and crafts fair or similar event held:
(A) Within a structure on private or public property that is entirely enclosed;
(B) With no outside display of goods, wares, or merchandise; and
(C) In compliance with all zoning, health and sanitation, and other applicable codes;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/507
(4) Sales in connection with home occupation. Sale of goods in connection with a home occupation
lawfully conducted in accordance with the law;
(5) Insurance, securities, and other intangibles. The sale of insurance contracts, securities, or other
intangibles;
(6) Produce. The sale of raw agricultural products, flowers or produce;
(7) Garage sales. The sale, offer, exhibition or solicitation of orders for the sale of goods at a “garage sale”
held on private residential premises and in compliance with local ordinances;
(8) Newspapers and periodicals. The sale of newspapers or periodicals from a stationary coin-operated
machine properly situated so as not to obstruct or impede pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic and in
compliance with local law;
(9) Food products. The sale of food, beverages, or other commodities intended for human consumption by
authority of a permit issued by the Plainview/Hale County Health District or otherwise in accordance with all
laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable thereto; or
(10) Noncommercial printed matter. The sale or distribution of printed matter that is not commercial
printed paper, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, books, etc., which sale is otherwise than
from a coin-operated machine as described in the above subsection.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-209)
Secs. 4.07.007–4.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.07.031 Required; issuance; fees; renewal
(a) License required for selling goods on private property. It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell goods on
private property within the city without an itinerant vendor's license issued in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
(b) Time for securing license. The license required by the preceding subsection shall be secured prior to the actual
sale, offer, exhibit, or solicitation of orders for the sale of goods by an itinerant vendor.
(c) Application forms. Application for an itinerant vendor's license may be secured during business hours at the
Plainview Police Department, 108 W. 9th, Plainview, Texas 79072.
(d) Application requirements. Applications for an itinerant vendor's license must be complete, accurate, and made on a
form provided for that purpose by the chief of police or his authorized representative, with the signature thereon duly
notarized upon the oath of said vendor that his/her answers are true and correct.
(e) Contents of application. At the time of the application, each itinerant vendor shall provide, at a minimum, the
following data for identification of such applicant and each employee, agent, or representative who will sell, offer,
exhibit, or solicit orders on his/her behalf:
(1) Name;
(2) Address (residential and business);
(3) Social security number;
(4) Date of birth;
(5) Telephone numbers (residential and business);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/507
(6) Name and address of the person, corporation, or other entity from whom goods, wares, or merchandise
to be sold is secured (sources of goods);
(7) Recent photograph (not more than one year old) of the applicant and all employees, agents, or
representatives:
(8) Current driver's license number of applicant and all employees, agents, or representatives;
(9) A brief description of the nature of the business and of the goods to be sold or services to be performed;
(10) Length of time for which the right to do business is required;
(11) The fingerprints of the applicant;
(12) The names of two references as to the character and business responsibility of the applicant or, in lieu
of such references, the means of obtaining evidence as to the applicant's character and business responsibility;
(13) A statement as to any convictions of crimes, misdemeanors, or violations of municipal ordinances, the
date, the nature of the offense, and the penalty assessed therefor;
(14) A statement that a license, if granted, will not be used or represented as an endorsement by the city for
solicitations thereunder.
(f) Fees. Each application for an itinerant vendor's license shall be accompanied by a license fee of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) for the applicant and an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each employee, agent, or representative of
the applicant vendor who will sell, offer, exhibit, or solicit orders for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise for or on
behalf of the applicant vendor.
(g) Acknowledgement of receipt. Each itinerant vendor shall be required to receive his/her license in person and
acknowledge receipt therefrom on a form provided for this purpose by the chief of police.
(h) Primary term. Each itinerant vendor's license issued under this article shall be valid for a primary term of ninety
(90) days from the date of issuance.
(i) Extension of term. The primary term indicated in the preceding subsection may be extended once for an additional
ninety (90) days by filing a renewal application on a form provided for this purpose by the chief of police prior to the
expiration date of the primary license term.
(j) Renewal application and fees. Each renewal application shall be accompanied by a license renewal fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) for each applicant vendor and an additional ten dollars ($10.00) for each employee, agent, or
representative selling, offering, exhibiting or soliciting orders for the sale of goods on behalf of the applicant vendor.
(k) Transfer. A license issued under the authority of this article constitutes a purely personal privilege which may not
be sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred and shall not inure to the benefit of a person other than the original licensee.
(l) Issuance or denial. The chief of police shall receive all applications and review such applications for compliance
with the provisions of this article. After the passage of five complete business days from the date an application is
submitted to the chief of police, and if the chief of police has no evidence that answers to the questions on the
application are other than as stated on the application and the application is determined to comply with the provisions of
this article, then said license shall be issued to the applicant. If the chief of police determines that any question on the
application has been answered falsely or that the application does not comply with all of the provisions of this article,
then, in that event, the license shall not be issued and the applicant shall be so informed and given, in writing, the reason
for nonissuance.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-203)
Sec. 4.07.032 Display; unlawful use
(a) A license issued under this article shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place such that the same may be
easily read at any time during the sale, offer, exhibition, or solicitation of orders for the sale of goods.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/507
(b) It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor or employee, agent, or representative of such itinerant vendor to sell
goods in the city without prominently and conspicuously displaying his itinerant vendor's license as required in the
preceding subsection.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to present, display, or sell goods within the city under the authority of an
itinerant vendor's license issued to another.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to fail or to refuse to display or exhibit his/her itinerant vendor's
license or other identification upon request by the chief of police or his/her designee, any member of the city police
department, or a code enforcement officer.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell goods under the authority of a false, counterfeit, invalid or
altered itinerant vendor's license.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-205)
Sec. 4.07.033 Suspension or revocation
(a) A license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police if the following conditions
are found:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business of the
solicitor or canvasser;
(3) Any violation of this article;
(4) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, or conducting the business of soliciting or
canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or so as to constitute
a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(b) Notice of suspension or revocation of a license shall be in writing and mailed to the licensee at the address of
record on the original application and shall be effective as of the date of the writing.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-207)
Sec. 4.07.034 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by the denial, suspension, or revocation of an itinerant vendor's license hereunder may appeal
such action within ten (10) days from the date thereof in the manner and in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) An appeal in writing must be submitted to the city manager's office stating the grounds therefor.
(2) The city manager's office shall issue a decision within three (3) calendar days regarding the decision
rendered by the chief of police. The city manager's office shall have the authority to grant, deny, modify, or
overrule the chief of police's decision in regard to the issuance of the license.
(3) The decision of the city manager's office shall be final.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-208)
ARTICLE 4.08 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.08.001 Findings
Based on public testimony and other evidence before it, including information, studies and court decisions from other
jurisdictions, the city council makes the following legislative findings and statement of purpose: The council recognizes
that some activities which occur in connection with sexually oriented businesses are protected as expression under the
First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The council further recognizes the First Amendment rights are
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/507
among our most precious and highly protected rights, and wishes to act consistently with full protection of those rights.
The council is aware, however, that sexually oriented businesses may and do generate secondary effects which are
detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. Among these secondary effects are: (a) prostitution and other sexrelated
offenses, (b) drug use and dealing, (c) health risks through the spread of AIDS and other sexually transmitted
diseases, and (d) infiltration by organized crime for the purpose of drug- and sex-related business activities, laundering
of money and other illicit conduct. This article is not intended to interfere with legitimate expression but to avoid and
mitigate the secondary effects enumerated above. Specifically, the council finds that licensing of persons who operate
and manage sexually oriented businesses and persons who provide adult services will further the goals of this article by
enabling the city to ascertain if an applicant is underage or has engaged in criminal or other behavior of the sort this
article is designed to limit. This information will enable the city to allocate law enforcement resources effectively and
otherwise protect the community. The council finds that limiting proximity and contact between adult service providers
and patrons promotes the goal of reducing prostitution and other casual sexual conduct and the attendant risk of sexually
transmitted diseases. The council finds the foregoing to be true with respect to places where alcohol is served and where
it is not. The council finds that individual and interactive sexual activities in adult video facilities pose a risk of sexually
transmitted disease, especially AIDS, and that the open booth requirement of this article will reduce that risk. The
council finds that the harmful secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses are more pronounced when conducted
continuously or during late-night hours. The fees established for licenses and permits in this article are based on the
estimated cost of implementation, administration, and enforcement of the licensing program. (2000 Code, sec. 7-301)
Sec. 4.08.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult service. Dancing, service of food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking or listening,
or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration in an adult business by a person who is nude during
all or part of the time that the person is providing the service.
Adult service business. A business establishment or premises where any adult service is provided to patrons in the
regular course of business and as one of its principal business purposes.
Adult service provider or provider. Any person who provides an adult service.
Adult video facility. A commercial establishment where, for any consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassette
projections, videos, or other visual media characterized by depiction of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” are shown in the regular course of business as a principal business purpose of the establishment.
“Adult video facility” does not include a theater where all viewing occurs in a common area with seating for fifty (50) or
more persons.
Booth. A partitioned area in which coin- or token-operated video machines, projectors or other electronically or
mechanically controlled devices are used in the regular course of business to produce still or moving picture images
characterized by depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Cabaret. A sexually oriented business licensed to provide alcoholic beverages pursuant to a license described in chapter
11 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or the chief's designee.
Employee. Any person hired, engaged or authorized to perform any service on the premises of an adult service business,
including an adult service provider, whether denominated as an employee, independent contractor or otherwise.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-302)
Enterprise. An organization or venture, especially with financial commitment, where related activities are under unified
operation or common control for a common business purpose. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Finance director. The finance director of the city or the finance director's designee.
License. The license required by this article as a condition of conducting a sexually oriented business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/507
Licensee. A person or enterprise holding a sexually oriented business license issued under this article, including those
persons required to provide information under section 4.08.006(c) of this article.
Manager's station. A permanently designated area marked accordingly within a sexually oriented business where a
sexually oriented business manager is located in the normal course of operations.
Nude. Without opaque non-flesh-colored fabric fully covering the genitals, pubic hair, vulva, mons veneris, anus, cleft of
the buttocks, and the part of the female breast directly below the top of the areola.
Patron. A person invited or permitted to enter and remain upon the premises of a sexually oriented business, whether or
not for a consideration.
Permit. The permit required by this article to engage in the activity of an adult service provider or sexually oriented
business manager.
Sexually oriented business. An adult service business or an adult facility.
Sexually oriented business manager or manager. A person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is
authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business.
Specified anatomical areas. Human genitals, pubic hair, vulva, mons veneris, anus, cleft of the buttocks, female breast
below the top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
Specified sexual activities. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy,
flagellation, bestiality, fondling or touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or the female breast, or any
combination of the foregoing.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-302)
Sec. 4.08.003 Penalty; abatement of businesses operating without license
(a) The violation of any provision of this article, including the doing of anything which is herein prohibited or
declared to be unlawful or the failure to do anything or perform any duty which is required herein, shall be punishable as
provided by section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code as amended.
(b) In addition to other penalties, a sexually oriented business which operates without a valid license shall constitute a
public nuisance which may be abated by a suit for injunctive relief.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-322)
Sec. 4.08.004 Administration; duration of licenses and permits
(a) The administration of this article, including the duty of prescribing forms, is vested in the chief of police, except as
otherwise specifically provided.
(b) License or permit applications made pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the chief of police. He/she shall
grant, deny, suspend, or revoke licenses or permits in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(c) Licenses or permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-303)
Sec. 4.08.005 License required
(a) A person may not conduct a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a sexually oriented business license
pursuant to this article. The license shall state the name of the license holder; the name, address and phone number of the
licensed premises; and the dates of issuance and expiration of the license.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/507
(b) A sexually oriented business for which a license has been issued pursuant to this article may conduct business only
under the name or designation specified in the license.
(c) A licensee shall conduct business only at the address shown on the license. Each additional place of business shall
require a separate license.
(d) A sexually oriented business license shall be displayed on the premises in such a manner as to be readily visible to
patrons.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-304)
Sec. 4.08.006 Application for license
(a) An applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall file in person at the office of the chief of police an
application, signed under oath by the applicant and notarized, accompanied by the fee required under section 4.08.020.
An applicant or other person whose fingerprints and photograph are required under subsection (c) may, at his option, be
photographed and fingerprinted at the office of the chief of police or other city location not later than the close of
business of the first business day after filing for an application[. The application shall include] any payment of fees, all
information required in subsection (c), photograph and fingerprints of the applicant and, in the case of a corporation or
other business organization, photograph and fingerprints of all persons for whom information is required under
subsection (c) of this section.
(b) The fingerprints and photograph, if not taken at the office of the chief, shall be taken by a law enforcement agency
and accompanied by a notarized verification by the agency.
(c) The application shall include the information called for in subsections (1) through (9). If the applicant is an
enterprise, it shall designate an officer or partner as applicant. In such case, in addition to the information required in
subsections (1) through (9) for the applicant, the application shall include the state and date of formation of the
organization and the information called for in subsections (2) through (6) of this subsection with respect to each officer,
director, general partner, and all other persons with authority to participate directly and regularly in the business;
provided that such information need not be provided with respect to attorneys, accountants and other persons whose
primary function is to provide professional advice and assistance to the licensee.
(1) The name, business location, business mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually
oriented business establishment.
(2) The full, true name and any other names, aliases or stage names used in the preceding five (5) years.
(3) Current residential mailing address and telephone number.
(4) Written proof of age, in the form of a birth certificate, current driver's license with picture, or other
picture identification document issued by a governmental agency.
(5) The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit relating to a sexually oriented
business or adult service, and whether any such license or permit has been revoked or suspended, and, if so,
the reason or reasons therefor.
(6) All criminal charges, complaints or inducements in the preceding three (3) years which resulted in a
conviction or a plea of guilty or no contest for an “organized crime and fraud” offense under chapter 71 of the
Texas Penal Code, a “prostitution” offense under chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code, a “drug offense” under
chapters 481 and 483 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, or a “sexual offense” under chapters 21, 22, 25
and/or 42 of the Texas Penal Code, or for conduct in another jurisdiction which if carried out in this state
would constitute an offense under one of the statutory provisions enumerated in this subsection.
(7) The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process.
(8) The names of the sexually oriented business managers who shall have actual supervisory authority over
the operations of the business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/507
(9) An accurate, to scale, but not necessarily professionally drawn, floor plan of the business or premises
clearly indicating the location of one or more manager's stations.
(d) The information provided pursuant to subsections (5) and (6) of subsection (c) of this section shall be
supplemented in writing by certified mail to the chief within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which
would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-305)
Sec. 4.08.007 Adult service provider permit
(a) A person may not work as an adult service provider unless the person has first obtained an adult service provider
permit under this article.
(b) Application for an adult service provider permit shall be made in the same manner as an application for a sexually
oriented business license except that the applicant need provide only the information called for in subsections (2)
through (6) of section 4.08.006(c).
(2000 Code, sec. 7-307)
Sec. 4.08.008 Confidentiality of information
The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license or permit under this article
shall be maintained by the chief on a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed to other
governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function. (2000 Code, sec. 7-308)
Sec. 4.08.009 Granting or denial of license or permit
(a) Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the
chief shall mail to the applicant a license or a notice of intent to deny. If the chief fails to do so, the license shall be
deemed granted.
(b) Upon receipt of a complete application for a sexually oriented business manager permit or an adult service
provider permit, payment of the required fees and completion of the photograph and fingerprinting requirements of this
article, the chief shall issue the applicant a temporary permit. Within thirty (30) days after issuance of a temporary
permit, the chief shall mail to the applicant a regular permit or a notice of intent to deny.
(c) The issuance of any license or permit does not waive any right of revocation or denial the city may have at the time
of issuance.
(d) The chief shall grant the license or permanent permit to an applicant who has completed all requirements for
application, unless the chief finds any of the following conditions. For purposes of this subsection (d), a person required
to submit information pursuant to section 4.08.006(c) shall be deemed an applicant.
(1) The application is incomplete or contains a misrepresentation, false statement or omission.
(2) The applicant has failed to comply with applicable zoning or other land use ordinances and regulations
of the city relating to the business or activity to be carried out under the license or permit; or is delinquent in
payment of any city taxes, fees or other payments due in connection with such business or activity.
(3) The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(4) The applicant or other person required to provide information under section 4.08.006(c), in the past
three (3) years, has been convicted or pled guilty or no contest with respect to a felony violation or two
misdemeanor violations of one or more offenses in the categories stated in section 4.08.006(c)(6).
(5) Within the past two (2) years, a license or permit under this article held by an applicant, or other person
required to provide information pursuant to section 4.08.006(c), has been revoked, or a similar license in
another jurisdiction has been revoked on the basis of conduct which would be a ground for revocation of a
license or permit issued under this article if committed in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/507
(2000 Code, sec. 7-309)
Sec. 4.08.010 Transfer of license or permit
Licenses and permits issued under this article are nontransferable. (2000 Code, sec. 7-310)
Sec. 4.08.011 Adult service provider or sexually oriented business manager work identification card
The chief shall provide to all adult service providers and sexually oriented business managers a work identification card.
The card shall contain a photograph of the permittee, the number of the permit issued to that permittee and the date of
expiration of the permit. (2000 Code, sec. 7-311)
Sec. 4.08.012 Adult service business operating requirements
(a) A person employed or acting as an adult service provider or manager shall have a valid permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this article. A permit or a certified copy thereof for each manager or provider shall be maintained on
the premises in the custody of the manager at all times during which a person is serving as a provider or manager on the
premises. Such permits shall be produced by the manager for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or
other authorized city official.
(b) An adult service business shall maintain a daily log of all persons providing adult services on the premises. The
log shall cover the preceding twelve-month period and shall be available for inspection upon request by a law
enforcement officer during regular business hours.
(c) A person below the age of eighteen (18) years may not observe or provide an adult service.
(d) A person may not provide an adult service in an adult service business except upon a stage elevated at least
eighteen (18) inches above the floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof within which the
adult service is provided, shall be a distance of at least three (3) feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which
patrons may be present. The stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be
located by a barrier or railing, the top of which is at least three (3) feet above floor level. A provider or patron may not
extend any part of his or her body over or beyond the barrier or railing.
(e) An adult service provider, in the course of providing an adult service, may not perform a specified sexual activity.
(f) Adult services may not be provided between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday though Saturday, or
between 1:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.
(g) An adult service may not be provided in any location which is not visible by direct line of sight at all times from a
manager's station located in a portion of the premises which is accessible to patrons of the adult service business.
(h) An adult service provider shall wear his or her adult service provider work identification card at all times while on
the premises except while providing an adult service. The card shall be affixed to clothing on the front of the person and
above the waist level so that the picture and permit number are clearly visible to patrons.
(i) A sexually oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult service business at all times during
which any adult service is provided on the premises. The manager shall wear his or her identification card in the manner
described in subsection (h) above.
(j) An employee may not touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of a patron nor may a patron touch the breast,
buttocks, or genitals of an employee.
(k) A sign, in a form to be prescribed by the chief, summarizing the provisions of subsections (c), (d), (j) and (l) of this
section shall be posted near the entrance of an adult service business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons
upon entry.
(l) A patron may not place any money on the person or in or on the costume of an adult service provider.
(m) A manager or licensee may not knowingly permit or tolerate a violation of any provision of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/507
(n) With respect to a cabaret, the requirements of this section shall apply to the extent that they are not in conflict with
specific statutory or valid regulatory requirements applicable to persons licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-312)
Sec. 4.08.013 Adult video facility operating requirements
(a) An adult video facility shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle, as measured at the
floor level.
(b) An adult video facility shall be configured in such a way that a patron, whether sitting or standing, is visible below
the waist by direct line of sight from a manager's station at all times during which the patron is viewing video material
characterized by depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. The manager's station shall be
located in a portion of the premises accessible to patrons.
(c) A sexually oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult video facility at all times that the facility
is open for business. The manager shall wear his or her identification card in the manner described in section
4.08.012(h).
(d) A patron may not engage in specified sexual activities on the premises of an adult video facility.
(e) A booth shall:
(1) Be rectangular in shape;
(2) Have one side open without any door, wall, curtain or other obstruction on that side; and
(3) Not have any hole or aperture in any wall separating one such booth or viewing area from another.
(f) A manager or licensee may not knowingly permit or tolerate a violation of any provision of this section.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-313)
Sec. 4.08.014 Inspection of premises and records
The manager of a sexually oriented business shall maintain on the premises business records reflecting all receipts and
expenditures with respect to the business for the preceding two (2) years. The manager shall permit law enforcement
officers of the city to inspect the premises and the finance director to inspect the business records upon request during
regular business hours, subject to section 4.08.008. (2000 Code, sec. 7-314)
Sec. 4.08.015 Grounds for suspension of license or permit; period of suspension
The chief shall suspend a license or permit for a period of ten (10) days if the licensee or permittee is convicted of
violating a provision of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 7-315)
Sec. 4.08.016 Grounds for revocation of license or permit
The chief shall revoke a license or permit issued pursuant to this article if the licensee or permittee:
(1) Is convicted of three (3) or more violations of this article in any twelve-month period.
(2) Is convicted of or pleads guilty or no contest to an offense stated in section 4.08.006(c)(6).
(2000 Code, sec. 7-316)
Sec. 4.08.017 Procedure for denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit
If the chief determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license or permit under this article, he
shall notify the applicant, licensee or permittee (respondent) in writing of his intent to deny, suspend, or revoke,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/507
including a summary of the grounds therefor. The notification shall be by certified mail to the address on file with the
chief. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the chief in writing a
response which shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or
revoked and may include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the chief in the time stated, the
notification shall be final administrative action of denial, suspension or revocation and notice of such will be sent to the
permittee or licensee within five (5) working days after expiration of the period for submitting a response. Within five
(5) working days after receipt of a response, the chief shall either withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke, and
send notification of the withdrawal to the respondent in writing by certified mail, or shall schedule a hearing before the
city manager or his designee and shall send notification to the respondent in writing by certified mail of the date, time
and place of the hearing. If the chief fails to send a timely notification either withdrawing the intent or scheduling a
hearing, the intent to deny, suspend or revoke shall be deemed withdrawn. The hearing, if requested, shall be scheduled
not less than fifteen (15) nor more than twenty (20) working days after receipt by the chief of the request for a hearing.
The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel. The rules of
evidence shall not apply. The city manager shall render a written decision within five (5) working days after completion
of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the
chief. In no case shall more than forty-five (45) days elapse between receipt by the chief of a request for a hearing and
mailing by the city manager of a final decision to the respondent[. If the city manager fails to mail the final decision
within such time], a decision in favor of the applicant, licensee or permittee shall be deemed to have been rendered. In
the case of an intent to revoke, suspend or not renew a license or permit, or to deny a regular permit, the permittee or
licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending receipt of the final decision of the city manager.
The decision shall be final at the end of five (5) working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final administrative
action. (2000 Code, sec. 7-317)
Sec. 4.08.018 Appeal of administrative action on license or permit
Final administrative action to deny, revoke, or not renew a license or permit may be appealed to the district court by
special action or other viable procedure within thirty-five (35) days after receipt of written notice of the decision. The
city shall consent to expedited hearing and disposition. (2000 Code, sec. 7-318)
Sec. 4.08.019 Renewal of license or permit
(a) A license or permit may be renewed by filing an application for renewal. The application shall contain the
information required to be submitted with the original application, provided that a renewal application need not contain
information that has been provided in a previous application and has not changed since the time of the most recent
application. An application for license renewal shall be received by the chief not less than forty-five (45) days before the
expiration of the license. Application for permit renewal shall be received by the chief before the expiration of the
permit.
(b) The chief may deny an application for renewal for the reasons and in accordance with the procedure set forth in
section 4.08.009.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-319)
Sec. 4.08.020 License and permit fees
(a) An original application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and by a license fee in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00). The license fee will be refunded if the license is denied. An application for renewal shall be accompanied by
the amount of the license fee.
(b) An application for issuance or renewal of an adult service provider permit shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(c) An application for issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business manager permit shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00).
(d) A duplicate or certified copy of a license, permit or identification card shall be issued by the director upon
payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/507
(e) A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid at the time of fingerprinting for each set of fingerprints to be
provided for by the chief under section 4.08.006.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-320)
Sec. 4.08.021 Compliance with other regulations
A license or permit required by this article is in addition to any other license or permit required by the city, the county, or
the state to engage in the business or occupation. Persons engaging in activities described in this article shall comply
with all other ordinances and laws, including the city zoning ordinance, as may be required to engage in a business or
profession. (2000 Code, sec. 7-321)
Sec. 4.08.022 Applicability to existing activities
This article shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described herein, whether or not such activities were
commenced prior to the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted July 25, 1995). Persons so engaged as of the
effective date of this article shall be in full compliance with this article, including receipt of any required license or
permit, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 7-323)
ARTICLE 4.09 TAXICABS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.09.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as
follows:
Driver or chauffeur. Every person in actual charge of the operation of a taxicab, whether as owner or agent, servant or
employee of the owner.
Owner or taxicab operator. Any person who has the control, direction, maintenance and the benefit of the collection of
revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs on or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as an owner or
otherwise, except a “driver.”
(2000 Code, sec. 7-251)
Permit. A written document issued by the chief of police or his/her designated representative granting the applicant the
authority to engage in the business of transportation by taxicab. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sub-taxistand. Any place which the drivers of taxicabs, or chauffeurs of taxicabs, shall use to receive calls from the
dispatcher as such calls may be relayed from the taxistand, and shall likewise mean and embrace that space and area
used by taxicabs in waiting for passengers.
Taxicab. Every automobile or other motor-propelled vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire over the public
streets of the city, and not over a definite or fixed route, and irrespective of whether or not the operations extend beyond
the corporate limits of the city, at rates for distance traveled, or for waiting time, or for both, or at rates per hour, per
week, or per month, which vehicle is routed to the destination under the direction of any passenger or any person hiring
the same; provided, however, the term “taxicab” shall not apply to city buses operated within the city over a fixed route,
nor shall such term apply to city buses regularly operated in the city along fixed routes to and from points outside the
corporate limits of the city, nor shall such term apply to motor vehicles regularly engaged in interstate commerce.
Taxistand. The taxi depot at which place the taxicabs shall be housed or parked, and at which place the telephone calls
and requests for service shall be made, and at which place a dispatcher shall control the movements of the taxicabs to the
points of request for taxicab service. This term shall likewise be synonymous with “taxi terminal” and shall mean and
embrace that space and area of land and buildings off the streets of the city, and upon private property, which shall be
and constitute the main office of the owner and taxicab operator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/507
Waiting time. Such time as may be consumed or lost at the special instance and request of a passenger after such
passenger has first entered the taxicab to make a trip and before reaching his/her final destination. No charge shall be
made against a passenger for any time lost on account of any other delay whatsoever.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-251)
Sec. 4.09.002 Fares
Fares which may be charged by any person engaged in the operation of a taxicab business within the city shall first be
approved by the city manager, and it shall be unlawful for any taxicab operator to charge any fare not so approved. The
taxicab operator shall display in each taxicab operated by him a list of approved fares which may be charged for taxicab
service. (2000 Code, sec. 7-252)
Sec. 4.09.003 Identification
Every taxicab shall have painted or decaled on each side and the rear of the cab the name in which the owner operates.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-253)
Sec. 4.09.004 Taxicabs to be operated only by permittee and employees
No taxicab for which a permit shall have been granted shall be operated by any person except the permittee thereof, or
an employee of the permittee. (2000 Code, sec. 7-254; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.005 Responsibility of owner and operator for acts of drivers
The owner or operator of taxicabs shall be responsible for the acts of negligence of any driver of a taxicab who shall
drive such taxicab with the knowledge or with the consent of such owner or operator of taxicabs. (2000 Code, sec. 7-
261(4))
Sec. 4.09.006 Alcohol and drug use
Acts prohibited:
(1) Taxi driver consuming alcohol or illegal drugs.
(2) Taxi driver under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
(3) Taxi driver allowing customers to consume alcohol or drugs.
(4) Taxi driver taking medication that impairs vision and/or impairs judgment or driving.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-261(5))
Sec. 4.09.007 State driver's license
Every driver of a taxi must hold a valid driver's license issued by the state which permits carrying passengers for hire.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-261(6))
Secs. 4.09.008–4.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Operator's Permit
Sec. 4.09.031 Required
No person shall be permitted to engage in the transportation of persons for hire in the operation of taxicabs in the city
unless and until a permit for such operation of taxicabs is first had and obtained from the chief of police. (2000 Code,
sec. 7-261; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.032 Application
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/507
To obtain a taxi permit, each person shall make a written application to the chief of police on a form provided. (2000
Code, sec. 7-261(1); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.033 Investigation
The chief of police shall make or cause to be made such investigations of the character, experience, and qualifications of
the applicant as may be deemed consistent and judicious, and shall determine whether or not the applicant is fit and
proper to drive and operate a taxicab within the corporate limits of the city in a manner consistent with the welfare of the
citizens of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 7-261(2))
Sec. 4.09.034 Appeals
When the chief of police has made his/her decision concerning the permit issuance or permit being revoked, each
applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal this decision to the city manager. An appeal must be made in
writing within five (5) days after the decision is made. The city manager will consider the appeal and render his/her
decision. The decisions of the city manager will be final. (2000 Code, sec. 7-261(3); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.035 Fee
Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall pay an annual fee of one
hundred dollars ($100). (2000 Code, sec. 7-262; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.036 Ownership of vehicles
Every person holding a permit provided for herein shall own each and every taxicab he/she operates, and the certificate
of title shall be in the name of such person, and the certificate of title must be submitted to the chief of police for his/her
approval before the taxicab will be allowed to operate under such permit. (2000 Code, sec. 7-263; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 4.09.037 Payment of taxes
The grantee of a permit under this article shall promptly pay all lawful ad valorem taxes that may be lawfully imposed
upon him. Failure to pay any of such charges or either of them shall be deemed a breach of the privilege granted herein,
and the city, upon the happening of such event, may declare the rights of the grantee hereunder forfeited for such breach.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-264; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.038 Duration
A permit granted under the provisions of this article shall continue in force until revoked. (2000 Code, sec. 7-266;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.039 Transfer
No permit for the operation of taxicabs within the city shall be transferable. (2000 Code, sec. 7-267; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 4.09.040 Revocation
(a) Failure to abide by any of the provisions of this article or failure to pay any fees assessed will result in the permit
being revoked.
(b) The chief of police shall have the right to revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this article for the
violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation, or for
any other good cause.
(2000 Code, secs. 7-265, 7-268; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 4.09.041–4.09.060 Reserved
Division 3. Liability Insurance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/507
Sec. 4.09.061 Required
Before any permit shall be issued under this article to any owner or operator of a taxicab, or before any renewal of the
permit shall be granted, the owner or operator shall be required to file with the chief of police, and thereafter keep in full
force and effect, a liability policy in a form approved by the state department of insurance, issued by an insurance
company duly authorized to transact liability insurance in the state, covering bodily injuries and injury to or destruction
of property resulting from the operation of such vehicle or vehicles. (2000 Code, sec. 7-271; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.062 Minimum amount of coverage
(a) The maximum amount of recovery in a policy of insurance required by this article shall not be less than the
following sums:
(1) For the injury or death of any one person in any one accident, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000).
(2) For total liability in any one accident for personal injuries or death, three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000).
(3) For injury or destruction of property in any one accident, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).
(b) The minimum amount of insurance liability shall never be less than the amount established by the statutes of the
state under the Texas Safety Responsibility Act or amendments thereto.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-272)
Sec. 4.09.063 Persons protected
The public liability insurance required by this division shall be for the protection of the passengers of the insured taxicab
and for the public, but shall not cover personal injuries sustained by the servants, agents or employees of the person
filing the insurance. (2000 Code, sec. 7-273)
Sec. 4.09.064 Provision for continuing liability
All policies of public liability insurance required by this division shall contain a provision for a continuing liability
thereon up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. (2000 Code, sec. 7-274)
Sec. 4.09.065 Increase of amount upon return of execution unsatisfied
In the event of the return unsatisfied of any execution issued on any final judgment rendered against any taxicab owner
in any suit for damages on account of injury to person or property occasioned by the operation of any taxicab, such
owner, within ten (10) days after the return of such execution unsatisfied, provided the judgment is still unpaid, shall
increase the amount of his insurance by the amount of such judgment, and failing to do so shall forthwith cease the
operation of taxicabs in the city until such additional insurance is deposited or such judgment is paid. (2000 Code, sec.
7-275)
Sec. 4.09.066 Cancellation
(a) In the event that any insurer desires to be released from any insurance filed under this article, he may give written
notice of such desire to the chief of police at least thirty (30) days before he desires his liability released, and the chief of
police shall thereupon give written notice, by personal delivery or by mail, to the insured and demand that he furnish
new assurance by the expiration of the thirty-day period above provided for, and shall discharge such first insurer from
any liability which shall accrue after the time of approval of such new policy, or shall discharge such first insurer after
the expiration of such thirty-day period.
(b) In the event any policy is so cancelled upon the request of the insurer and no new insurance policy is filed before
the cancellation of the original insurance, the permit to operate taxicabs granted to the insured shall be automatically
revoked.
(2000 Code, sec. 7-276)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/507
Sec. 4.09.067 City not liable for solvency of insurer; owner's liability not affected; suits on policy
Neither the city nor any officer thereof shall be held liable for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any insurer
under the provisions of this article, or in any manner become liable for any sum on account of any such claim or act or
omission relating to the insured vehicle. Nor shall the liability of the owner of any such vehicle be in any manner limited
or changed by reason of the provisions of this article, but the judgment creditors having causes of action secured thereby
shall be authorized to sue directly on such policy of insurance without impleading the city. All persons known to have
been injured or damaged in the same accident and claiming damages thereunder may be made parties without priority of
claim on payment in any suit had or instituted on account of such matters. (2000 Code, sec. 7-277)
Secs. 4.09.068–4.09.090 Reserved
Division 4. Chauffeur's Permit
Sec. 4.09.091 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab upon or over any street within the corporate limits of the city
without having first obtained from the chief of police a city chauffeur's permit. (2000 Code, sec. 7-281; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.092 Qualifications
Every person who may drive any taxicab used in the business of carrying passengers for hire upon the streets of the city
must be a bona fide resident of the county, and must not live further than five (5) miles from the city limits. (2000 Code,
sec. 7-282)
Sec. 4.09.093 Application
To obtain a city chauffeur's permit, each person shall make a written application therefor to the chief of police of the city,
which application shall be made upon the form provided therefor by the chief and which shall contain the following
information:
(1) The full name, age and specific address of the applicant.
(2) The full name of the person or owner by whom the applicant proposes to be employed.
(3) The length of local residence of the applicant in the city, county and state and if a citizen of the United
States.
(4) A full personal description of the applicant, including his age, height, size, race, color of eyes,
complexion and color of hair, body and facial marks, defects, his full fingerprints, and his photograph, both
front views, with his hat on and off.
(5) The experience that the applicant has had in rendering such service, and if married or single, and how
many children in his immediate family, and the specific address of his mother and father, and where born.
(6) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony and full information concerning same; likewise, if
the applicant has a police record with conviction of a misdemeanor and full information concerning same.
(7) Whether the applicant has been convicted of violations of the law in the operation of motor vehicles,
and, if so, full information concerning same.
(8) The applicant for a city chauffeur's permit shall deliver to the chief of police a certificate of the city
health officer that the applicant is not afflicted with any communicable disease or disability which would
impair his ability to drive and operate a taxicab in a safe manner upon the streets of the city. Such certificate
shall indicate specifically the condition of the hearing and eyesight of the applicant.
(9) The number and date of issuance of the state chauffeur's license issued to the applicant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/507
(2000 Code, sec. 7-283; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.094 Fee
A fee, to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council, shall be paid at the time an application for a permit
required by the provisions of this article is made, which fee shall be nonrefundable. (2000 Code, sec. 7-284; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.095 Investigation
The chief of police shall make or cause to be made such investigations of the character, experience and qualifications of
the applicant as may be deemed consistent and judicious, and shall determine whether or not the applicant is fit and
proper to drive and operate a taxicab within the corporate limits of the city in a manner consistent with the welfare of the
citizenry of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 7-285)
Sec. 4.09.096 Appeals
If the chief of police has made his decision and declared same, either the applicant for such permit or any duly qualified
citizen of the city shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten (10) days, which appeal shall be perfected
by delivering in writing five (5) copies of same to the city council stating that an appeal from the decision of the chief of
police is desired. The city council will then, within a period of not more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such notice
of appeal, grant a hearing thereon, and after the hearing of such appeal shall, within a period of five (5) days, sustain or
reverse the decision of the chief of police. If no appeal is taken from the findings made by the chief of police within the
time provided above, his decision shall be final; otherwise the decision of the city council shall become final. (2000
Code, sec. 7-286; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.097 Duration
The chauffeur's permit, when issued, shall be valid for a period of not to exceed two (2) years. (2000 Code, sec. 7-287;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.098 Renewal
A city chauffeur's permit may be renewed by the holder of same making a formal written application for renewal to the
chief of police, and stating in such application for renewal that the applicant has not committed any of the acts for which
his city chauffeur's permit could be cancelled or suspended. (2000 Code, sec. 7-288; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.099 Transfer
Chauffeur's permits issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable. (2000 Code, sec. 7-289;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.100 Revocation
A city chauffeur's permit granted under the provisions of this article shall be cancelled by the city council for the
violation of any applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. (2000 Code, sec. 7-290;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.101 Responsibility of owner and operator for acts of drivers
The owner or operator of taxicabs shall be responsible for the acts of negligence of any driver of a taxicab who shall
drive such taxicab with the knowledge or with the consent of such owner or operator of taxicabs. (2000 Code, sec. 7-
291)
ARTICLE 4.10 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.10.001 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/507
Basic cable rates. The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment.
Basic service tier. A separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of
service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic television
signals other than superstations.
Benchmark. A per-channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has determined is
reasonable.
Cable Act of 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
Cable operator. Any person or group of persons who:
(1) Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a
significant interest in such a cable system; or
(2) Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of
such a cable system
Channel. A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
Cost-of-service showing. A filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap
is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to
attract capital.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Initial basic cable rates. The rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for
associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic
cable rates.
Must-carry signal. The signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to be carried on the
basic service tier.
PEG channel. The channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and
equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
Price cap. The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a formula
using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall
inflation.
Reasonable rate standard. A per-channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level.
Superstation. Any nonlocal broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-1)
Sec. 4.10.002 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to implement and comply with cable television rates and services as authorized by the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (the “Act”), within the parameters promulgated in
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (the “FCC”), and to administer and comply with FCC
requirements.
Sec. 4.10.003 Customer service standards
(a) FCC regulations require specific standards for customer service by cable operators. The cable operator will file
with the city secretary its written procedures for compliance with FCC customer service standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/507
(b) Should the city receive a customer service complaint it will send complaint details to the cable operator by
telephone or facsimile transmission. The cable operator will give the city its response within the time prescribed by the
FCC regulations for responding to that type of complaint. If the cable operator cannot respond to the complaint within
the prescribed time, it will notify the city in writing of the reasons for its inability and expected response time.
(c) Failure of the cable operator to respond to customer complaints as required may result in a complaint being filed
with the FCC.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 4.10.004–4.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Review of Request for Increase in Basic Cable Rates
Sec. 4.10.031 Notice
A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a
request with the city and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator desires the increase to take
effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of
the initial basic cable rates. (2000 Code, sec. 8-31)
Sec. 4.10.032 Expedited determination and public hearing
(a) If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable
service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city council shall:
(1) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and
(2) Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its request with
the city.
(b) If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city, the
proposed rates will go into effect.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-32)
Sec. 4.10.033 Extended review period
(a) If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard
based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, by
adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final
determination:
(1) 90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
(2) 100 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase
above the applicable price cap.
(b) The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
(c) If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the city council shall issue a brief
written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by
reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-33)
Sec. 4.10.034 Public hearing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/507
During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city council shall hold at
least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. (2000 Code, sec. 8-
34)
Sec. 4.10.035 Objections
An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city secretary to
record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing at any time before the decision
resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city secretary
with the objector's name and address. (2000 Code, sec. 8-35)
Sec. 4.10.036 Delayed determination
If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time
period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund if the city council later issues a
decision disapproving any portion of the increase. (2000 Code, sec. 8-36)
Sec. 4.10.037 Price cap analysis
If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city
council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC.
Based on the city council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
(1) If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed
rates shall become the new basic cable rates.
(2) If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council
shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-37)
Sec. 4.10.038 Cost-of-service showings
If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap, the city
council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may
approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-ofservice
determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator's then-current rate will prescribe
the cable operator's new rate. (2000 Code, sec. 8-38)
Sec. 4.10.039 Decision
The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase
proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made by other parties to the
proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public
hearing by a person requesting the city secretary to record the objection or may be submitted in writing at any time
before the decision resolution is adopted. (2000 Code, sec. 8-39)
Sec. 4.10.040 Refunds
(a) The city council may order refund of subscribers' rate payments with interest if:
(1) The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in section
4.10.033(c);
(2) The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and
(3) The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap in that
the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council
disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/507
(b) The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in
the city council's decision resolution.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-40)
Sec. 4.10.041 Appeals
The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the
FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. (2000 Code, sec. 8-41)
Secs. 4.10.042–4.10.060 Reserved
Division 3. Cable Operator Information
Sec. 4.10.061 Right of city to require additional information
(a) In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the
reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to that
submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator
may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this division.
(b) In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may request
additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the standard.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-51)
Sec. 4.10.062 Submission of request for confidentiality
(a) A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the information not be
made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of the information
and all copies of the information to which it applies.
(b) If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any information to
which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request applies shall
be identified.
(c) Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon
which those reasons are based.
(d) Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this section shall not be considered.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-52)
Sec. 4.10.063 City council action on request for confidentiality
Requests which comply with the requirements of section 4.10.062 will be acted upon by the city council. The city
council will grant the request if the cable operator presents, by a preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure
consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of
the information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city
council denies the request, the city council shall take one of the following actions:
(1) If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator
may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with
this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires will the information be made
available for public inspection.
(2) If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made
available for public inspection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/507
(2000 Code, sec. 8-53)
Sec. 4.10.064 Review of decision on request for confidentiality
If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the
FCC within five working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the information will be stayed pending
review. (2000 Code, sec. 8-54)
Secs. 4.10.065–4.10.090 Reserved
Division 4. Automatic Rate Adjustments
Sec. 4.10.091 Annual inflation adjustment
In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per-channel rate for the basic service
tier annually by the final GNP-PI index. (2000 Code, sec. 8-61)
Sec. 4.10.092 Adjustments for other external costs
(a) The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier automatically to
reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These
factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable
television service, and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be
automatically added to the base per-channel rate, without regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
(b) For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date for
measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per-channel rate may be adjusted will be the date on
which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February 28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted
per-channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of transmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before
October 6, 1994.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-62)
Sec. 4.10.093 Notification and review
The cable operator shall notify the city at least 30 days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment
items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the
city makes no objection within 30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect. (2000 Code,
sec. 8-63)
Secs. 4.10.094–4.10.120 Reserved
Division 5. Enforcement
Sec. 4.10.121 Refunds
The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following
circumstances:
(1) A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge
or above the actual cost of equipment; or
(2) The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 8-71)
Sec. 4.10.122 Fines
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/507
If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of
$500 for each day the cable operator fails to comply. (2000 Code, sec. 8-72)
Sec. 4.10.123 Provisions cumulative; applicability of other regulations
The provisions of this article are cumulative and nothing herein shall prevent, alter, or diminish the applicability or
enforcement of other local, state, or federal regulations restricting, regulating or governing the subject matter herein,
including but not limited to the rules promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act, published at 47 CFR 76.900 et seq., as may be amended. (2000
Code, sec. 8-73)
ARTICLE 4.11 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.11.001 Definitions
The following words and terms, as used herein, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as herein provided. Any
word or term not specifically defined herein shall be accorded the meaning most commonly attributed to it within the
context used.
Alarm site. The premises or location served by an alarm system.
Alarm system. A device or system which transmits a signal intended to summon an emergency service of the city in
response to an emergency. The categories of alarm systems are robbery, burglary, fire, emergency medical assistance and
emergency assistance. Alarm system does not mean an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless used for a habitation at a
permanent site, or an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within the premises, but does include an alarm that
emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure.
Automatic tape dialer. A device that, when tripped, automatically rings the police department emergency line.
Burglar alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered by an alarm
system designed to respond to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion.
Coordinator. The chief of police or his authorized designate.
Emergency assistance alarm. Any automatic notification system other than those otherwise defined in this section which
summons emergency assistance from the city.
Emergency medical assistance alarm notification. An alarm system intended to summon emergency medical assistance.
False alarm notification. An alarm notification to the police department when the responding officer finds no evidence
of unauthorized intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, or an attempt to take a person
hostage. The coordinator shall not consider an alarm notification to be false if he determines that the alarm was caused
by:
(1) A natural or manmade catastrophe;
(2) Severe weather that causes physical damage to the premises;
(3) Vandalism;
(4) Telephone line outage; or
(5) Attempted entry or attempted robbery.
Financial institution. An institution required to have an alarm system by the provisions of the Bank Protection Act of
1968 (12 USC 1822, as amended).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/507
Fire alarm notification. A notification to the fire department or police department to summon firefighting forces, which
is initiated or triggered by an alarm designed to react to any of the visual or physical characteristics of fire.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible from the exterior of a structure.
Robbery alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered by an alarm
system designed to respond to a robbery in progress.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-21; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.11.002 Penalty
A person commits an offense if he operates any alarm system as herein defined without having a valid permit in
accordance with the provisions of this article, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section
1.01.009 of this code for each offense; and a violation occurs as a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during
which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. (2000 Code, sec. 17-30)
Sec. 4.11.003 Liability of city limited
(a) The city shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages
received by the city are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the city shall not be
liable for any defects in operation of automatic dialing devices and signal line systems, for any failure or neglect to
respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source, or for the failure or neglect of any person with a
license issued pursuant to this article in connection with the installation and operation of equipment, the transmission of
alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages, or the relaying of such signals and messages. In the event that the city
finds it necessary to disconnect a defective automatic dialing device or signaling device, the city shall incur no liability
by such action.
(b) The issuance of any license pursuant to this article shall not constitute acceptance by the city of any liability to
maintain any equipment.
(c) The installation of alarm devices (including annunciators, indicator panels, etc.) at police headquarters shall be
made at no cost to the city. The owner or lessee shall assume full responsibility for such equipment.
(d) If the location of police headquarters should be changed at any time, the city shall not be responsible for any
expense incurred by the owner or lessee or alarm business licensee or alarm agent for moving alarm systems or
components thereof or for reconnecting such systems or components to the relocated police headquarters.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-26)
Sec. 4.11.004 Police department monitoring fee
There shall be assessed against each alarm company, agency or system which is to be monitored at the police department
a charge of five dollars ($5.00) per month for each alarm device installed at the police department. (2000 Code, sec. 17-
23(b))
Sec. 4.11.005 Audible alarms; automatic tape dialers
(a) A person in control of an audible alarm on the structure must:
(1) Adjust the mechanism so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being
activated.
(2) Come to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes after receiving a request from a member of the city
police department or the city fire department to do so and grant access to the site and deactivate the alarm if
necessary.
(b) Automatic tape dialers connected to the police department are prohibited.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-25)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/507
Sec. 4.11.006 Financial institutions
Financial institutions shall be exempt from having a permit revoked, but must abide by all other sections of this article.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-29)
Secs. 4.11.007–4.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.11.031 Required; application; conditions
(a) A person commits an offense if he/she installs, operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first
obtaining a permit from the coordinator. A separate permit is required for each alarm site.
(b) Upon receipt of the required fee and completed application form, the coordinator shall issue a permit unless there
is reasonable cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained or operated in
accordance with this article or the applicant will not comply with each provision of this article.
(c) (1) Each permit application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the person who
is responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees or charges
levied under this article.
(2) Each permit application shall also contain the names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two
(2) persons who are able and have agreed to receive notification from a member of the city police department
or the city fire department at any time and to come to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes after receiving
such notification.
(d) An alarm permit is not transferable or assignable. However, the individual designated to respond to an alarm or
relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder shall inform the coordinator of any changes that alter information listed
on the permit application. No fees shall be assessed for such changes.
(e) Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an
alarm permit or renewal, or for the purpose of making a change thereto, may be sufficient cause for refusal to grant, or
suspension of, a permit.
(f) Each alarm system shall have a backup power supply sufficient to maintain the alarm system in the event of a
power outage of up to four hours.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-22; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.11.032 Fee; duration
A nonrefundable fee of $10.00 is required for each permit or renewal of a permit. A permit shall be issued for two years
and shall be renewed every two years thereafter by payment of the permit fee. It is the responsibility of the permit holder
to pay the renewal fee prior to the expiration date of the permit. (2000 Code, sec. 17-23(a))
Sec. 4.11.033 False alarm fees; revocation of permit for excessive false alarms
(a) The holder of a burglar alarm permit shall be allowed six (6) false alarms. After that a $25.00 fee shall be assessed
for each additional false alarm up to 12 in one year. If the false alarms exceed twelve, the permit may be revoked until
proof is shown that the alarm has been repaired or the problem is solved.
(b) The permit holder of a fire alarm shall be allowed six (6) false alarms. After that a $25.00 fee shall be assessed for
each additional false alarm up to 12 in any one year. If the false alarms exceed twelve, the permit may be revoked until
proof is shown that the alarm has been repaired or the problem is solved.
(c) The holder of a robbery alarm permit shall be allowed six (6) false alarms. After that a $25.00 fee will be assessed
for each additional false alarm up to twelve (12) in any one year. If the false alarms exceed twelve, the permit may be
revoked until proof is shown that the alarm has been repaired or the problem is solved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/507
(d) The permit holder of an emergency assistance alarm shall be allowed six (6) false alarms. After that a fee of
$10.00 will be assessed for each additional false alarm. The permit may be revoked if the false alarms exceed 12 in any
one year until proof is shown that the alarm has been repaired or the problem is solved.
(e) The permit holder of a medical assistance alarm shall be allowed six (6) false alarms. After that a fee of $10.00
will be assessed for each additional false alarm up to 12. If the false alarms exceed 12 in any one year, the permit may be
revoked until proof is shown that the alarm has been repaired.
(f) A permit holder shall pay any service fee assessed under the provisions of this section within 30 days after receipt
of notice that it has been assessed by the coordinator.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-24)
Sec. 4.11.034 Grounds for suspension or nonrenewal
(a) The coordinator may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm system permit for failure to pay any assessment service
fee or other fee as provided for under this article.
(b) The coordinator may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm permit if an alarm system generates an excessive
number of false alarm notifications.
(c) The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the coordinator as provided in section 4.11.035 of this
article.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-27)
Sec. 4.11.035 Appeal of denial or suspension
(a) If the coordinator refuses to issue or renew a permit, or suspends a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit
holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his/her action and a statement of the right to an
appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the coordinator to the hearing officer, setting forth the
reasons for the appeal, within 10 days after receipt of the notice from the coordinator. The filing of a request for an
appeal hearing with the city manager stays an action of the coordinator in suspending a permit until the city manager
makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal is not made within the 10-day period, the action of the coordinator shall
be final.
(b) The city manager, or his/her designate, shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence
offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing; the hearing officer shall
make his/her decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The city manager shall
render a decision within 10 days after the hearing is adjourned and shall notify all interested parties, as such were
designated at the hearing, by written notice.
(c) The city council shall have the authority to accept review of the city manager's decision if:
(1) Written notice is provided to the mayor's office requesting review of the city manager's decision within
10 days from the date of the city manager's decision; and
(2) The city council, by a majority vote of those present and voting, agrees to review the decision.
Should the city council agree to hear the case, the council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the city
manager.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-28)
CHAPTER 5
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/507
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.01.001 Arson reward
(a) Offered; conditions.
(1) Subject to the terms and provisions of this section, there shall be a reward of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) to any person furnishing information to an agent of the city which leads to the arrest and
indictment of any person or persons for the offense of arson within the corporate city limits.
(2) Only one reward shall be paid when the indictment of more than one person is for arson on one single
occasion.
(3) No reward shall be paid to any person whose duty it is to enforce the law, including but not limited to
law enforcement officers of the city, county, or state, or any other agent or employee of the city. No reward
shall be paid if information furnished is already (as of the time said information is furnished) within the
knowledge of any law enforcement officer or other agent of the city.
(4) The city manager shall be the judge of whether or not such information did lead to such arrest and
indictment and whether or not the reward is due under the circumstances presented for the claim of the
reward; the judgment of the city manager shall be final in such instances.
(b) Payment. The reward provided in subsection (a) of this section is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the
general fund of the city.
(2000 Code, secs. 11-1, 11-2)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
Sec. 5.01.002 False fire alarms
Pursuant to Texas Penal Code, section 42.06, it shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or
made, any false alarm of fire within the city. (2000 Code, sec. 11-3; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.01.003 Opening and closing fireplugs
The chief of the fire department shall have authority to and shall prescribe the manner in which all fireplugs shall be
opened and closed. No person shall have authority to open or close any fireplug except the chief of the fire department or
superintendent of waterworks or any member of the fire or waterworks department authorized by the chief of the fire
department or superintendent of waterworks respectively. (2000 Code, sec. 11-4)
Sec. 5.01.004 Fire lanes
(a) Designation. The fire marshal or his designated representative is hereby authorized to designate adequate fire lanes
and/or turnarounds to any building when deemed necessary for fire department access in the event of fire or other
emergencies in such buildings. Such fire lane shall be designated only upon the agreement between the fire marshal and
the property owner, manager or developer. In the event an agreement cannot be reached as to the location of any fire
lane, the matter shall be presented to the building trades and fire code board of appeals, which shall make such
designation.
(b) Signs and markings. The owner, manager or person in charge of any building to which fire lanes and/or
turnarounds have been designated by the fire marshal or his designated representative shall post and maintain
appropriate signs in conspicuous places along such fire lanes or turnarounds stating “No Parking - Fire Lane” and one
designating “Tow Away Zone.” The fire marshal or his duly authorized representative or the chief of police or his
authorized representative is hereby authorized to cause such streets, fire lanes and turnarounds to be maintenance free
and unobstructed at all times for fire department uses. “Appropriate signs” required in this section shall consist of red
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/507
letters painted on a white background located along the sides of the fire lane easement as the fire marshal or his
designated representative may determine. Those letters shall be not less than three (3) inches in height as to “No
Parking,” not less than two (2) inches in height as to “Fire Lane,” and not less than one (1) inch in height as to “Tow
Away Zone.” Fire lane markings shall be placed on both sides of the fire lane in accordance with this section, as deemed
necessary by the fire marshal, fire chief, or his designee. In all respects to design, marking, maintenance or application,
designated fire lanes shall be as described in the locally adopted fire code except as noted in this section. Appendix D, of
the 2015 International Fire Code, copyright 2015, regarding fire apparatus access roads shall also apply.
(Ordinance 16-3642, sec. I, adopted 10/25/16)
(c) Parking in fire lanes prohibited.
(1) No person shall park or place or allow, permit or suffer to be parked or placed or to remain unattended
any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, machinery or similar obstruction within or upon an area designated or
dedicated as a fire lane and marked by an appropriate sign placed in a conspicuous place.
(2) If a motor vehicle, trailer, boat, machinery or similar obstruction is found parked, placed, or unoccupied
within an area designated or dedicated as a fire lane as required by this section, the same is hereby declared a
nuisance per se, and the fact that such motor vehicle, trailer, boat, machinery or similar obstruction is parked,
placed, or is unattended or unoccupied in such manner as to obstruct in whole or in part any such fire lane
shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner unlawfully parked, placed or permitted to be parked or
placed such obstruction within a fire lane.
(3) The records of the state department of highways and motor vehicle division, crime information center
and/or National Crime Information Center showing the name of the person to whom the state highway license
or out-of-state highway license or both are prima facie evidence of ownership by the named person.
(d) Issuance of citations and impoundment of obstructions.
(1) If any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, machinery or similar obstruction is found parked, placed or
unattended in or upon a properly marked fire lane which has either been designated or dedicated as a fire
lane, the fire marshal or his designated representative, or the police chief of his designated representative, is
hereby authorized to issue a citation for such violation, charging the owner as defined in subsection (c) above.
Such obstruction may be removed by towing it to such place as designated by the police department. Such
vehicle or obstruction may be redeemed by payment of the towing and impounding fee and storage charges in
the same manner and at the same rate as any vehicle impounded for illegal parking.
(2) No citation as provided for in subsection (1) above shall be voided by the redemption of the obstruction
from the place of impoundment, nor shall the violator be relieved of any penalty assessed by a judge of the
municipal court for a violation of any provision of this section.
(e) Abandonment or closure of fire lanes. No owner, manager or person in charge of any premises served by a
required fire lane shall abandon or close any such fire lane without written permission of the fire marshal.
(Ordinance 11-3540, sec. I (11-10), adopted 1/20/11; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.01.005 Annual reports
A report representing the bureau of fire prevention, the fire department, and the emergency medical services shall be
made annually and transmitted to the mayor and city council. Such report shall contain all proceedings under this
chapter. (Ordinance 04-3435, sec. II (11-27), adopted 10/26/04)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Sec. 5.02.001 Office of fire chief established
The office of fire chief is hereby created and established for the city. The fire chief shall be the chief of the fire
department of the city. The fire department of the city shall be under his/her supervision, and all members of the fire
department shall be subject to the orders and supervision of the fire chief. (2000 Code, sec. 11-6)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/507
Sec. 5.02.002 Civil service law adopted
In accordance with 143.006 Local Government Code, the provisions of chapter 143 Local Government Code are hereby
adopted and implemented in accordance with the law. (2000 Code, sec. 11-7)
State law reference–Municipal civil service for firefighters and police officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 143.
Sec. 5.02.003 Classification of firefighters under civil service
The classification of all firefighters subject to state civil service law and the number of authorized positions in each
classification are hereby provided as follows:
Classification No. of Authorized Positions
Fire chief (noncivil service position) 1
Fire marshal 1
Captain 4
Lieutenant 6
Equipment operator 12
Firefighter 12
Total 36
(Ordinance 11-3546, sec. I (11-8), adopted 6/14/11)
Sec. 5.02.004 Fire chief designated non-civil service position
The city fire chief is hereby designated, pursuant to state law, to be a non-civil service position. (Ordinance 04-3435, sec.
I (11-9), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 5.02.005 Certification pay
(a) The term “fire department certification pay” shall relate to pay which is offered upon successfully meeting the
requirements set by the state commission on fire protection (TCFP) and the state department of state health services
(TDSHS) for certification in the following areas and providing proof of the applicable accomplishments to the fire chief:
(1) TCFP basic firefighter;
(2) TCFP intermediate firefighter;
(3) TCFP advanced firefighter;
(4) TDSHS basic EMT;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/507
(5) TDSHS EMT-intermediate; and
(6) TDSHS EMT-paramedic, or LP.
(b) The following chart shows which positions will be eligible for certification pay:
Positions Intermediate
firefighter
Advanced
firefighter
EMT-I EMT-P or
LP
Fire chief - - - -
Fire marshal X X X X
Captain X X X X
Lieutenant X X X X
Equipment
operator
X X X X
Firefighter X X X X
(c) Continuing eligibility. In order to have continuing certification pay eligibility as provided in this section, members
of the fire department shall comply with the following provisions:
(1) After becoming eligible for the fire department certification pay, each member of the fire department, in
order to continue such eligibility, is hereby required to successfully continue to meet all requirements of the
TCFP, the TDSHS, Plainview Fire/EMS Department's SOP, and city policy regarding such certifications.
(2) In the event that eligibility for the fire department certification pay, as set by the TCFP and the TDSHS,
is not maintained by any member of the fire department, such member's certification pay shall terminate on
the date upon which the said TCFP or the TDSHS revokes, cancels or suspends the member's certification.
(d) Authority. It is hereby determined that the city has a population of under 1.5 million, and this section is passed
pursuant to the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 143.044.
(Ordinance 11-3566, sec. I (11-10), adopted 11/17/11)
Sec. 5.02.006 Assignment pay
(a) The city council hereby authorizes assignment pay in addition to the regular pay received by civil service members
of the following divisions of the city fire/EMS department due to the specialized functions of such members:
(1) Fire prevention division;
(2) EMS division;
(3) Arson investigator (only if assigned to fire prevention division);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/507
(4) Fire inspector (only if assigned to fire prevention division);
(b) It is hereby determined that the city has a population of under 1.5 million, and this section is passed pursuant to the
authority of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 143.042.
(Ordinance 11-3566, sec. I (11-11), adopted 11/17/11)
Sec. 5.02.007 Requirements and criteria for additional pay
A firefighter meeting the following minimal criteria and complying with the requirements established below shall
receive additional pay.
(1) Arson investigator II. To receive arson investigator II pay, a firefighter must:
(A) Hold an intermediate arson investigator certification issued by the state commission on fire
protection and maintain this certification level or higher;
(B) Be assigned to the fire prevention division and actively perform the duties of arson investigator
II; and
(C) Provide proof of certification to the fire chief.
(2) Arson investigator III. To receive arson investigator III pay a firefighter must:
(A) Hold an advanced arson investigator certification issued by the state commission on fire
protection and maintain this certification level or higher;
(B) Be assigned to the fire prevention division and actively perform the duties of arson investigator
III; and
(C) Provide proof of certification to the fire chief.
(3) Fire inspector II. To receive fire inspector II pay a firefighter must:
(A) Hold an intermediate fire inspector certification issued by the state commission on fire protection
and maintain this certification level or higher;
(B) Be assigned to the fire protection division and actively perform the duties of fire inspector; and
(C) Provide proof of certification to the fire chief.
(4) Fire inspector III. To receive inspector III pay a firefighter must:
(A) Hold an advanced fire inspector certification issued by the state commission on fire protection
and maintain this certification level or higher;
(B) Be assigned to the fire prevention division and actively perform the duties of fire inspector; and
(C) Provide proof of certification to the fire chief.
(Ordinance 11-3566, sec. I (11-12), adopted 11/17/11)
Sec. 5.02.008 Additional pay
Additional pay is authorized in the following monthly amounts:
(1) Certification pay shall be authorized for the following additional amounts paid:
(A) Firefighter certification pay.
(i) Basic firefighter certification: $40.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/507
(ii) Intermediate firefighter certification: $120.00.
(iii) Advanced firefighter certification: $220.00.
(B) EMS certification pay.
(i) Basic EMT: $40.00.
(ii) EMT-I: $240.00.
(iii) EMT-P or LP: $480.00.
(C) Paramedic recertification pay. A paramedic is required to be recertified once every four years.
For each time a paramedic is recertified as a paramedic while employed by the city, the employed
paramedic will be paid $25.00 per month.
(2) Assignment pay shall be authorized for the following additional amounts paid:
(A) Fire prevention division.
(i) Arson investigator II: $120.00.
(ii) Arson investigator III: $220.00.
(iii) Fire inspector II: $120.00.
(iv) Fire inspector III: $220.00.
(B) EMS division.
(i) Tach I - EMT-P or LP: $0.00.
(ii) Tach I - EMT intermediate: $0.00.
(iii) Tach II - EMT-P or LP: $0.00.
(iv) Tach II - EMT-I: $0.00.
(Ordinance 11-3566, sec. I (11-13), adopted 11/17/11)
Sec. 5.02.009 Administration
(a) The city council authorizes assignment pay in the above-stated additional amounts for firefighters in the abovespecified
positions as long as he/she possesses the specific criteria to perform the assigned positions.
(b) The fire chief shall establish procedures for the administration of the additional pay authorized by this article.
(c) Such certification and assignment pay will be effective retroactively starting October 1, 2011.
(Ordinance 11-3566, sec. I (11-14), adopted 11/17/11)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.03.001 Fire marshal to be chief of bureau of fire prevention
For the purposes of the fire code, the fire marshal shall be and is hereby made the chief in charge of the bureau of fire
prevention. Wherever the fire code herein adopted refers to the chief in charge of the bureau of fire prevention, the same
shall refer to and mean the fire marshal, who shall be one and the same person as the chief in charge of the bureau of fire
prevention, and he/she is hereby charged with the duties and responsibilities of the chief in charge of the bureau of fire
prevention as prescribed by the fire code. (2000 Code, sec. 11-22)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/507
Sec. 5.03.002 Supervision
The office of fire marshal shall be under the supervision of the fire chief, except that wherever permits are required by
the fire code herein adopted the same shall be issued, or application therefor rejected, by the chief of the bureau of fire
prevention, who is the fire marshal, whose judgment in this respect shall not be subject to the supervision or control of
the fire chief. (2000 Code, sec. 11-23)
Sec. 5.03.003 Records
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall keep complete records and files pertinent to his office. (2000 Code, sec.
11-24)
Sec. 5.03.004 Enforcement of fire prevention code
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city, which is
hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal. (2000 Code, sec. 11-25)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE CODE AND LIFE SAFETY CODE
Sec. 5.04.001 Adopted
The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code as copyrighted in 2015 by the International Code Council, as hereinafter
amended, is specifically adopted as the fire code of the city, and a copy is attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference as though set out completely in detail. A copy of said International Fire Code shall be filed with the city
secretary, and a copy maintained in the office of the fire marshal. All such copies are to be open to public inspection
during business hours of the office where they are maintained.
Charter reference–Adoption of code of technical regulations, sec. 2.15.
Sec. 5.04.002 Amendments
The fire code adopted by the provisions of this article is hereby amended, altered and changed in the following aspects:
Chapter 1, Section 105, “Permits”. Amend to read as follows:
No permit shall be required when referred to in this code other than herein noted.
Construction, building or special use permits shall be required as noted in the following sections of the 2015 edition of
the International Fire Code.
Chapter 1, section 105.6.15, Explosives
Chapter 1, section 105.6.32, Open burning
Chapter 1, section 105.7.1, Automatic fire extinguishing systems
Chapter 1, section 105.7.6, Fire alarm systems and related equipment
Chapter 1, section 105.7.7, Fire pumps
Chapter 1, section 105.7.9, Gates and barricades across fire apparatus access roads.
Chapter 1, section 105.7.14 Smoke control or smoke exhaust systems
Chapter 1, section 105.7.17, Stand pipe systems
Permits for public and school activity bonfire fires and firework displays, shall be issued by the fire marshal or the fire
chief's discretion. Construction or building permits for fire suppression and fire alarm systems listed in this article shall
be issued by the City of Plainview's Chief Building Official with the approval of the fire marshal or his designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/507
Chapter 9, section 903.2.8. Amend to read as follows: “An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with
section 903.2 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area. One- and two-family dwellings shall
be exempt from this requirement.”
Nothing in the ordinance from which this section derives or the adopted fire code shall prohibit the installation of a fire
suppression system if the owner of a one- or two-family dwelling desires to have one installed, so long as the system is
installed according to applicable NFPA standards.
Chapter 34, Section 3404.2.9.6.1. Amend to read as follows:
“The limits in which storage of Class I and Class II liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited in any residential
district, as set out by the zoning ordinance of the City of Plainview, as amended.
(Ordinance 16-3642, sec. II, adopted 10/25/16)
Sec. 5.04.003 Penalties
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon the conviction of
any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 04-
3435, sec. III (11-53), adopted 10/26/04)
Sec. 5.04.004 Parking of trucks transporting inflammables or other dangerous substances
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, park and leave unattended any tank truck or portable tank used for the
purpose of transporting anhydrous ammonia, gasoline or any other inflammable or combustible liquids, or any other
gaseous substance that is harmful to humans if inhaled, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any residence or house in
the city in which persons are living and used as a place of abode. (Ordinance 04-3435, sec. III (11-54), adopted
10/26/04)
Sec. 5.04.005 Appeals board
See article 3.02 of this Code of Ordinances for procedures outlined for an appeal based on the requirements in this
chapter. (Ordinance 16-3642, sec. II, adopted 10/25/16)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 6.01.001 Adoption of state law, rules and regulations
(a) The following chapter of the Health and Safety Code as published by the department of state health services is
hereby incorporated and adopted by the city: Chapter 341 Minimum Standards of Health and Sanitation; and
(b) Chapter 285, On-Site Sewage Disposal Rules, Texas Administrative Code, as published by the state commission
on environmental quality is hereby incorporated and adopted by the city.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 6.02 SMOKING†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/507
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.02.001–6.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Smoking in City Buildings
Sec. 6.02.031 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply:
City building. All of the enclosed area that is used by the city and its employees and the general public, including but not
limited to all or any part of the building used for any of the operations of the city, such as the city hall, police station,
municipal court, library, fire stations, health department, city maintenance facilities, water treatment plant, and
wastewater treatment plant.
Smoke, smokes or smoking. Includes:
(1) Carrying or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking
equipment or device;
(2) The combustion of any cigar, cigarette, tobacco, or similar article, or any other combustible substance,
in any manner, or in any form; or
(3) Emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-261)
Sec. 6.02.032 Offenses; penalty
(a) A person commits an offense if in a city building the person smokes and fails or refuses to extinguish smoking
materials or move outside the building upon request by any person to do so.
(b) Any person convicted of violating this provision shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, as set by a judge or jury.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-262)
Sec. 6.02.033 Signs
Signs shall be visibly placed at each public entrance to city buildings to notify persons entering the premises that
smoking is prohibited. This provision does not include exits used exclusively as emergency exits. (2000 Code, sec. 2-
263)
Sec. 6.02.034 Exceptions
(a) Nothing herein shall preclude the designation of the following premises as nonsmoking areas, but the restrictions
contained herein shall not apply to:
(1) The Plainview Chamber of Commerce building, the Plainview Country Club buildings; the Rotary
Center, or the Broadway Street Shelter; or
(2) An individual participating in an authorized theatrical performance.
(b) In the course of a police interview with a witness, victim or suspect, it may be advantageous to allow that person to
smoke for the purpose of relaxing. In such an event, the police officer conducting the interview may allow the individual
to smoke in his/her office or work area during the interview only. This should not be construed as a method to
circumvent the purpose of this division, but to allow the police department the freedom to conduct criminal
investigations in the most efficient and practical means possible.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/507
(2000 Code, sec. 2-264)
ARTICLE 6.03 FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.03.001 State food establishment rules adopted
The department of state health services Texas Food Establishment Rules, 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229,
subchapter K, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference herein as if fully set forth. (2000 Code, sec. 12-1;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.002 State law adopted
The following chapters of the Health and Safety Code as published by the department of state health services are hereby
incorporated and adopted by the city:
(1) Chapter 433 Meat and Poultry Inspection Act; and
(2) Chapter 434 Public Health Provisions Relating to Production of Baked Goods.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 6.03.003–6.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Health Certificate
Sec. 6.03.031 Penalty
Any person or commercial establishment violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this division is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon
conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code;
provided [that, if a penalty is provided] for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, then the maximum
penalty for violation as provided by state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this code. (2000 Code, sec. 12-23)
Sec. 6.03.032 Health card required
(a) Every person whose work brings him or her in contact with the production, handling, storage, or transportation of
food or food products, including retail food establishment workers whose work entails a likelihood of such person
contaminating food or food-contact surfaces, shall hold a health card issued by a licensed physician in compliance with
this division.
(b) Retail food establishment workers whose work is solely and exclusively in an area where there is no reasonable
likelihood of contaminating food or food-contact surfaces, such as cashiers or sackers, are exempt from this section.
Such exemption shall cease if said worker is in fact working in an area where food or food-contact surfaces may be
contaminated.
(c) The health card shall certify to the fact that not more than fifteen (15) days prior to issuance proper examinations
have been made that said person is free of tuberculosis, and that said person is not a carrier of any disease capable of
being spread through the handling of food and food products.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-16)
Sec. 6.03.033 Scope of physician's examination
It shall be unlawful for any physician to issue to any person a health certificate required under this division without
seeing said person personally, to make the determination that said person is free of tuberculosis and is not a carrier of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/507
any disease capable of being spread through the handling of food and food products. Any physician issuing any such
health certificate shall administer to each person to whom a health certificate is granted a tuberculin skin test or chest Xray.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-17)
Sec. 6.03.034 Duration
Each health certificate issued under this division shall be valid for twelve (12) months. (2000 Code, sec. 12-18)
Sec. 6.03.035 Records of examination
The records of the examination by a physician under the provisions of this division, together with the test results, shall
be kept in the files of said physician for a period of twelve (12) months, and shall be exhibited and shown to the health
authority or his authorized representative upon request of said health authority or his authorized representative. (2000
Code, sec. 12-19)
Sec. 6.03.036 Reexamination
The health authority, or his assistant, may require the holder of any health certificate to be reexamined at any time such
holder of such certificate is known or suspected by the health authority to be afflicted with tuberculosis or any disease
capable of being spread through the handling of food, food products or drinks. (2000 Code, sec. 12-20; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.037 Employment of diseased persons
It shall be unlawful for any manager, proprietor or owner of any establishment where food, food products or drinks are
prepared, handled, served or dispensed to knowingly permit any person who is afflicted with tuberculosis or any disease
capable of being spread through the handling of food, food products or drinks, to prepare, handle, serve or dispense any
food, food products or drinks on or from said premises. (2000 Code, sec. 12-21; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.038 Report of disease
The owner, lessee or operator of any food establishment upon whose premises or in whose place of business any case of
infectious, contagious or communicable disease occurs shall notify the health authority within twenty-four (24) hours.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-22; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 6.03.039–6.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Food Service Establishments*
Sec. 6.03.061 Conformance with state rules; applicability
(a) The definitions, the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits
to operate food service establishments, the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink, and the
enforcement of this division shall be regulated in accordance with the department of state health services Texas Food
Establishment Rules, copies of which shall be on file in the office of the health inspector; provided that the word
“municipality” in said rules shall be understood to refer to the city and the words “regulatory authority” shall be
understood to refer to the city-county health board.
(b) The provisions of this division shall apply to all food service establishments, retail food stores, mobile food units,
and roadside vendors operating within the corporate limits of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-31; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.062 Definitions
Food seller. Any person or organization that is selling any products intended for human consumption. (2000 Code, sec.
12-32)
Food service establishment, mobile food unit, retail food store, and roadside food vendor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/507
(1) Those commercial establishments defined as “food processing plant” or “food establishment” by the
Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted by the state health services department and such definitions shall
not be deemed to include kitchens in private homes preparing non-potentially hazardous food items for sale
as fundraising items by charitable and nonprofit organizations on a temporary basis, nor shall such terms
include the site at which such sales for charitable purposes take place.
(2) A food establishment shall not include and no permit shall be required for the preparation of food of
any kind in a kitchen in a private home for noncommercial purposes, including but not limited to potluck
suppers, picnics, tailgating, office parties, school functions or other similar private events.
(3) Further, operation of a lemonade stand by a child on a temporary basis shall be allowed without a
permit and neither the lemonade stand nor the kitchen in a private home in which the items sold at the
lemonade stand are prepared shall be considered a food establishment.
(4) To the extent of any conflict in the definition of a food establishment as set forth above and the Texas
Food Establishment Rules, the definition as set forth in this section shall prevail.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Manager of food service establishment or retail food store. Any person or persons who oversee, direct, supervise, or
control the operation of a restaurant, dining room, snack bar or any other business or facility that sells items or products
intended for human consumption. (2000 Code, sec. 12-32)
Sec. 6.03.063 Penalty
Any person who violates a provision of this division, and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a
food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of this division, and any responsible officer of
that permit holder or those persons, shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. (2000 Code, sec. 12-36)
Sec. 6.03.064 Injunctions
The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of this division. (2000 Code, sec. 12-37)
Sec. 6.03.065 Issuance of health certificates
Health certificates shall be issued in compliance with division 2 of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 12-33)
Sec. 6.03.066 Permit fees
(a) The annual permit fee for a food service establishment or retail food store establishment shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
(b) The annual permit fee for food sellers shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). A seasonal permit, for those food
sellers in operation three (3) months to two (2) weeks, shall be forty dollars ($40.00). The permit fee for those food
sellers who are temporary, that being in operation for two weeks or less out of the calendar year, shall be twenty dollars
($20.00).
(c) The permit fee for those establishments which are seasonal, that being in operation from three (3) months to two
(2) weeks out of the calendar year, shall be forty dollars ($40.00).
(d) The permit fee for those establishments which are temporary, that being in operation for two weeks or less out of
the calendar year, shall be twenty dollars ($20.00).
(e) All managers of food service establishments or retail food stores shall be required to purchase a food manager's
permit at a cost of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) annually. If said food manager has attended a recognized food manager's
workshop sponsored by the city-county health department or the department of state health services within the last six
(6) years, then the fees shall be reduced to fifteen dollars ($15.00) annually.
(f) The above fees and schedules are subject to change as recommended by the city-county health department and
ratified by ordinance by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/507
(2000 Code, sec. 12-34)
Sec. 6.03.067 Permit, license or certificate required; issuance; suspension or revocation
(a) Permit, license or certificate required; transfer; posting. No person shall operate a food service establishment who
does not have a valid permit, license or certificate issued to him by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies
with the requirements of this division shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license or certificate. Permits,
licenses or certificates are not transferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every food service
establishment.
(b) Application; issuance.
(1) Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application for a permit,
license or certificate on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include the name
and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food service establishment, and the
signature of each applicant.
(2) Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license or certificate, the regulatory authority shall
inspect the proposed food service establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this
division.
(3) The regulatory authority shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the applicant if its inspection
reveals that the proposed food service establishment complies with the requirements of this division.
(4) Food service establishments that contain a deli shall be afforded the opportunity to purchase a separate
permit for the deli portion of their business.
(c) Suspension.
(1) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit, license or
certificate to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the permit, license or certificate does not
comply with the requirements of this division, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with
the requirements of this division, or if the operation of the food service establishment otherwise constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection
(c)(2) of this section. When a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license or
certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for
hearing.
(2) Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or
the person in charge, shall be notified in writing that the permit, license or certificate is, upon service of the
notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a
hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten (10)
days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The
regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(d) Revocation. The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit, license or
certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this division or for interference with the
regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder
of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit, license or
certificate is subject to revocation and that the permit, license or certificate shall be revoked at the end of ten (10) days
following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder
of the permit, license or certificate within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day
period, the revocation of the permit, license or certificate becomes final.
(e) Service of notices. A notice provided for in this division is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the
permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed
in the records of the regulatory authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/507
(f) Hearings. The hearings provided for in this division shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and
place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make a final
finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the
hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license or certificate by the regulatory authority.
(g) Reapplication after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit, license or certificate has become final, the
holder of the revoked permit, license or certificate may make written application for a new permit, license or certificate.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-35(a))
Sec. 6.03.068 Inspections
(a) Frequency. An inspection of a food service establishment shall be performed at least once every six (6) months.
Additional inspections of the food service establishment shall be performed at often as are necessary for the enforcement
of this division.
(b) Access. Agents of the regulatory authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service
establishment at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this division.
The agents shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishments to obtain information pertaining to food and
supplies purchased, received or used, or to persons employed.
(c) Reports. Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be
recorded on the inspection report form provided for in subsection (e) of this section. The inspection report form shall
summarize the requirements of this division and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional
remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state the correction to be made.
The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from
one hundred (100). A copy of the inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment
at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made
available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
(d) Correction of violations.
(1) The inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations
found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified in accordance with
the following provisions:
(A) If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into
the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations. Operations shall
not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority.
(B) All violations of four- or five-point violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection shall
be conducted to confirm correction.
(C) All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event by
the time of the next routine inspection.
(D) When the rating score of the establishment is less than seventy (70), the establishment shall
initiate corrective action on all identified violations within forty-eight (48) hours. One or more
reinspections shall be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction. There shall be a
twenty-five dollar ($25.00) charge for any reinspection deemed necessary due to violations of the nature
cited in this section.
(E) In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected within
twenty-four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty-four (24) hours, the establishment
shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the regulatory authority.
(2) The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in
cessation of food service operations. An opportunity for appeal from the inspection findings and time
limitations will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority within ten
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/507
(10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for a hearing is received, a hearing shall be held
within twenty (20) days of receipt of that request.
(3) Whenever a food service establishment is required under the provisions of this section to cease
operations, it shall not resume operations until such time as a reinspection determines that conditions
responsible for the requirement to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be
offered within a reasonable time.
(e) Inspection report form. An inspection report form based on the requirements of this division is on file in the health
inspector's office.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-35(b); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.069 Examination and condemnation of food
Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this division.
The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, specifying with particularity the
reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of subsection 229.164(a) of the
department of state health services Texas Food Establishment Rules, or any other section of this division. The regulatory
authority shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be
used, served or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of food under conditions
specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate
destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within
ten (10) days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested, and,
on the basis of evidence produced at the hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the
food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions
of this division. (2000 Code, sec. 12-35(c))
Sec. 6.03.070 Review of plans
(a) Submission and approval of plans. Whenever a food service establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled
and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review
and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of
proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications to assure
that they meet the requirements of this division. No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively
remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority.
(b) Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by subsection (a) of this section to be
submitted to the regulatory authority, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to its
beginning operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of
this division.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-35(d))
Sec. 6.03.071 Procedure when infection is suspected
When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food
service establishment employee, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other
investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The regulatory authority may require any or all of the
following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service establishments;
(2) The immediate closing of the food service establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the
regulatory authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/507
(3) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no
danger of transmitting disease;
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, of other employees, and of his and their
body discharges.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-35(e))
(5) The city hereby incorporates “The Communicable Disease Act,” Texas Health and Safety Code,
chapter 81, adopted by the department of state health services by reference, and the health officer will enforce
such state law as applicable. A copy of said public law shall be available for inspection during regular
business hours. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.072 Other food sellers
(a) Food sellers who do not come under either food service or retail food store regulations by virtue of the nature of
their product shall be required to obtain a food seller's permit and undergo such inspections as shall from time to time be
deemed necessary by the city-county health district.
(b) The fee for food sellers who come under this section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for those sellers who operate
full time, year-round. The permit fee for those sellers who operate on a seasonal basis, that is, in operation from six
months to two weeks out of the calendar year, shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The permit fee for those sellers who
operate on a temporary basis, that is, in operation for less than two weeks out of the calendar year, shall be fifteen dollars
($15.00).
(c) The above fees and schedules are subject to change as recommended by the city-county health department and
ratified by ordinance by the city council.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-38)
Secs. 6.03.073–6.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Milk and Milk Products*
Sec. 6.03.091 Adoption of state law
The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling and sale of all milk and
milk products sold for ultimate consumption within the city or its police jurisdiction; the inspection of dairy herds, dairy
farms, and milk plants; and the issuing and revocation of permits to milk producers, haulers and distributors shall be
regulated in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Milk Grading and Labeling Law and the Texas Specifications
and Requirements thereunder authorized, promulgated and certified to by the state health commissioner, and the
applicable provisions of the 1965 Public Health Service Milk Ordinance and Code, Public Health Service Publication
No. 229. Certified copies of the above, which are hereby adopted by reference, shall be filed in the office of the health
inspector and the city-county health unit. (2000 Code, sec. 12-51; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.092 Definitions
(a) Whenever the word “municipality” or the word “city” is used in the law, specifications and requirements adopted
by the provisions of this division, it shall be construed to mean the city.
(b) Whenever the term “corporate counsel” or “city attorney” is used in the law, specifications and requirements
adopted by the provisions of this division, it shall be construed to mean the attorney of this city.
(c) Whenever the word “health authority” is used in this division, the term refers to the director of the city-county
health unit.
(2000 Code, sec. 12-52)
Sec. 6.03.093 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/507
Any person who shall violate any provision of the law, specifications and requirements adopted by the provisions of this
division shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each
day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (2000 Code, sec. 12-53)
Sec. 6.03.094 Conflicting regulations
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the law, specifications and requirements adopted by the provisions
of this division and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations,
the latter shall prevail and be controlling. (2000 Code, sec. 12-54)
Sec. 6.03.095 Milk and milk products that may be sold
Only grade A pasteurized milk and milk products shall be sold to the final consumer, or to restaurants, soda fountains,
grocery stores, or similar establishments in the city. Provided that, in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk
products which have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be authorized by the city health officer,
who, as herein referred to, is the director of the city-county health unit. (2000 Code, sec. 12-55)
Sec. 6.03.096 Inspectors
It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the health authority to appoint and provide for inspectors or other employees
who shall, acting under him, make all inspections and perform all such duties as the director may require in order to
provide for the effective enforcement of the terms and provisions of this division. (2000 Code, sec. 12-56)
ARTICLE 6.04 SWIMMING POOLS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.04.001 Enclosure
(a) Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a barrier or enclosure in accordance with state
law and article 3.15 of this Code of Ordinances.
(b) All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device
for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling
which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.
(c) The health department may permit other protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of
protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the wall, fence, gate,
and latch described herein and as stated at article 3.15 of this Code of Ordinances and state law.
(d) If such barrier or enclosure is a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare, then the health department may
require such repairs or remedy the hazard. The health department, upon remedying such hazard, may place a lien against
the property on which the barrier or fence is situated, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution.
(e) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine as
specified in this Code of Ordinances at section 1.01.009.
(Ordinance 17-3658, sec. II, adopted 7/25/17)
State law references–Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.101; pool yard enclosure for multiunit rental
complex, property owners' association, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 757.
Secs. 6.04.002–6.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Public Swimming Pools*
Sec. 6.04.031 Title
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/507
This division shall be known and may be cited as the swimming pool ordinance of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 18-61)
Sec. 6.04.032 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings
given herein:
Health department. The Plainview-Hale County Health Department.
Person. Any person, firm, organization, partnership, association, corporation, or company of any kind.
Swimming pool. A body of water (whether it be a swimming, spray, wading or spa pool) in an artificial or semiartificial
receptacle or other container, whether located indoors or outdoors, used or intended to be used for public or semipublic
swimming by adults or children, or both adults and children, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed upon such
adults or children, operated and maintained by any person as herein defined, whether he be an owner, lessee, operator,
licensee or concessionaire, exclusive of a family pool intended to be used solely by the owner, operator or lessee thereof
and his/her family and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee, and shall include all structures,
appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance
of a swimming pool, and also all swimming pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, motels,
hotels and community associations.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-62)
Sec. 6.04.033 Design requirements
In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably imposed by the health department, the health department
shall not issue a permit to operate a swimming pool unless said pool is maintained in conformity with the following
requirements:
(1) Material. The material used for lining artificial swimming pools shall be one which is light in color, is
impervious, and will provide a tight tank with smooth and easily cleaned surfaces. Sand or dirt bottoms
therefor are prohibited.
(2) Walls, markings and slope. Conspicuous markings shall be provided on vertical walls showing the
location and depth of the shallow and deep portions, and the location and depth of the points where the slope
of the bottom of the pool changes. Special markings shall be necessary for large and odd-shaped pools as
prescribed by the health department.
(3) Overflow gutters. Overflow gutters shall be provided extending completely around the pool, having
adequate drainage of overflow water away from the pool.
(4) Inlets and outlets. All pools shall be provided with outlets, at the pool's deepest point, of sufficient size
to permit the pool to be completely drained or emptied. The outlet openings in the floor of the pool shall be
designed and located to reduce suction currents and shall be covered with a proper grating. Inlets for fresh or
repurified water shall be submerged and located so as to produce as nearly as possible a uniform circulation
of water through the entire pool.
(5) Separate space for bathers and spectators. The design of the locker room, shower rooms and pool shall
be such as to provide proper routing of bathers. Enclosures sufficiently high and strong to keep spectators
outside the runways of the pool shall be provided. The pool shall be completely surrounded by a walkway at
least 4 feet in width.
(6) Heating. All indoor pools which are to be used when the outside temperature is below 60° Fahrenheit
shall be provided with facilities for uniform and adequate heating of the pool room, dressing rooms, and
water in the pool.
(7) Water in pool. The water in the swimming pool shall not exceed the safe limits for bacterial content per
state standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/507
(8) Recirculation. A satisfactory recirculating system for the swimming pool shall be installed consisting of
circulating pumps, chemical dosing equipment (alum and alkali) or surge tank, float valve control on water
supply, hair and lint catcher, disinfector, indicator, recording and totalizing instrument, flow meters, pressure
gauges, and piping connections to inlets and outlets, and all other necessary fixtures.
(9) Shower baths. Adequate shower facilities with hot and cold water and adequate in number for both
males and females shall be provided. Signs shall be posted requiring all swimmers to shower prior to entering
the pool.
(10) Cross-connections. There shall be no direct physical connection between the sanitary sewer system
and any drain from the swimming pool or recirculation system. Any swimming pool or gutter drain or
overflow from the recirculation system, when discharged to the sanitary system, shall connect through a
suitable air gap so as to preclude the possibility of backup of sewage or waste into the swimming pool piping
system.
(11) Meters, gauges, etc. When necessary in the opinion of the health department, indicating, recording, or
totalizing instruments, flow meters or indicators and pressure gauges shall be installed at such points as may
be designated by the health department.
(12) Hair and lint interceptors. Hair and lint interceptors shall be installed so that all water drawn from the
pool for recirculation shall pass through the hair and lint interceptors before reaching the filter.
(13) Lavatory and drinking water supply. The lavatory and drinking water supply shall be adequate in
quality and quantity.
(14) Walks. Walks providing ingress and egress to the swimming pool must be of ample size and
satisfactorily drained.
(15) Lighting. Satisfactory lighting must be provided for all accessory and appurtenant facilities.
(16) Hoses. Hose connections and hoses must be of ample size and pressure to clean all of the pool area
and be protected from backflow.
(17) Steps and ladders. Steps and ladders must be made of an impervious material, easily cleaned, and
must be so designed as not to collect water when the water is lowered in the swimming pool.
(18) Pollution. Swimming pools must not be exposed to excessive pollution by dust, smoke, soot, or other
undesirable substances.
(19) Disinfecting equipment. Disinfecting equipment adequate for the purpose must be provided as an
integral part of the swimming pool.
(20) Accessibility of equipment. All equipment must be readily accessible and every pool shall be provided
with necessary equipment for the measurement of acidity or alkalinity and for residual determinations. The
equipment room shall be satisfactorily located and adequately drained.
(21) Dressing rooms. Dressing rooms shall be adequately designed, located, drained, equipped, lighted and
ventilated.
(22) Toilets. Toilet facilities shall be provided and shall be adequately designed and located, with separate
facilities for men and women.
(2000 Code, sec. 18-63; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.04.034 Safety of bathers
All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the users of and bathers in swimming pools from injury or accident.
Convenient means of ingress and egress shall be provided and the depth of water and any irregularities of the bottom
shall be clearly indicated. Safety appliances such as lifebuoys, shepherd hooks, reaching poles and ropes and equipment,
including first-aid kits and telephones, shall be provided and readily accessible during hours of operation. A sufficient
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/507
number of attendants shall be on duty when the swimming pool is in use, who shall be capable swimmers, competent in
life-saving methods and artificial resuscitation. If such personnel are not provided, a sign informing the public that such
personnel are not available shall be clearly posted. (2000 Code, sec. 18-65)
Sec. 6.04.035 License required; authority of health department
No person shall operate or maintain a public or semipublic swimming pool until a license therefor shall have been issued
by the health department, which license shall not be valid for longer than one year from the date of issuance. A new
license must be secured on or before May 1 each year, which will permit operation or maintenance until the following
April 30. All licenses shall be in writing and shall state the conditions thereof and the term for which the license is
granted. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, maintain or manage any swimming pool without
complying with the requirements of this division, and the health department is charged with the enforcement of the
provisions hereof. The health department is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the construction,
operation and maintenance of swimming pools and family pools for the protection and promotion of the public health,
safety, morals and public welfare. (2000 Code, sec. 18-66)
Sec. 6.04.036 Revocation of license
Any license granted by the health department hereunder may be revoked by it whenever, in the determination of the
health department, further operation under such license creates a menace to the health and safety of the users of a public
or semipublic swimming pool; provided that the holder of any license which has been revoked may appeal to the city
council the health department's revocation of the license and may have the city council determine the legality or
reasonableness of the revocation of the license. No appeal under this section, however, shall entitle the license holder to
continue operation of the swimming pool pending action by the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 18-67)
Sec. 6.04.037 Bathers with communicable diseases; prohibited acts by bathers
No person having or known to have any skin eruption or abrasion, sore or infected eyes, a cold, nasal or ear discharge, or
any communicable disease shall be permitted to use a public or semipublic swimming pool. Spitting, spouting water,
blowing of the nose or urinating in the swimming pool shall be strictly prohibited. The operator of a swimming pool
shall post suitable placards embodying such personal regulations and instructions. (2000 Code, sec. 18-68)
Sec. 6.04.038 Sanitation of premises
The buildings, grounds, dressing rooms, and all other public or semipublic swimming pool facilities shall be kept clean
and in a sanitary condition and maintained free from garbage, trash and other refuse. (2000 Code, sec. 18-69)
Sec. 6.04.039 Cleaning of pool
Visible dirt on the bottom of public or semipublic swimming pools and visible scum or floating matter on the surface of
pools shall be removed at least once daily with an approved type vacuum cleaner or as often as necessary to maintain
good sanitary conditions. All swimming pools shall be thoroughly cleansed at least once each week in a manner and by
the use of such disinfecting agents or cleansing materials as may be required by the health department. (2000 Code, sec.
18-70)
Sec. 6.04.040 Inspections
The health department shall inspect or cause to be inspected all public or semipublic swimming pools within the city at
such times as it may deem necessary to carry out the intent of this division. The health department is hereby authorized
to enter upon any public premises, to take such samples of water from such pools at such times as it may deem
necessary, and to require the owner, proprietor or operator to comply with the provisions of this division. In the event of
the failure of compliance after due notice by the health department, it shall have the power to abate or cause a suspension
of the use of such swimming pool until such time as the same is, in the opinion of the health department, no longer a
menace or hazard to the public health and safety. (2000 Code, sec. 18-71)
Sec. 6.04.041 Minimum available chlorine or disinfectant
A minimum free residual chlorine and/or disinfectant of two (2) parts per million for water in a public spa and a
minimum free residual chlorine and/or disinfectant of one (1) part per million for water in other public swimming pools
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/507
must be maintained in a public swimming pool in use. A sufficient number of daily tests for available chlorine and/or
disinfectant shall be made by the pool operator and a record kept of these tests to insure proper operation. (2000 Code,
sec. 18-72)
Sec. 6.04.042 Quality of water
The water at public or semipublic swimming pools shall not show an acid reaction at any time when the swimming pool
is in use. Whenever alum or sulphate of aluminum is used, frequent tests shall be made to insure that the water does not
show an acid reaction. At all times when the pool is in use, the water shall be sufficiently clear to permit the entire
bottom of the pool to be clearly visible from the walkways. (2000 Code, sec. 18-73)
Sec. 6.04.043 Records of operation
Such records of operation shall be kept as may be required by the health department, and reports shall be submitted to
this department as required. (2000 Code, sec. 18-74)
Sec. 6.04.044 Interference with enjoyment of property rights prohibited
No swimming pool shall be so located, designed, operated or maintained as to interfere unduly with the enjoyment of the
property rights by owners of property adjoining the swimming pool located in the neighborhood. (2000 Code, sec. 18-
75)
Sec. 6.04.045 Shielding of lights
Lights to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining
premises. (2000 Code, sec. 18-76)
Sec. 6.04.046 Unnecessary noise
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued at any swimming pool any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others. In the operation of a swimming pool, the use or permitting the use or operation of any radio,
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in
such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the person or persons who are in the swimming pool premises shall
be unlawful. (2000 Code, sec. 18-77)
Sec. 6.04.047 Commercial activities
The carrying on of any commercial undertakings at a swimming pool entailing the sale of food, drinks, novelties or other
merchandise in a manner unreasonably disturbing to neighboring property owners and inhabitants in the enjoyment of
their property shall be prohibited. Swimming pool signs and placards shall be of such type and so affixed as not to
prejudice or unreasonably disturb the enjoyment of neighboring property owners of their property. (2000 Code, sec. 18-
78)
Sec. 6.04.048 Compliance with state requirements
In the operation and maintenance of any swimming pool, state laws, this division and the requirements of the department
of state health services shall be observed. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this division and the
requirements of the department of state health services, the provision imposing the higher standard or the more stringent
requirement shall be controlling. (2000 Code, sec. 18-79)
Sec. 6.04.049 Indecent exposure
Every person using an outdoor public or semipublic swimming pool, or an indoor public or semipublic swimming pool
where the sexes are mixed, must wear a bathing suit or other suitable garment to protect his person from indecent
exposure. (2000 Code, sec. 18-80)
Sec. 6.04.050 Fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/507
The fee for a swimming pool permit, including three (3) samples per year, shall be $64.00 annually. Additionally, the
swimming pool operator's license shall be $15.00 annually. However, in the event that the operator has attended an
approved operator's certification within the previous three (3) years, the fee for a swimming pool operator's license shall
be $5.00 annually. Year-round pools will pay an additional $8.00 per month per water sample. The reinspection fee for
any swimming pool shall be $25.00. These fees may be periodically adjusted by a recommendation of the health
department and approval by the city council, based on overhead and other associated costs. (2000 Code, sec. 18-81)
Sec. 6.04.051 Use of polluted water for swimming or bathing purposes
No body of water, whether it be a natural or artificial body of water, in the city which contains sewage, waste or other
contaminating or polluting ingredients rendering the water hazardous to health shall be used for swimming or bathing
purposes by any person or persons. (2000 Code, sec. 18-82)
ARTICLE 6.05 AMBULANCES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.05.001 Response by private ambulance to call for pickup in public place
The driver or operator, as the term is defined in section 6.05.061, of an ambulance, other than a city EMS vehicle, shall
not respond to any call to pick up an ill, injured or dead person in any public street, public alley or public park except in
compliance with the terms of a permit granted by the city council. (Ordinance 07-3478, sec. I (4-1), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.002 False request for emergency service
No person shall, by any means whatsoever, cause the city fire department emergency medical service to dispatch an
EMS ambulance, unless he or she knows, or has reasonable grounds to believe, that a bona fide medical emergency
exists. (2000 Code, sec. 4-2)
Sec. 6.05.003 Soliciting business on streets
(a) No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city, the business of transporting
sick, injured, disabled or deceased persons.
(b) The ambulance service shall have no right to compensation from anyone for picking up a person from a street,
alley or park in violation of subsection (a) of this section.
(2000 Code, sec. 4-3)
Secs. 6.05.004–6.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Medical Services
Sec. 6.05.031 Services to be provided by city; fees; standards for operation, equipment and personnel
(a) The city fire department shall provide emergency medical services within the city. This department shall provide
“basic life support services” and “advanced support life services.”
(b) Fees for such services shall be as follows:
(1) Basic life support (non-emergency): $750.00.
(2) Basic life support (emergency): $825.00.
(3) Advanced life support-1: $1,150.00.
(4) Advanced life support-2: $1,250.00.
(5) Specialty care transport (SCT): $2,500.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/507
(6) Mileage: $15.00/mile.
(7) Waiting time: $50.00 per 1/2 hour.
(8) Extra attendant: $125.00 per attendant.
(9) Nonresident fee: $100.00.
(c) The city emergency medical services department and operations shall conform and comply with any and all
applicable federal and state law. Minimum equipment and personnel standards shall be established by the department of
state health services and the area medical director.
(Ordinance 18-3676 adopted 5/8/18)
Sec. 6.05.032 Area covered by city service
The area covered by the city emergency medical services shall consist of the corporate limit of the city and other entities
or political subdivisions which have contracted with the city for service. The document detailing the area to be covered
shall be on file at the city secretary's office for public inspection. (2000 Code, sec. 4-12)
Sec. 6.05.033 Dispatcher
The emergency medical services dispatcher shall be designated by the city manager, or his/her designate, to handle calls
for emergency medical services, and shall be available by telephone at all hours. (2000 Code, sec. 4-13)
Sec. 6.05.034 Restrictions on private ambulance services
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, including the holder of the transfer service permit, or anyone other than a
member of the city fire department emergency medical services department officially on duty, or an agency of the United
States, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise for, or otherwise be engaged or profess to be engaged in the
operation of an emergency ambulance or the providing of emergency service upon the streets of the city except in the
following circumstances:
(1) It shall not be unlawful for a person operating a transfer ambulance with a city permit, upon responding
to a direct call for nonemergency conditions, to use emergency equipment after notifying the central
dispatcher and receiving permission to make an emergency run, when a determination is made by the transfer
ambulance attendant that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all
practical speed to a hospital.
(2) It shall not be unlawful for any person operating a transfer ambulance with a city permit, who is
performing the service of maintaining an ambulance at a particular location for a sporting event, to operate
such ambulance under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the central
dispatcher and receiving permission to make an emergency run, when a determination is made by the transfer
ambulance attendant that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all
practical speed to a hospital.
(3) It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate an emergency ambulance to a hospital within the city,
if the place of emergency at which the sick or injured person was picked up by the ambulance is outside the
city limits and the ambulance making the emergency run is licensed and operated in accordance with all
applicable state laws. On each emergency run into the city, ambulance personnel must notify the central
dispatcher and receive permission to make an emergency run, unless otherwise notified by the fire chief of
the city fire department EMS.
(4) It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate a transfer ambulance with a city permit on an
emergency run when city fire department EMS ambulances are not available, and the central dispatcher
requests the operator furnish backup emergency ambulance service for the city fire department EMS.
(b) The transfer service with a city permit shall be subject to revocation if it is found that the holder of said permit or
any company, service, or corporation that the holder is affiliated or in partnership with is duplicating emergency service
in areas outside the city, in which the city is under contract to provide such service. If the transfer ambulance holder of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/507
said permit receives an emergency call from any source to respond either in the city or these areas under contract with
the city, permittee shall immediately notify the EMS communication center and shall not respond unless requested to do
so by the emergency medical service department dispatcher. Duplication of emergency service is responding without the
request of the dispatcher to the same call as a city emergency medical services department unit.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. II (4-14), adopted 5/8/07)
Secs. 6.05.035–6.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Private Transfer Ambulance Service
Sec. 6.05.061 Definitions
The following words shall have the following meanings:
Central dispatch or communications center. The facility from which the city fire department EMS units are radiodispatched.
City. The City of Plainview.
Emergency. Any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting the sick,
wounded, or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person.
Emergency ambulance. Any motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped and used for transporting the
injured or sick in answer to an emergency call.
Emergency call. Any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone, or other means of communication, in
circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency requiring immediate ambulance service.
Operator. Any individual, firm or corporation engaged in the business of transporting the injured, wounded, sick or
deceased and using the streets of the city for such purpose.
Public convenience and necessity. A public convenience which is fitting and suited to a public need and public necessity
which embrace a great urgent public convenience. This term as applied to an ambulance service proposed and offered to
the public by a person shall mean that the person is fit, able, and willing to perform the ambulance service in the city in
accordance with the requirements of this article.
Response time. The time from which a call is received until the time of arrival at the scene.
Street. Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive or highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the
corporate limits of the city.
Transfer ambulance. Any motor vehicle constructed, equipped and used for transferring the injured or sick under
circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency.
(2000 Code, sec. 4-21)
Sec. 6.05.062 Penalty
Any person, either by himself/herself or agent, who shall do any act or thing prohibited by the terms of this article, or in
any way violate the provisions thereof, shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than the maximum
allowed by state law, and if the person or service is a licensee hereunder, such license shall be terminated. A separate and
distinct violation occurs for each and every day, or part thereof, that said licensee violates a provision or provisions of
this article. It shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege or for proof to be made that the act was knowingly done,
nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negative any exception contained in this article concerning any prohibited
act, but any such exception made herein may be urged as a defense by any person charged by such complaint. (2000
Code, sec. 4-32)
Sec. 6.05.063 Permit required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/507
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or operator to engage in furnishing a transfer service by operating,
driving or causing to be operated or driven a transfer ambulance vehicle upon the public streets of the city without first
having obtained a permit in accord with the terms and provisions of this division. (Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-22),
adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.064 Permit application; contents
(a) Application for a permit shall be filed with the city secretary upon the form furnished by the city secretary. Such
application shall be subscribed and sworn to before a notary public. The applicant shall furnish the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the owner or operator of the ambulance service.
(2) The names and addresses of the true owners of the transfer ambulance service and, if the business is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the corporate officers.
(3) A statement from the city tax assessor-collector that all city taxes on the permit applicant's property,
both real and personal, to be used in the business are current.
(4) A statement that the applicant has obtained liability insurance in accordance with the requirements
provided by this division before commencing service.
(5) A statement of the number of vehicles which the applicant proposes to operate and the make, model,
and vehicle identification number of each transfer vehicle, with a minimum of two (2) units.
(6) Proof that the applicant has been issued a permit by the state board of health and pursuant to
authorization of Texas Health and Safety Code, section 773.041 (Vernon's 2003) must be shown. No
emergency ambulance permit will be issued unless the applicant has obtained such a permit. Also, the city
requires proof that the ambulance service is in compliance with all requirements of the area medical director.
(7) Each ambulance shall be staffed with no fewer than two (2) persons. At the minimum, one person shall
be certified at the level of emergency medical technician and/or emergency medical technician-intermediate
and one person shall be certified or licensed at the level of emergency medical technician-paramedic by the
department of state health services. A list of persons who will act as ambulance attendants and drivers, their
current state registry status, and their date of employment must be submitted.
(8) Proof of state safety inspection sticker for each vehicle.
(9) All motor vehicles used for the purpose of providing ambulance service hereunder shall be in
compliance with the Texas Health and Safety Code and rules promulgated by the department of state health
services.
(10) Applicant shall attach to the application a current financial statement.
(11) A schedule of rates, charges, and fees to be charged by the applicant for the transfer ambulance
service.
(b) Copies of each application for ambulance service shall be forwarded to the city manager, or his/her designate, and
he/she shall review applications for ambulance service and make recommendations to the city council.
(c) Any person who gives false information regarding any statements made in subsection (a) of this section, shall be
guilty of a class C misdemeanor and subject to punitive measures, which may include suspension or revocation of any
permit granted.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-23), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.065 Permit fees
Every applicant for a transfer ambulance operator's permit shall pay to the city the following nonrefundable fees upon
the filing of the application with the city secretary:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/507
(1) An annual permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), which fee shall entitle a permit holder meeting
the requirements of this division and state law to operate a transfer ambulance service for a period of one (1)
year from the issuance date of a permit. Permits shall be prominently displayed at the permit holder's
principal place of business within the city.
(2) In addition to the annual permit fee required to be paid to the city as set forth in this section, each
applicant for a transfer ambulance operator's permit shall pay to the city an annual inspection fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) for each ambulance vehicle operated or to be operated by the applicant. This inspection fee is
assessed to defray part of the certification and inspection costs by the city under this division. This fee may
be waived by the city manager or his/her designee upon review.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-24), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.066 Permit application; review hearing
(a) Upon application for a permit, the city council will set the time for a public hearing and receive evidence as to
whether clear and convincing evidence shows that the community has a need for additional services and current services
within the city, and the community will not be adversely affected. The applicant shall not be granted a permit unless the
city council finds and determines that the public convenience and necessity will be served by the issuance of such
permit. The city council shall also have the right to call any witnesses that may be deemed necessary or appropriate to
determine whether the applicant is qualified to render good services and has or will have sufficient equipment of suitable
type and condition as well as any other relevant facts bearing on whether the additional services are needed and in the
interest of the public as a whole.
(b) In all hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicants to establish by clear and convincing evidence that
a need in the community exists for their services.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-25), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.067 Insurance
(a) No ambulance shall be operated in the city unless there is at all times in full force and effect insurance coverage as
follows:
(1) Commercial general liability: Coverage for claims for damages because of bodily injury, sickness or
disease or death of any person other than ambulance service provider's employees, claims insured by usual
bodily injury liability coverages, and claims for damages because of injuries to or destruction of tangible
property, including loss of use resulting therefrom in an amount of not less than one million and no/100
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence;
(2) Automobile liability: Coverage for claims for damages resulting from an automobile accident resulting
in property damage and/or personal injury or death in an amount not less than one million and no/100 dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence;
(3) Professional liability: Coverage for claims for damages resulting from professional malpractice liability
in an amount of not less than one million and no/100 dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
(b) Such insurance policy shall not contain a passenger liability exclusion.
(c) Every insurance policy required shall extend for the duration of the ambulance service operation, and the insurance
policy shall contain a provision obligating the insurer to give not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the city and
the fire chief prior to the date of any reduction or cancellation of that policy.
(d) No emergency ambulance operator's permit will be issued until such insurance is in effect and a certificate of
insurance has been filed with the application.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-26), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.068 Attendants and drivers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/507
(a) Attendants employed with an ambulance service must be currently certified with the state registry of the
department of state health services, emergency medical services division, as an emergency medical technician, EMT-I
(intermediate), EMT-P (paramedic), or EMT-LP (licensed paramedic). Each transfer ambulance shall be staffed with at
least one (1) paramedic at all times.
(b) Attendants and drivers employed with an ambulance service must meet all minimal state and federal requirements,
medical control requirements, and:
(1) No later than six months from the date of employment, must provide evidence showing completion of
the National Safety Council approved defensive driving course or comparable driver safety course approved
by the city. An extension may be granted by the city manager or his/her designee;
(2) Possess a license valid to operate an emergency vehicle and transfer ambulance in the state; and
(3) When asked by the city manager or designee, ambulance service will be able to provide proof that any
or all employees are free of communicable diseases and are physically capable of performing the required
duties. Ambulance service will also be able to provide, upon request by city manager or designee, proof that
employee(s) have immunity to the following diseases by immunization or, when applicable, by the history of
prior infection:
(A) Rubella (German Measles).
(B) Red measles.
(C) Mumps.
(D) Hepatitis B.
(E) Tetanus-Diphtheria.
EMS personnel shall be tested for tuberculosis annually (semi-annually preferred) unless required by state
law to test more frequently. Positive reactors should be referred to the public health authorities for
appropriate followup.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-27), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.069 Ambulance operations; permitted and prohibited services
(a) Ambulance service operators, and their agents or employees, upon receipt of a request for emergency service
within the city limits, shall immediately relay the request to the city fire department EMS central dispatcher.
(b) Unless authorized to do so by the city manager or his/her designee, it is unlawful for ambulance service operators,
their agents, or their employees to go to the scene of an emergency within the city limits with the intent to provide
emergency service and transportation; provided, however, if persons operating a transfer or emergency vehicle discover
an emergency situation within the city limits, they shall immediately notify the city fire department EMS central
dispatcher and shall remain to render aid until a city fire department EMS vehicle arrives.
(c) Ambulance service operators shall mark each vehicle distinctly with the name of the company providing
ambulance service. The words “Emergency Medical Services,” or “EMS” shall not be written on any vehicle, and
vehicles shall not be marked in any way which might cause confusion with EMS vehicles. It is unlawful for any person
to mark his/her vehicles in any way, other than to place the name of the company on the vehicles.
(2000 Code, sec. 4-28)
(d) Ambulance service operators, their agents, or their employees, shall not hold out to the public in any manner that
their personnel are trained emergency medical technicians or paramedics unless they have been so certified or licensed
by the department of state health services emergency services medical division. (Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-28(d)),
adopted 5/8/07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/507
(e) Ambulances shall be used only for the purpose of transporting patients, and no other use shall be lawful. (2000
Code, sec. 4-28)
Sec. 6.05.070 Personnel, vehicles and equipment
(a) Each ambulance shall be manned by two persons, one driver and one attendant, both meeting the requirements of
section 6.05.068.
(b) Each vehicle shall meet all minimum requirements set forth by state and federal regulations at all times. Units will
be kept clean and sanitized.
(2000 Code, sec. 4-29)
(c) Each ambulance shall be licensed to carry the required equipment and staff for MICU (mobile intensive care unit).
(d) If the city manager or his/her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists any
ambulance containing any condition or code violation which makes such ambulance unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the
city manager or his/her authorized representative may, after proper request has been made, inspect and examine the
ambulance pursuant to this division.
(e) The city manager or his/her authorized representative may then direct such ambulances to proceed to a specified
location for further inspection. An ambulance that does not meet the inspection requirements will immediately be taken
out of service and replaced by another company ambulance that is compliant. Transfer ambulance that failed inspection
may be put back into service after corrections have been made and evidence of such has been presented to the city
manager or his/her designee.
(f) Each unit shall be equipped with a two-way radio which transmits and receives on frequencies designated for use
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) between each vehicle and dispatch. Radio communications to and
from such transfer ambulance vehicles shall be the sole responsibility and expense of the operator. In addition, each
transfer ambulance vehicle shall have capability to communicate with hospitals and other emergency services from their
ambulance units.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-29(c)–(f)), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.071 Reprimand, suspension or revocation of permit
(a) The city manager and/or his designee shall investigate every written complaint filed with his office which
complaint alleges that the permit holder has committed a violation of the grounds set forth below for reprimand,
suspension or revocation of a permit issued.
(b) Any one of the following items shall be grounds for reprimand, suspension or revocation of a permit issued under
this division:
(1) Operating a transfer ambulance vehicle upon the city's streets when such vehicle has not met the
inspection requirements of this division.
(2) Charging a fee for services rendered that is in excess of the schedule of rates, charges and fees filed by
the permit holder with the city secretary under this division.
(3) Failing to conspicuously post within every transfer ambulance vehicle:
(A) A copy of the schedule of rates and fees for services on file with the city secretary; and
(B) The inspection certificate required under this division.
(4) Failure to properly maintain every transfer ambulance vehicle so that it is free of mechanical defects
and suitable for transportation of patients from the standpoint of health, sanitation, and safety.
(5) Failure to maintain and have available for duty during the operation hours of the business conducted by
permit holder a minimum of two (2) transfer ambulance vehicles as required by this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/507
(6) Operating a transfer ambulance vehicle as an emergency service vehicle when not authorized to do so
in accordance with the terms of this division.
(7) Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this division, or has willfully or knowingly
violated any of the provisions of such division.
(8) Conviction of the permit holder of a felony or any criminal offense involving moral turpitude.
(9) Conviction of a driver of driving while under the influence of alcohol and/or illegal drugs or of a driver
or attendant of public intoxication.
(10) Cancellation, withdrawal, or termination of insurance required by this division.
(11) Other good cause exists and public convenience and necessity is no longer served by the permit.
(c) If the city manager finds that grounds for reprimand, suspension, or revocation do in fact exist, he shall reprimand
the permit holder in writing, suspend the permit for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or revoke the permit as the
facts of each case warrant.
(d) In each case where a permit is suspended or revoked such facts shall be communicated in writing to the permit
holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall set forth the basis for the action taken by the city manager
and/or his designee.
(e) In each case where a permit is suspended or revoked, the permit holder shall have a period of ten (10) days from
receipt of the notice of such action to appeal the suspension or revocation of the permit to the city council.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-30), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.072 Rates
The term of the permit granted by this division shall be renewable annually. A schedule of rates, charges and fees for
services will be filed by the permit holder. Additionally, the transfer ambulance service will conspicuously post within
every transfer ambulance vehicle the following: (1) a copy of the schedule of rates and fees for services on file with the
city secretary; and (2) the inspection certificate required by this division. This permit renewal will be determined by the
city manager or his/her designee after reviewing all necessary information as required in this division. Said term is
subject to the provisions of this division and as amended. (Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-31), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.073 Duty of care; use of red lights and sirens; speed
(a) The emergency ambulance operator has the duty to operate the vehicle with appropriate regard for the safety of all
persons. This division does not relieve the operator of an authorized emergency ambulance from the consequences of
reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(b) It shall be unlawful to operate or drive an emergency ambulance on the city's public streets in excess of the speed
limits applicable to nonemergency vehicles unless the driver has notified the public safety communication center of the
necessity of such action. Notification shall be by telephone to the 911 operator and shall include the driver's
identification, the ambulance service, and the origin and destination of the service request.
(c) The use of sirens or flashing emergency lights upon the city public streets shall be unlawful unless an emergency
situation requires use of lights and sirens, and the public communication center has been notified prior to activation of
said lights and sirens. Notification shall meet standards in subsection (b) above.
(d) It shall be unlawful to operate an emergency ambulance more than ten (10) miles per hour in excess of the posted
speed limit.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-33), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.074 Permit term and renewal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/507
(a) When the requirements of this division have been completed, the city secretary shall issue to applicant a transfer
ambulance operator's permit which permit shall expire one (1) year from the issuance date.
(b) A transfer ambulance operator's permit may be renewed by the holder of such permit provided said holder follows
the same procedure for such renewal permit as set forth in this division to obtain the initial permit and such renewal
application is filed forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit.
(Ordinance 07-3478, sec. III (4-34), adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.05.075 Other state laws and regulations
No portion of this division shall be construed in a manner inconsistent with state laws and regulations, including but not
limited to Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 773 and any other relevant state and federal law. (Ordinance 07-3478,
sec. III (4-35), adopted 5/8/07)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Created
There is hereby created a municipal court in and for the city. (2000 Code, sec. 2-161)
Sec. 7.01.002 Jurisdiction
The municipal court shall have original jurisdiction within the city with the power to hear and determine all cases of
violation of this code or the ordinances of the city, and all other cases of which municipal courts are given jurisdiction by
state law, including cases filed regarding property owned by the city in the city's extraterritoral jurisdiction. (2000 Code,
sec. 2-162; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Municipal court jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.003, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 4.14.
Sec. 7.01.003 Rules of practice and procedure
The rules of practice and procedure as prescribed by state laws governing trials in the state justice of the peace courts
shall govern the procedure and practice of the municipal court, and the city council may prescribe such additional rules
of practice and procedure as may not be inconsistent with state law. (2000 Code, sec. 2-163)
State law reference–Procedures for processing cases within criminal jurisdiction of municipal court, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. ch. 45.
Sec. 7.01.004 Seal
The municipal court shall have a seal having engraved thereon a star of five (5) points in the center and words
“Municipal Court in Plainview, Texas” around the margin thereof, the impress of which shall be attached to all
proceedings, except subpoenas, issued out of said court, and shall be used to authenticate the official acts of the clerk and
of the judge, where he is authorized or required to use the seal of office. (2000 Code, sec. 2-164)
State law reference–Municipal court seal, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.012(g).
ARTICLE 7.02 JUDGE†
Sec. 7.02.001 Office created; powers and duties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/507
There is hereby created the office of judge of the municipal court, who shall have all the power and authority as granted
by and shall perform the duties as required by state law. (2000 Code, sec. 2-165)
Sec. 7.02.002 Appointment
The person appointed shall have the qualifications provided by law for other city officials; provided, however, that he
need not be a licensed attorney. (2000 Code, sec. 2-166; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.02.003 Oath
The judge, prior to taking office, shall take the requisite oath of office required by the constitution and state law to be
taken by the mayor. (2000 Code, sec. 2-167)
State constitution reference–Oath of office, Texas Constitution, art. 16, sec. 1.
ARTICLE 7.03 CLERKS*
Sec. 7.03.001 Appointment
There shall be appointed by the judge, with the approval of the city manager, a clerk and deputy clerks of the municipal
court. The city manager shall determine the number of deputy clerks which are necessary for the proper and efficient
operation of such court. (2000 Code, sec. 2-169)
Sec. 7.03.002 Powers and duties
The clerk and deputy clerks of the municipal court shall perform all the duties and have all the powers bestowed upon
clerks of municipal courts by state law. Any clerk or deputy clerk so appointed may act as the official clerk of the
municipal court and perform all acts incident to such office. (2000 Code, sec. 2-170)
ARTICLE 7.04 FEES
Sec. 7.04.001 Special expenses
(a) All special expenses described in article 45.203, Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, dealing with special
expenses for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under article 38.10 of the Penal Code, or under
section 543.009 of the Transportation Code, after due notice, not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00), shall be paid
into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city.
(b) All special expenses described in article 45.0511, Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, dealing with the
dismissal of certain misdemeanor charges upon completing a driving safety course, not to exceed the actual expense
incurred for the service or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is less, shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and
benefit of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-171; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Municipal court fines, costs and special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.203; driving safety course or motorcycle
operator course dismissal procedures, Tex. Code of Crim. Proc. art. 45.0511.
Sec. 7.04.002 Building security fund
(a) A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in a municipal court shall be required to pay a three dollar
($3.00) security fee as a cost of court.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/507
(c) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the municipal treasurer, for deposit in a
fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund. A fund designated by this subsection may be used only
to finance the items set forth in article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure as amended.
(d) The courthouse security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the governing body of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-172)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.04.003 Technology fund
(a) A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in a municipal court shall be required to pay a four dollar ($4.00)
technology fee as a cost of court.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the budget manager, for deposit in a fund to
be known as the municipal court technology fund. A fund designated by this subsection may be used only to finance the
items set forth in article 102.0172 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure as amended.
(d) The courthouse technology fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the governing body of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-173)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 7.04.004 Collection fee
(a) A defendant shall be assessed a collection fee in the amount of 30% of each delinquent debt and account
receivable, including adjudicated fines and fees, that is more than 60 days past due and has been referred to an attorney
for collection.
(b) A defendant is not liable for the collection fees authorized under subsection (a) if the court of original jurisdiction
has determined the defendant is indigent, or has insufficient resources or income, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part
of the underlying fine or costs.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-174)
State law reference–Contracts for collection services, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 103.0031.
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 8.01.001 Vandalism reward
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/507
(a) Subject to the terms and provisions of this section, there shall be paid a reward of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) to any person furnishing information, to an agent of the city, which leads to the arrest and indictment of any
person or persons for the offense of criminal mischief as defined in the Texas Penal Code, because said person or
persons intentionally or knowingly damaged or destroyed tangible property of the city.
(b) Only one reward shall be paid when the indictment of more than one person is for damage to city property on one
single occasion.
(c) No reward shall be paid to any person whose duty it is to enforce the law, including but not limited to peace
officers of the city, county or state, or any other agent and employee of the city. No reward shall be paid if the
information furnished is already (as of the time said information is furnished) within the knowledge of any law
enforcement officer or other agent of the city.
(d) The city manager shall be the judge of whether or not such information did lead to such arrest and indictment and
whether or not the reward is due under the circumstances presented for the claim for the reward, and the judgment of the
city manager shall be final in such instances.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-1)
Sec. 8.01.002 Throwing stones or other missiles
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any stones or other missiles in, along or across a street or alley in
the city. (2000 Code, sec. 17-2)
Sec. 8.01.003 Discharge of airguns
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any airgun on, in or across any public street or alley within
the corporate limits of the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge an airgun on, in or across any private land, not his own
property, within the corporate limits of the city.
(c) It shall be unlawful to discharge or fire any airgun in such manner that the missile discharged shall strike the
property, real or personal, of any person, when such property is not his own, within the corporate limits of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 17-3)
Sec. 8.01.004 Firearms
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer, to carry a firearm in any city building.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any BB gun, pellet gun, gun, pistol, rifle, or firearm of any kind
within the city limits, except within a properly secured indoor firearms range, constructed and maintained in accord with
National Rifle Association specifications and standards, or upon a range owned and operated by a governmental entity.
(c) The term “city building” as used in this section is defined as any building or portion of a building owned,
occupied, leased, or controlled by the city, for city operations and activities. The term does not include any public or
private driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking areas.
(d) The term “handgun” as used in this section is defined as any firearm that is designed, made, or adapted to be fired
with one hand, and the term “concealed handgun” as used in this section is defined as a handgun, the presence of which
is not openly discernible to the ordinary observation of a reasonable person.
(e) The terms “gun,” “pistol,” “rifle,” and “firearm” as used in this section shall not only be defined as to include all
percussion weapons, but shall also include all airguns, air pistols, air rifles, and all other firearms using air pressure to
propel a projectile.
(f) This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance
of his/her duty, nor to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/507
(g) Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor pursuant to
Tex. Gov't. Code Ann. art. 4413 (29ee).
(2000 Code, sec. 17-4; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.001; limitation
of authority to prohibit discharge of firearms or other weapons in extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 229.002;
disorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.01; weapons, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, ch. 46.
ARTICLE 8.02 NUISANCES GENERALLY*
Sec. 8.02.001 Definition
For the purposes of this article, the word “nuisance” is hereby defined as any person doing an unlawful act, or omitting
to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing
either:
(1) Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
(2) Offends decency;
(3) Is offensive to the senses;
(4) Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public
or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage;
(5) In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property; or
(6) Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the
value of the property of others.
(2000 Code, sec. 16-1)
Sec. 8.02.002 Illustrative enumeration
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public property, specifically, an
adjoining alley, easement, or other public way, any of the following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to
be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive,
limiting or restrictive:
(1) Objectionable, unsightly grass, weeds or plants not cultivated to grow in rank profusion;
(Ordinance 05-3447, sec. I (16-2), adopted 7/26/05)
(2) Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other
things;
(3) Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin;
(4) Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human
habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or that presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is
located;
(5) All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises;
(6) All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes
which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches;
(7) The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/507
(8) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead
animals, creamery or industrial waste, or other substances;
(9) Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state
or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained;
(10) Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground;
(11) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities.
(2000 Code, sec. 16-2)
(12) The illegal dumping, discarding or unloading of items such as furniture, appliances, mattresses, carpet
or carpet padding, rubbish/brush, tree stumps, trees and limbs, glass, gravel, paper, plastic, rubber, shingles,
wheels or tires, vehicle frames, parts, or accessories, residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, boxes, brick or broken concrete, debris, junk, any other unsightly or unsanitary matter
of whatever nature or any other material constituting a nuisance at any place within the city corporate limits,
except at a state-permitted or -approved landfill or at such other place as may be designated by the city or the
state. (Ordinance 15-3622 adopted 8/11/15)
Sec. 8.02.003 Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. (2000
Code, sec. 16-3)
Sec. 8.02.004 Notice and order to abate
(a) Upon notice to the code enforcement department of any property not meeting the standards set forth in this article,
a code enforcement officer shall notify the property owner of the violation.
(b) Unless specified otherwise, the city's notice of violation under this article shall contain the following:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property in violation of this
article;
(2) A description of the code violations that occurred on the property;
(3) The time period of seven (7) days after the notice date to comply with the provisions of this notice and
abate the nuisance;
(4) A statement that upon the owner's failure to abate the nuisance within the time period specified the city
may cause the correction and abatement work be done on its own, charging the owner for the expense
involved as set out in this article; and
(5) A notice that upon the owner's failure to pay the city such expense, a lien may fix on the property for
the expense involved.
(c) The city in the notice of a violation shall inform the owner that if the owner commits another violation of the same
kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the notice date, the
city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expenses against the property.
If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been
informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by
this article to abate the violation and may assess expenses against the property owner.
(d) Unless specified otherwise, the notification under this article shall be given by using one of the following methods:
(1) Personally delivering written notice to the owner;
(2) Certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the
appraisal district's records;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/507
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown:
(A) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least once;
(B) Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
(C) Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which
the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(e) Notices mailed to the property owner shall be addressed to the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located. If the city mails a notice in accordance with this
subsection and subsection (d), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the
notice's validity is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. When the known owner is a corporation, notice
shall be served or addressed for delivery to the president, vice-president, or registered agent of the corporation. When the
corporation shall fail to appoint or maintain a registered agent, or when its officers or registered agent cannot with
reasonable diligence be found at the registered office, duplicate copies of the notice may be served on the secretary of
state by sending said duplicate copies by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Ordinance 05-3447, sec. I (16-4), adopted 7/26/05; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.02.005 Owner's right to appear and show cause
When a notice to abate or remove any nuisance that may exist upon any property is received, the owner shall have the
right, within the time period designated in the abatement order, to appear and meet with a code enforcement officer or
his/her designee to show cause why such order should not or cannot be complied with, and the code enforcement officer
may, at his/her discretion, give such time extension for the abatement or removal of such nuisance as may be necessary
as long as no immediate public health danger exists. (Ordinance 05-3447, sec. I (16-5), adopted 7/26/05; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 8.02.006 Abatement by city
(a) If the owner fails to request a hearing, and if abatement to city code standards does not occur within the time
period provided in this article, the city may enter upon such premises and may do such work as necessary or cause the
work necessary to abate the violation to be done at the owner's expense. The costs, charges, and expenses incurred in
doing or having such work done or improvements made to the real property shall be a charge to and personal liability of
such person. This remedy shall be in addition to the remedy provided for in section 8.02.008.
(b) A statement of the costs incurred by the city to bring the property into compliance shall be mailed to the owner or
any person(s) having supervision or control of such premises, if the owner or such person in control of the premises has
a known mailing address, and, if not known, may be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The
statement shall demand payment within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt or publication.
(c) If such statement has not been paid within such period, the mayor, the city health authority, or other official
designated by the mayor may file a statement of expenses incurred with the county clerk stating the owner's name, if
known, and the legal description of the lot or parcel. The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement shall
be prima facie proof of the expenses incurred Such statement shall be and the city shall have a privileged lien for
expenditures incurred, and this lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, together with ten
(10) percent on the delinquent amount from the date such payment is due. The city may foreclose such liens in a
proceeding brought in accordance with applicable law. The remedy allowed in this subsection shall not be the city's sole
remedy.
(d) The city may assess to the owner of such property a charge for all work done or improvements made as is needed
to bring any property into compliance with this code, including an administrative expense of one hundred seventy-five
dollars ($175.00) per occurrence. The administrative fee will be charged per lot, tract, parcel of land, or across the
adjacent sidewalk, parkway or alley, which is the city's cost in administering the terms of this provision. The fee can be
adjusted upon annual review to correspond to the actual cost of providing the applicable services.
(Ordinance 05-3447, sec. I (16-6), adopted 7/26/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/507
Sec. 8.02.007 Adoption of state law
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, as amended, chapter 342, is hereby adopted by the city. (2000 Code, sec. 16-7)
Sec. 8.02.008 Penalties and liens
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any land within the city to knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal
negligence fail to have any grass, weeds, or brush mowed, cut, removed, or otherwise bring property into compliance
with the standards set forth in section 8.02.002 above.
(b) Upon conviction for violation hereof, the owner shall be fined an amount no less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) provided, however, in the event a defendant has once
previously been convicted under this article, the defendant shall be fined no less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
a third conviction and for each conviction thereafter. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 05-3447, sec. I (16-8), adopted 7/26/05)
ARTICLE 8.03 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.03.001 Administration
The administration of this article shall be vested in the code enforcement officer, the chief of police or their authorized
representatives. (2000 Code, sec. 16-21; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.03.002 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to the following:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, where it is
not visible from the street or other public or private property;
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property, in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; or
(3) Unlicensed operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on his
property, provided that the vehicles and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that they
do not constitute a health hazard, and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly
growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means.
(2000 Code, sec. 16-22)
Sec. 8.03.003 Definitions
(a) Definitions.
Antique auto. Passenger cars or trucks that were manufactured in 1925 or before, or which became thirty-five (35) or
more years old.
Junked vehicle. Any motor vehicle as defined in Texas Transportation Code Ann., section 683.071 (Vernon's 2005), as
amended:
A vehicle that is self propelled and:
(1) Displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not
display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/507
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor vehicle collector. A person who does the following:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles;
(2) Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special
interest vehicle; and
(3) Possesses such vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special vehicle for historic
interest.
Nuisance. A junked vehicle, as defined in Texas Transportation Code Ann., section 683.071, or part thereof which shall
constitute a public nuisance when visible from a public place or public right-of-way, which is detrimental to the safety
and welfare of the general public; tends to reduce the value of private property; invites vandalism; creates fire hazards;
constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; or is detrimental to the economic
welfare of the city, by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the
city.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original manufacture's
specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
Sec. 8.03.004 Declaration of public nuisance
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain upon any public property, public right-of-way, or upon
any lot or tract of land within the city any junked vehicle as defined in section 8.03.003. The owner or occupant of any
premises within the city shall not keep or permit other persons to keep any junked vehicle or parts thereof on said
premises in ordinary public view. Said junked vehicles are hereby declared to be public nuisance.
Sec. 8.03.005 Notice
(a) Whenever any public nuisance, as declared in section 8.03.004 exists in the city, the code enforcement officer,
chief of police, or their designee shall furnish written notice to the following: (1) the last known registered owner of the
junked motor vehicle; (2) every lienholder of record; and (3) the owner or the occupant of the premises whereupon such
nuisance exists or abuts the public property whereupon such nuisance exists, to abate or remove such public nuisance. A
vehicle description, including identification number and license plate number, if available, shall be included in notice.
(b) The notice required to be sent shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) State the nature of the public nuisance and specify that the nuisance must be removed and abated within
ten (10) days after receipt of notice;
(3) State the date of the next board of adjustment meeting where a hearing will be held and a determination
made as to whether or not the motor vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined herein;
(4) At the hearing, a determination will be made that the motor vehicle is a junked vehicle or not, and any
personal property items within the vehicle shall be presumed abandoned junk if not claimed on the hearing
date. If a public nuisance is found, then the board of adjustment may order immediate removal and disposal
by the code enforcement officer, chief of police, or their designee; and
(5) State that the failure to abate and remove the nuisance or failure to attend the hearing after notice
constitutes a waiver by the owner and lienholders of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle, and their failure
to abate the nuisance or attend the hearing after notice will be deemed consent to dispose of such junked
vehicle in accordance with the provisions of chapter 683, subchapter E of the Texas Transportation Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/507
(c) The notice may be served personally or by certified or registered mail with a five-day return receipt requested. If
the notice is returned undelivered by the U.S. Postal Service, abatement by the city may proceed not less than ten (10)
days after the date of such return.
Sec. 8.03.006 Filing of complaint; penalty; presumption of ownership; prima facie evidence
(a) Whenever a junked vehicle is found to exist within the city in violation of chapter 683, subchapter E of the Texas
Transportation Code, the city may, without notice, pursue the filing of an immediate complaint against the owner of the
vehicle or the person responsible for such violation.
(b) (1) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article relating to the maintaining of a public
nuisance as described herein or in permitting or allowing such public nuisance to exist, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00). Each day shall constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
(2) On conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance.
(3) It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this provision that the notice required by
section 8.03.005 of this article was not given to the defendant prior to the commencement of the criminal
prosecution.
(c) The person in whose name a junked vehicle is last registered shall be presumed to be the owner and person in
control of such vehicle for purposes of prosecution under this article. Proof of ownership may be made by production of
a copy or facsimile of the registration of a vehicle with the state department of transportation or the county motor vehicle
licensing department or any other licensing authority showing the name of the person to whom the license plates for the
vehicle were issued. This proof shall constitute prima facie evidence of the fact that the person to whom such certificate
of registration was issued was the owner and person in control of the junked motor vehicle determined to be a public
nuisance. This presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence.
(d) Evidence that a vehicle in public view has not been driven under its own power for a period of forty-five (45) days
or more shall constitute prima facie evidence that said vehicle was inoperative for the same period.
Sec. 8.03.007 Public hearing
(a) A public hearing prior to the removal of a junked vehicle, or part thereof, under this article as a public nuisance,
may be held before the board of adjustment within ten (10) days or at the next designated meeting after service of notice
to abate the nuisance. Ten (10) days' written notice of such hearing shall be mailed by certified mail with a five-day
return receipt requested to the last known owner of the junked vehicle, any lienholder of record, and the owner or
occupant of any private residence upon which the junked vehicle is stored or located informing such persons of the date
and time of the public hearing. The code enforcement officer, chief of police, or their designees will seek an order from
such board requiring the removal of such junked vehicle. Any order of the board requiring removal of a vehicle or part
thereof shall include a vehicle's description and the correct identification number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
(b) The hearing shall be administrative in nature. A written record shall be made which shall include:
(1) The names of witnesses appearing before the board.
(2) A vehicle description and any identifiable personal property therein.
(3) The correct identification number and most recent license number, if available.
(4) The board's decision as to whether or not the vehicle is in fact a junked vehicle.
(5) The board's finding as to whether notice requirements were met as set forth in this article.
(c) Upon determination by the board that the motor vehicle is a junked vehicle, the owner or occupant of the premises
upon which the motor vehicle is located shall be ordered to remove the vehicle within ten (10) days or, if hardship is
found to exist, within thirty (30) days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/507
(d) The board shall make a written order setting forth their findings and ordering that the nuisance be removed and
that the vehicle be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of chapter 683, subchapter E of the Texas
Transportation Code, if the nuisance fails to be abated within the time period ordered. Such order shall state that such
junked motor vehicle shall be removed and disposed of by any licensed demolisher or scrap metal dealer, and any
personal property contents not removed will be deemed abandoned property.
Sec. 8.03.008 Removal and disposal of vehicles
In the event the board orders removal of the public nuisance, the code enforcement officer, chief of police, or their
designees may abate such nuisance by removal and disposal of such junked vehicle to any licensed demolisher or scrap
metal dealer, and dispose of any personal property contents as abandoned property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.03.009 Notice to state department of transportation
Notice shall be given by the city to the state department of transportation within five (5) days after the date of removal of
the junked vehicle or part thereof, identifying said vehicle. (2000 Code, sec. 16-29; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.03.010 Payment of abatement expenses
All expenses incurred in the abatement of such public nuisance shall be charged against the owner or owners of the
junked vehicle. Such expense shall be payable in the city, and the city shall have the first and prior lien on such vehicle,
together with ten percent (10%) interest on any delinquent amount from the date of removal of such vehicle. (2000
Code, sec. 16-30)
Sec. 8.03.011 Relocation of public nuisance
The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the city limits after a proceeding
for an abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked
vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.03.012 Removed vehicles not to be reconstructed or made operable
Any vehicle which has been removed in accordance with the requirements of this article shall not be reconstructed or
made operable thereafter. (2000 Code, sec. 16-32)
ARTICLE 8.04 NOISE*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
Decibel. The intensity of a sound wave, equal to twenty (20) times the common logarithm of the ratio of the pressure
produced by the sound wave to 0.0002 microbars. (2000 Code, sec. 16-41)
Sec. 8.04.002 Disturbance of persons in immediate vicinity
Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of
ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. (2000 Code,
sec. 16-42)
Sec. 8.04.003 Disturbance of persons in private homes
Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
(2000 Code, sec. 16-43)
Sec. 8.04.004 Presumption of violation–During day
Any noise which measures ninety (90) decibels: (i) at the property line of private property or farther, or (ii) fifteen (15)
feet or farther from any vehicle or other machine, person, animal or thing making a noise if located on public ways,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/507
public property or airspace, shall, during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. each day, be presumed to cause
material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities. (2000 Code, sec. 16-44)
Sec. 8.04.005 Same–During night
Any noise which measures seventy-five (75) decibels: (1) at the property line of private property or farther, or (2) fifteen
(15) feet or farther from any vehicle or other machine, person, animal or thing making a noise if located on public ways,
public property or airspace, shall, during the hours between 10:30 p.m. one day and 7:00 a.m. the next succeeding day,
be presumed to cause material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities. (2000 Code, sec. 16-45)
Sec. 8.04.006 Construction permit
Upon application in writing, the city secretary may issue a special permit to a licensed contractor to exceed the noise
limitations described in section 8.04.004 during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. in connection with the actual
construction or repair of a building or other improvements located in the city. (2000 Code, sec. 16-46)
ARTICLE 8.05 JUVENILE CURFEW*
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
Emergency. Unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, any situation requiring immediate action
to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life, or a serious medical condition of sudden onset.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment
to which the public is invited.
Juvenile. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years of age, or, in equivalent phrasing, any person of the age of
sixteen (16) years old or younger, who has not been emancipated by court order pursuant to the Texas Family Code,
chapter 31.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Parent. Any natural parent of a juvenile, a legal guardian, or any adult person, eighteen (18) years or older, in whose
care the juvenile has been placed by the natural parent or legal guardian.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not
limited to, parks, streets, highways, the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport
facilities, shops, shopping malls, and shall include parking facilities adjacent to the same.
Remain. To stay behind, to tarry and stay unnecessarily upon a public place, including congregating in groups totaling
four (4) or more juveniles in which any minor included would not be using the public place for an ordinary or serious
purpose such as passage or going home. To implement this definition with more precision and precaution, numerous
exceptions will be provided hereinafter to indicate that this is not a mere prohibitory or presence type curfew ordinance.
More exceptions become available to juveniles with increasing years and advancing maturity as appropriate in the
interest of reasonable regulation.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Time of night. The prevailing local standard of time at the date in question, whether Central Standard Time or Central
Daylight Savings Time, as observed by the public. The time maintained by the police department shall be prima facie
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/507
evidence of the time of day for continued implementation of this article.
Sec. 8.05.002 Established
It is unlawful for a juvenile to be in a public place within the city, to be in any motor vehicle operating or parked in a
public place, or to be in or on the premises of any establishment within the city between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. daily.
Sec. 8.05.003 Exceptions
(a) In the following exceptional cases a juvenile in or upon any public place or in and upon an establishment shall not
be deemed in violation of this article. This section is intended as a clear general guide for juveniles, their parents, and
enforcement officials.
(1) When the juvenile is accompanied by his parents, legal guardian or authorized adult supervisor.
(2) When a juvenile is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the rights of assembly, whether parade or
demonstration, has been permitted by the city pursuant to this Code of Ordinances, article 12.15 Parades and
Processions, or other bona fide religious, social or school activities involving the rights to assemble.
(3) When engaged in performing an errand or other legitimate business at the direction of a parent,
guardian or supervisory adult, including travel to and from such location by a direct route.
(4) When a juvenile is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of that juvenile to take the parent's
place in accompanying the juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.
(5) When the juvenile is on the sidewalk at the place where such juvenile resides, or on the sidewalk of
either next-door neighbor, when said neighbors do not object to such presence.
(6) When engaged in employment activities, or going to or returning home from an employment activity.
(7) When involved in an emergency.
(8) When the juvenile is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
(9) When the juvenile is attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that has undertaken
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from such activity.
(10) With respect to section 8.05.002 of this article, it shall be an exception that the offense occurred after
the juvenile has graduated from high school, received a high school equivalency certificate, or is or had been
married or emancipated by law.
(11) All of the above-cited exceptions to the curfew ordinance include travel to and from such activity by a
direct route, and this section is in no way to be construed as a limitation upon normal travel by a juvenile
engaged in interstate movement.
(b) A defense to prosecution exists under section 8.05.005 that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment
promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew
hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 8.05.004 Parental responsibility
It shall be unlawful for a parent knowingly to permit or by insufficient control to allow a juvenile in his or her care to be
or remain in any public place or to be or remain in any establishment other than for excepted activities during the curfew
hours established by this article. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that a parent should reasonably be expected
to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in such parent's custody. It shall be prima facie evidence of violation of
this section if a responsible parent has no knowledge of the juvenile's whereabouts during the curfew hours established
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/507
by this article. The purpose of this section is to require neglectful or careless parents to meet the community standard of
parental responsibility.
Sec. 8.05.005 Establishment owner's responsibility
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a business establishment to allow a juvenile to remain upon such
business premises during the curfew hours established in this article beyond the time necessary to conduct an excepted
activity. It shall be no defense to this section that a juvenile made a purchase, if the juvenile did not immediately make
such purchase upon arrival and depart immediately thereafter. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that
the owner or operator of such business establishment has promptly notified the city police department that juveniles
present on the premises after hours have refused to depart.
Sec. 8.05.006 Enforcement
(a) Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article unless the
officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no
defense in section 8.05.003 exists.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person (including any minor) to give a false name, address, date of birth, or telephone
number to any officer investigating a possible violation of this article.
Sec. 8.05.007 Penalties
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) When required by the Texas Family Code Ann., section 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a juvenile who violates section 8.05.002 and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
Sec. 8.05.008 Continuing evaluation
This article shall be reviewed every third year prior to March 31 of such year as required by the Texas Local
Government Code Ann., section 370.002. The first review shall be conducted no later than March 31, 2010, and every
third year thereafter. Such review shall be conducted following a public hearing upon the need to continue this article,
and the city council shall have the option to continue, abolish, or modify this article based upon their review of the
article's effects on the community and on the problems this article is intended to remedy.
(Ordinance 16-3632 adopted 3/22/16; Ordinance 19-3688 adopted 3/26/19)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 9.02 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/507
Sec. 9.02.001 Sick leave for police officers
(a) A certified police officer is allowed sick leave with pay accumulated at the rate of 1-1/4 full working days for each
full month employed in a calendar year, so as to total fifteen (15) working days to an officer's credit each twelve (12)
months.
(b) A certified police officer may accumulate up to ninety (90) workdays of sick leave and may use the leave if unable
to work because of bona fide illness.
(c) A certified police officer who leaves the department in good standing is entitled to receive, in a lump sum
payment, the full amount of the officer's salary for accumulated sick leave limited by the following criteria:
(1) The lump sum payment shall be computed by compensating the officer for the accumulated time at
his/her current pay classification.
(2) The maximum number of days that may be accumulated for purposes of use as actual sick leave or
computation of sick leave payment shall never exceed ninety (90) days.
(d) To facilitate the settlement of the accounts of deceased police officers, all unpaid compensation, including all
accumulated sick leave, due at the time of death to an active police officer who dies as a result of a line-of-duty injury or
illness shall be paid to the persons in the first applicable category of the following prioritized list:
(1) To the beneficiary or beneficiaries the police officer designated in writing to receive the compensation
and filed with the personnel department before the person's death;
(2) To the police officer's widow or widower;
(3) To the police officer's child or children and to the descendants of a deceased child, by representation;
(4) To the police officer's parents or to their survivors; or
(5) To the properly appointed legal representative of the police officer's estate, or, in the absence of a
representative, to the person determined to be entitled to the payment under the state law of descent and
distribution.
(e) Accumulation and payment of sick leave criteria for certified police officers shall not apply to the director of
public safety/chief of police or civilian police employees.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-51; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.02.002 Vacation leave for police officers
(a) Each police officer is entitled to earn a minimum of fifteen (15) working days' vacation leave with pay each year.
(b) In computing the length of time a police officer may be absent from work on vacation leave, only those calendar
days during which the person would be required to work if not on vacation may be counted as vacation days.
(c) A police officer may accumulate vacation leave to the extent allowable and as set out in section 5.4(c) of the city
personnel policy.
(d) Accumulation and payment of vacation leave criteria for certified police officers shall not apply to the director of
public safety/chief of police or civilian police employees.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-52)
Secs. 9.02.003–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Auxiliary Police Force*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/507
Sec. 9.02.031 Composition
There is hereby established a city auxiliary police force composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the
organization and whose application for membership has been accepted and who have complied with the rules,
regulations, and orders provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof. Its membership shall be limited to
the same number of officers as commissioned officers of the regular police force. Members of the auxiliary police force
shall not be considered as employees of the city for any purposes other than supervision and control while on duty. (2000
Code, sec. 2-271)
Sec. 9.02.032 Supervision
The members of the auxiliary police force shall be under the authority, control, and command of the chief of police of
the city, subject to all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and of this article. Members shall be appointed from
a list of eligible persons compiled as hereinafter provided. (2000 Code, sec. 2-272)
Sec. 9.02.033 Application and eligibility for membership; appointments; oath
(a) A list of eligible persons shall be established in compliance with rules and regulations set forth in the city police
hiring process. All applicants for positions with the auxiliary police force must apply in writing on the form prescribed
by the chief of police.
(b) All applicants for positions in the auxiliary police force must meet the following basic qualifications:
(1) Must be twenty-one (21) years old;
(2) A resident of the city;
(3) Possess a high school diploma or its equivalency;
(4) Must be of good moral character; and
(5) Must never have been convicted of a felony.
(c) Selections will be made through examinations and appointments will be made by the chief of police. All
examinations shall be impartial, and practical in their character, and shall relate to those matters which fairly test the
relative capacity of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the position to which they expect to be appointed.
(d) All applicants successfully completing the examination shall, before appointment, be subjected to:
(1) Rigid background investigation;
(2) Oral interviews;
(3) Polygraph examination;
(4) Psychological examination; and
(5) Rigid physical examination.
Failure to receive a favorable report on any of the five (5) above-mentioned investigations shall reject the applicant.
(e) All applicants, before appointment to the auxiliary police force, shall subscribe to an oath that he/she will obey and
observe the constitution of the state and the laws of this nation, this state and this city and that he/she will carry out the
duties of a member of the auxiliary police force.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-273)
Sec. 9.02.034 Duties; authority of chief of police
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/507
(a) The duties of the auxiliary police force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of
police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department of the city in the enforcement of the law and in the
maintenance of peace and order during periods of emergency designated by the chief of police. The chief of police may,
by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the auxiliary police force, to fix the specific duties of its members, and
to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders from time to time, and he may command
members of the auxiliary police force to obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out their duties.
(b) The chief of police may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the auxiliary police
force, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-274)
Sec. 9.02.035 Identification card and other insignia
An identification card and other insignia or evidence of identity as the chief may prescribe shall be issued to each new
member, who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and must surrender them upon
termination of his/her membership. (2000 Code, sec. 2-275)
Sec. 9.02.036 Termination of membership
Membership of any person may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the
chief. Any member may resign from the auxiliary police force at any time, but it shall be the duty of said member to
notify the chief of police of his/her resignation. (2000 Code, sec. 2-276)
Sec. 9.02.037 Power to reduce membership
The chief of police may, by order, diminish the membership of the auxiliary police force as may be required. (2000
Code, sec. 2-277)
Sec. 9.02.038 Authority and training of members
(a) Carrying firearms. Members of the auxiliary police force may only bear firearms in the case of any emergency
while they are discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer, and then only by specific order and
authorization of the chief of police.
(b) Entering private property. No member of the auxiliary police force shall break into or otherwise forcefully enter
upon any private property or enter the dwelling or habitation of another person without the consent of the owner or
occupant except when immediately accompanied by a regular member of the police department of this city who then and
there requests his/her aid in the enforcement of the law.
(c) Training. Members shall fulfill the minimum training standards established by the commission on law enforcement
officer standards and education and such other training as prescribed by the chief of police.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-278)
Sec. 9.02.039 Compensation of members
Members of the auxiliary police force shall receive no remuneration for their services and shall voluntarily serve. (2000
Code, sec. 2-279)
ARTICLE 9.03 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.03.001–9.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Texas Municipal Retirement System*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/507
Sec. 9.03.031 Election to participate
On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of its permanent
employees of all departments now existing or hereafter established, except for the fire department, participate in the
Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature, as amended (article 6243h
of Vernon's Civil Statutes of Texas), and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such
employees. (2000 Code, sec. 2-61; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.03.032 Inclusion of new employees
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of
such department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the municipal retirement system beginning
upon the date such person becomes an employee. (2000 Code, sec. 2-64)
Sec. 9.03.033 Discontinuance of participants
The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue
as to any participants. (2000 Code, sec. 2-65)
ARTICLE 9.04 OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE LIABILITY PLAN
Sec. 9.04.001 Definitions
City vehicle. A vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or owned by the city.
Loss. Any amount which a plan member is legally obligated to pay resulting from an act or omission of the plan member
which is covered under this plan.
Plan. The city officer and employee liability plan.
Plan member. A person who is:
(1) An employee of the city;
(2) A member of a city board, and this term shall include a board that is not entirely, in composition, a city
board, commission, or committee created by charter, ordinance or resolution of the city;
(3) A member of the city council; or
(4) A volunteer who has been approved as a volunteer by a departmental volunteer coordinator and who is
working under the direction of any employee of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-201)
Sec. 9.04.002 Coverage generally
(a) The city shall indemnify and defend a plan member, in accordance with the terms of this plan, against a loss
arising out of any claim, suit or judgment resulting from an act or omission of the plan member during the discharge of
his duties and within the scope of his office, employment or assigned volunteer work with the city. For purposes of this
section, the term “within the scope of his office, employment or assigned volunteer work” shall not include any action
which occurs during a period of time in which the officer or employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering
services to someone other than the city. Provided, however, that in the event such representation and indemnity have
been denied by the city, if upon a trial on the merits the court determines that the officer or employee was acting within
the scope of his official employment or within the scope of his office, employment, or assigned volunteer work, the
indemnifications shall be granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. The
city shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its consent, and the city reserves the
right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient.
(b) A plan member whose position with the city terminates is entitled to coverage in accordance with this plan for any
event that occurred while the person was a plan member.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/507
(2000 Code, sec. 2-202)
Sec. 9.04.003 Defense
(a) The city will defend any suit against a plan member who is covered under this plan even if the suit is groundless or
fraudulent.
(b) The city may investigate, negotiate, and settle any claim or suit as it determines necessary.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-203)
Sec. 9.04.004 Limits of coverage
(a) The city will pay losses covered by this plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay, except that in cases
arising under chapter 101, title S, section 101.021, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, V.T.C.A., as amended, the city
will pay losses covered by this plan that a member is legally obligated to pay, up to but not exceeding the limits of
liability provided by law, as amended for units of government.
(b) In addition to the coverage provided in subsection (a), the city will pay:
(1) The city's expenses in investigating and defending the claim or lawsuit;
(2) Costs taxed against a plan member in a suit covered by this plan and interest that accrues after entry of
judgment before the city has deposited payment with the court on that part of the judgment which does not
exceed limits of coverage;
(3) Reasonable expenses of the plan member incurred at the city's request;
(4) Attorney fees ordered by the court to be paid by the plan member.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-204)
Sec. 9.04.005 Notice of occurrence, claim or suit; cooperation
To be entitled to coverage under the plan a plan member must:
(1) Notify the city attorney's office as soon as practicable upon receipt of written notice of a claim or
lawsuit, but no later than seven (7) calendar days after receipt;
(2) Cooperate with the city attorney's office and, upon request by the office of the city attorney, assist in
making settlements, in the conduct of suits, and in enforcing any right or contribution or indemnity against a
person or organization who may be liable to the city because of injury or damage covered under the plan;
(3) Attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of
witnesses;
(4) Not, except upon advice of the city attorney's office or when questioned by a police officer at the scene
of an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a
claim or lawsuit; and
(5) Not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation or incur any expense
with respect to a claim or lawsuit without the consent of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-205)
Sec. 9.04.006 Plan period
This plan covers only acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred:
(1) While the plan is in effect;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/507
(2) Before the plan was in effect and which are not barred by any statute of limitations; and
(3) If the plan is canceled, while the plan is in effect and which are not barred by any statute of limitations.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-206)
Sec. 9.04.007 Exclusions
Coverage under the plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is brought against a plan member:
(1) By the city;
(2) Arising out of intentional or knowing violation of a penal statute or ordinance committed by or with the
knowledge or consent of the plan member, or any claim arising out of acts of fraud committed by or at the
direction of the plan member with intent to deceive or defraud;
(3) Arising either while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with no authority to operate the
vehicle, or while the plan member is operating a city vehicle in the course of personal or private business;
(4) For liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless the contract is entered into at the
request of the city;
(5) If the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit against the plan member a claim against the
city for benefits under this plan;
(6) If the plan member fails to comply with this plan;
(7) If the officer or employee or volunteer is protected and/or insured under another plan, such as a
commercial insurance policy.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-207)
Sec. 9.04.008 Subrogation
If payment or legal representation is provided under this plan, the city is subrogated to the plan member's rights for
recovery against any person or organization to the extent of the city's liability and payments, and the plan member must
execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to secure these rights. The plan member must
not do anything after a loss to prejudice these rights. (2000 Code, sec. 2-208)
Sec. 9.04.009 Legal representation
(a) The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a claim or suit in which the plan member is covered
under this plan.
(b) If the city attorney's office determines that there is a conflict of interest for the city attorney's office in representing
a plan member, and the plan member is otherwise entitled to coverage under this plan, the city will pay the reasonable
fee of a private attorney to represent the plan member. The private attorney will be selected by mutual agreement of the
plan member and the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 2-209)
Sec. 9.04.010 Determination of coverage
If the city denies coverage to a plan member, the plan member may seek a determination of coverage by a state district
court of the county. If the court rules in favor of the plan member, the city shall provide the plan member all benefits
under the plan and shall reimburse the plan member for reasonable attorney fees, expenses and costs incurred in
obtaining the determination of coverage. (2000 Code, sec. 2-210)
Sec. 9.04.011 No creation of cause of action
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/507
Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right or cause of action against a plan member nor as
giving a right to a third party to institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under law as a legal claim
against a plan member. (2000 Code, sec. 2-211)
Sec. 9.04.012 Conflicting regulations
Should any other ordinance, resolution or policy conflict with provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall
prevail. (2000 Code, sec. 2-213)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, AND APPLICABILITY*
Sec. 10.01.001 Title
The City of Plainview Subdivision Regulations shall be known as, and may be referred to as, “the Plainview Subdivision
Regulations” or “this chapter.”
Sec. 10.01.002 Authority
This chapter is adopted:
(1) Under the authority of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including but not limited to the
following chapters of the Texas Local Government Code (TLGC), as amended:
(A) Chapter 42, Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of Municipalities;
(B) Chapter 212, Municipal Regulation of Subdivisions and Property Development; and
(C) Chapter 245, Issuance of Local Permits.
(2) Pursuant to the provisions of the city's home rule charter.
Sec. 10.01.003 Purposes
The purposes of this chapter are to:
(1) Ensure that new development is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan;
(2) Provide for the harmonious development of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) by
properly aligning all existing and planned streets along with other necessary municipal infrastructure;
(3) Promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;
(4) Provide adequate provision for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewage and
other facilities;
(5) Ensure that development is compatible with and properly integrated into existing and future
neighborhoods;
(6) Assure that facilities to be accepted and maintained by the city are properly located and constructed;
(7) Ensure that subdivisions and subdivision improvements are designed to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/507
(A) Reduce potential impacts on street congestion by:
(i) Providing alternative travel routes;
(ii) Promoting alternative modes of transportation; and
(iii) Lessening overall vehicle miles traveled;
(B) Promote the orderly layout and use of land;
(C) Secure safety from fire and other dangers;
(D) Protect groundwater and surface water resources from contamination; and
(E) Facilitate adequate infrastructure development for neighborhood schools, parks, and playgrounds.
Sec. 10.01.004 Jurisdiction
Unless otherwise noted all provisions of this chapter apply only within the corporate limits of the City of Plainview,
Texas and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
State law references–Extraterritorial jurisdiction of municipalities in counties that regulate subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 242.001; extension of subdivision rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.003.
Sec. 10.01.005 Applicability
(a) Generally. Any owner of land located inside the corporate limits of the City of Plainview or within its ETJ wishing
to subdivide such land, into two or more parts for any and all land uses, shall submit to the planning and zoning
commission an application which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter.
(b) Exemption. Parcels of property being subdivided are exempt from the requirements of this chapter when each new
parcel of property will:
(1) Be ten acres or greater;
(2) Have public road frontage; and
(3) Have no public improvement dedicated to the property.
Sec. 10.01.006 Consistency with zoning and comprehensive plan
(a) Comprehensive plan. All subdivisions shall be consistent with the city's most recent comprehensive plan.
(b) Zoning.
(1) Within the corporate limits, no land contained in any proposed subdivision shall be reserved for any
land use other than a use permitted by article 14.03, Land Uses, of this Code of Ordinances for the zoning
district in which the land is located.
(2) .All subdivisions shall conform with article 14.05, Lot, Density, Design, and Historic Standards, of the
city's Code of Ordinances.
(3) No subdivision design shall be approved that requires a change in zoning until the rezoning request is
officially approved.
Sec. 10.01.007 Enactment and effective date
(a) Enactment. The enactment of this chapter shall repeal and replace the City of Plainview Subdivision Regulations,
as adopted on October 24, 1989, by Ordinance 89-2807, replaced by Ordinance 19-3686, hereafter titled the City of
Plainview Subdivision Regulations Ordinance, and adopted by the city council on January 22, 2019.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/507
(b) Effective date. The effective date of January 25, 2019 shall be the date when this chapter enters into the full force
of the law.
Sec. 10.01.008 Transition standards
(a) Development approvals predating code's effective date.
(1) It is the city's intent to respect existing development approvals. Approved development may be carried
out within the scope of the development approval, including applicable standards in effect at the time of
approval, provided that the approval was valid and has not lapsed per section 10.05.005, Inactive and Expired
Applications.
(2) This section does not prevent the city from:
(A) Adopting or enforcing building codes; or
(B) Prohibiting the use of building materials that have been proven to be inherently dangerous.
(b) Pending applications.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) below, each application for development approval shall be
evaluated only by the adopted ordinances and technical regulations in effect at the time that each complete
application is submitted.
(2) Applications that are not pursued with due diligence may expire pursuant to section 10.05.005, Inactive
and Expired Applications.
ARTICLE 10.02 LOT AND SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
Sec. 10.02.001 Development design principles
(a) Generally. The standards of this article shall be applied when applicable to subdivision plat review in the context
of the development design principles of this section. It is the policy of the city that the principles of this section be
applied to the maximum extent possible without imposing burdensome restrictions on the applicant.
(b) Compatibility. A proposed subdivision plat shall be designed in a way that:
(1) Provides appropriate space for buffers and transitions between incompatible land uses;
(2) Provides vehicular and pedestrian linkages between residential uses and nonresidential uses;
(3) Protects neighboring property from stormwater runoff;
(4) Anticipates and provides for future vehicular and pedestrian connections to neighboring properties that
are likely to be developed or redeveloped with similar or supportive land uses within ten years;
(5) Minimizes interference with existing access to adjacent and nearby properties, unless new and
improved access is provided by the proposed development; and
(6) Does not reduce the effectiveness of public utilities that are provided to surrounding development.
(c) Consistency with city public improvement plans. The proposed site development plan or subdivision plat
shall conform to all adopted and applicable capital improvement plans of the city with regard to public infrastructure and
facilities, including trails and parks.
(d) Future development. The proposed subdivision plat shall be designed in a way that shows how future development
of adjacent parcels under common ownership will relate to the parcel that is the subject of the application in terms of
transportation linkages and utilities.
Sec. 10.02.002 Subdivision and street names
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/507
(a) Naming parameters. Developers have the right and responsibility to determine any and all newly proposed street
and subdivision names so long as:
(1) Duplicative names prohibited. The name of either a street or subdivision is not duplicative or is
phonetically similar to an existing street or subdivision name, irrespective of the use of suffix. For example,
Pecan Street and Pecan Avenue would be considered duplicative. Additionally, West Austin Street would be
considered duplicative from East Austin Street.
(2) Street alignment. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named
streets, shall bear the assigned name and numbering scheme of the existing streets.
(b) Names placed on subdivision plat. Proposed street names shall be clearly depicted on any and all required
subdivision plat submittals.
(c) Emergency management coordination. The administrator shall forward the information to the proper entities for
additional review as it relates to addressing for dispatching of emergency services.
Sec. 10.02.003 Streets and public rights-of-way
(a) Subdivision plat approval required. No concrete shall be poured for streets, structures, or curbs and gutters, nor
shall any flexible base material be placed on the street subgrade, or asphaltic surface applied without approval being
granted the right to do so via compliance with this chapter and all other development regulations of the city.
(b) Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend all existing major streets and existing
secondary and local access streets or terminate in accordance with subsection (h).
(c) Future street access. If the lots or tracts of land in the proposed subdivision are large enough to permit further
subdivision, consideration must be given to possible future street openings and access to future lots which could result.
(d) Through traffic. Local streets shall be designed so as to discourage high-speed or through traffic.
(e) Topography. The street system shall bear a logical relationship to the natural topography of the ground.
(f) Right-of-way minimum width. See table 10.02.003.
(g) Street pavement minimum width. See table 10.02.003.
Table 10.02.003. Right-of-Way and Street Pavement Widths by Street Classification Type1
Street Types Right-of-Way Width Minimum 2 Proposed Pavement Street Width
Minimum
Arterial street (divided) 78 ft. 46 ft.
Arterial street (undivided) 76 ft. 46 ft.
Collector street 64 ft. 40 ft.
Local street 60 ft. 36 ft.
1 Additional right-of-way width and/or street pavement width may be required to accommodate the existing rights-of-way and existing street
pavement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/507
2 “Right-of-way width minimum” shall be measured from front lot line to front lot line of opposite lots. See figure 10.02.003A, Right-of-
Way and Pavement Width Minimums, for required cross-sections.
Figure 10.02.003A. Right-of-Way Width
(h) Dead-end streets, turn-arounds, and cul-de-sacs.
(1) Generally.
(A) Permanent dead-end streets without a cul-de-sac are expressly prohibited.
(B) Cul-de-sacs and temporary turn-arounds are not allowed except as provided in this subsection.
(C) Dead-end streets, turn-arounds, and cul-de-sacs are expressly prohibited on collector or arterial
streets.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/507
(2) Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall meet the following standards:
(A) Maximum length. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street with a permanent turn-around shall
be 600 feet, measured from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street to the center point of the turnaround
circle. The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the cul-de-sac
street from a point beginning at the intersection of the cul-de-sac street and the intersecting street to its
furthest point from the point of the beginning.
Figure 10.02.003B. Maximum Cul-De-Sac Length
(B) Minimum radii. The minimum radii of cul-de-sacs shall be at least:
(i) Residential (RA, SR, MR, MF, MH zoning districts): 50 ft. pavement; 70 ft. right-of-way.
(ii) Nonresidential (CU, CB, NC, GC, LI, HI zoning districts): 90 ft. pavement; 100 ft. right-ofway.
(3) Temporary turn-arounds. In order to avoid requiring a cul-de-sac, dead-end streets may terminate in a
temporary turn-around if the following requirements are met:
(A). The temporary turn-around is being installed only as a temporary measure until the remaining
phase(s) of a multiphase project can be completed.
(B) Adequate surety is provided for both the temporary turn-around construction and the future
development.
(C) A 50-foot radius is installed for the temporary turn-around, which allows for emergency vehicles
to turn around without backing.
(D) The turn-around shall have a paved surface and a base that meets the requirements for a public
street. A gravel surface may be allowed if the temporary turn-around will be in use for less than 12
months and security is provided to pave the turn-around if the anticipated connection is not made within
12 months.
(E) The following note should be placed on the subdivision plat: “Cross-hatched area is a temporary
easement for turn-around until street is extended (give direction).”
(F) A temporary easement is recorded using the form provided in appendix B, Required Dedication
Statement.
(i) Street intersections.
(1) Angle of intersection. All streets shall intersect at a 90-degree angle. However, where natural resources,
soils, or other site conditions justify variations from right angles, intersections between 70 and 110 degrees
may be allowed, provided that the intersection is as close to 90 degrees as possible. Variations of more than
five degrees must be approved by the planning and zoning commission.
(2) Centerline tie with existing streets. Each new street intersecting with or extending to meet an existing
street shall be tied to the existing street:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/507
(A) With dimensions and bearings to show relationship; and
(B) Either on centerline or offset by the following distances:
(i) Local street: 125 ft.
(ii) Collector street: 150 ft.
(iii) Arterial street: 150 ft.
(j) Curb and gutter. Curb and gutters shall be provided along both sides of the all local streets in accordance with the
City of Plainview Street Design Technical Standards.
(k) Street pavement. All streets shall be paved in accordance with the City of Plainview Street Design Technical
Standards.
(l) Street lighting. Street lighting shall be provided and shall meet the design standards for intensity, location, and type
as provided in the City of Plainview Street Design Technical Standards.
(m) Street name and traffic signs. All street name signs and traffic signs shall be provided by the city.
(n) Partial streets/half-streets. Partial streets and half-streets shall be prohibited except to complete abutting partial
streets or half-streets that were dedicated prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(o) Private streets.
(1) Private streets are permitted only if they meet all city requirements including, but not limited to this
chapter and the City of Plainview Street Design Technical Standards.
(2) Gated streets shall provide access for entry via knoxbox, electronic card, or similar access.
(p) Fire lanes. The city may require the applicant to provide areas reserved and identified for fire lanes or emergency
access ways for certain commercial, apartment, industrial and other uses.
(q) Traffic impact analysis.
(1) Where a proposed new development may create either increased traffic, intersection congestion, or any
transportation concern, the city may require the developer to fund a traffic impact analysis.
(2) The developer may be required to share with the city the cost of any traffic management facility as is
roughly proportional to the new development.
(r) Public rights-of-way.
(1) Required.
(A) Generally. Alleys shall be required along the rear line of all lots to be used in all residential,
commercial, and industrial districts.
(B) Exception. Where other definite and assured provisions can be made for service access, such as
off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the use proposed, then the
planning and zoning commission may waive the alley requirement in subsection (r)(1)(A) for properties
within either a commercial or industrial district.
(2) Width.
(A) Residential. Alleys in residential zoning districts (RA, SR, MR, MF, MH) shall not be less than
20 feet in right-of-way width and all 20 feet must be paved with either concrete or asphalt materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/507
(B) Commercial and industrial. Service alleys in commercial and industrial districts shall be a
minimum of 25 feet in right-of-way width and must be concrete paved 20 feet in width.
(3) Cut-offs. In case of two intersecting alleys or the intersection of an alley and street, a cut-off shall be
required at each corner. Cut-offs shall be triangles having two equal sides each of which shall not be less than
20 feet in length or of such greater distance to provide safe vehicular movement.
(4) Dead-end alleys. No permanent dead-end alleys shall be permitted.
(5) Connectivity. Alleys and cul-de-sacs in new subdivisions shall connect to and/or be aligned with alleys
and cul-de-sacs in adjacent subdivisions wherever feasible.
(s) Technical standards. All streets shall be built in accordance with the City of Plainview Street Design Technical
Standards.
Sec. 10.02.004 Sidewalks
(a) Required width. Sidewalks not less than five feet in width shall be required on both sides of all city streets.
(b) Distance from roadway. With the exception of properties located in the Central Business (CB) zoning district,
sidewalks shall be constructed at least five feet from the off of [sic] the edge of the curb. This distance is measured from
the back edge of the curb to the front edge of the sidewalk. If the street does not have a curb, then the measurement will
be from the back edge of the road to the front edge of the sidewalk.
(c) Crosswalks required. Crosswalks are required at the intersections of the following classifications of streets:
(1) Expressway and arterial.
(2) Arterial and arterial.
(3) Arterial and collector.
(d) Technical standards. All sidewalks shall be built in accordance with the City of Plainview Street Design Technical
Standards.
(e) Maintenance. Owners of property that abut a public sidewalk shall:
(1) Maintain the property between the edge of the pavement or the inside of the curb and the owner's
property line; and
(2) Provide for continuing compliance with section 14.05.006(b)(1) [section 14.05.006(c)(1)], Obstruction
Prohibited.
Sec. 10.02.005 Blocks
(a) Block length.
(1) Minimum. Block length shall be a minimum of 500 feet.
(2) Maximum. Blocks shall not be more than 1,200 feet in length.
(b) Block width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots with a block width no less than 220 feet,
except where reverse frontage lots are located along an arterial or collector street or where such an arrangement is
prevented by the size or other inherent site conditions on the property.
(c) Block numbering. The city reserves the right to provide any and all block numbers. Applicants need not submit
plats and/or plans with block numbering.
Sec. 10.02.006 Lots
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/507
(a) Lot size. All lots and tract sizes must conform to the regulations of article 14.05, Lot, Density, and Design
Standards, including minimum area, width, and depth.
(b) Corner lots.
(1) Corner lots with a width of less than 65 feet are to be at least 5 feet wider than average of interior lots
in the block.
(2) Corner lots with a width of less than 75 feet adjacent to an arterial street or expressway, as defined by
appendix A, Thoroughfare Map, are to be at least 15 feet wider than the average of interior lots in the block.
(c) Lots on expressway or arterial streets. Lots facing or backing on expressway or arterial streets shall be at least five
feet deeper than average lots facing on collector or local streets.
(d) Lots on drainage easements. Minimum usable lot depths for lots backing on natural drainage easements shall be
not less than 50 feet measured between rear lot line and drainage easement.
(e) Lot shape.
(1) Lots shall be as rectangular as is practicable.
(2) The ratio of depth to width shall not exceed two and one-half (2.5).
(3) Irregular shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet frontage requirements for
the appropriate zoning district.
(f) Lot lines. Side lots shall be approximately at right angles to the centerlines of abutting streets. Alternative
configurations may be approved to accomplish a public purpose, such as the preservation of natural resources.
(g) Lot facing.
(1) Street frontage. Each lot shall be provided with adequate access to an existing or proposed public street
by frontage on such street not to be less than 40 feet.
(2) Through lots.
(A) Generally. Through lots are prohibited.
(B) Exception. Through lots are permitted only under the following circumstances:
(i) The lot is not within a rural or residential zoning district (RA, SR, MR, MF, MH);
(ii) The lot fronts on one side to an expressway (see appendix A, Thoroughfare Map); and
(iii) A front building line shall be adhered to for each street.
(3) Front facing. Wherever feasible, each lot should face the front of a similar lot across the street. In
general, an arrangement placing adjacent lots at right angles to each other should be avoided.
(h) Lot numbering. The city reserves the right to provide any and all lot numbers. Applicants need not submit plats
and/or plans with lot numbers.
(i) Lot consolidation. Lots may be consolidated provided that:
(1) None or only one of the applicable lots has a primary habitable structure located on it; and
(2) The minimum lot area requirements of the zoning district are met pursuant to either table 14.05.002,
Rural and Residential Development Standards, or table 14.05.003, Nonresidential and Mixed Use
Development Standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/507
Sec. 10.02.007 Easements
(a) Generally. During the development approval process, the city may require a variety of easements on private
property. These easements may include, but are not limited, to the following purposes:
(1) Pedestrian access;
(2) Solid waste removal;
(3) Fire protection or hazard mitigation;
(4) Access to public utilities or drainage areas;
(5) Utilities; and
(6) Drainage.
(b) Utility easements. Easements across lots centered on rear and side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where
necessary and shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide for two utility services (e.g., electric, gas, telephone, etc.) or 14 feet to
20 feet for two or more utility services. Consideration for size and alignment of utility easements shall be stated in the
City of Plainview Street Design Technical Standards.
(c) Water and wastewater easements. Easements required for water and wastewater shall be a minimum of 10 feet in
width in the right-of-way of the front property line or as otherwise specified in the City of Plainview Water and Sewer
Construction Standards.
(d) Drainage and stormwater easements. Whenever necessary for reasons of water drainage the city may require a
stormwater or drainage easement that meets the requirements set out in the City of Plainview Stormwater Standards.
(e) Fire protection easements. Rear fire protection access easements, where necessary to provide adequate protection
for the structure, shall be improved as appropriate for fire protection equipment, at a minimum width of 20 feet, with
appropriate turning radii for the city's fire protection equipment as determined by the fire department.
(f) Pedestrian access easements. Pedestrian access easements for sidewalk construction may be required in accordance
with the City of Plainview Street Design Technical Standards.
(g) Encroachments and removal of encroachments. No structures or permanent encroachments shall be allowed to be
located within the area of any easement required by this section. While the city or utility provider benefiting from the
easement will make efforts to minimize disturbances, both, however, shall have the right to remove any encroachment,
structure, fence, landscaping (including overhanging limbs, shrubbery, or vegetation), or other improvements placed
upon or over such easement. The city and/or utility provider shall not be obligated to restore or replace any such
encroachment but shall restore any disturbed ground surfaces with seeding. The city may assess the cost of removing an
unauthorized improvement from an easement against the landowner, including the placing of a lien on the property.
(h) Maintenance of easements. The responsibility for the regular maintenance of the ground surface (meaning moving
and removal of trash cans) in any easement shall rest with the owner of the property within which the easement exists.
Sec. 10.02.008 Access management
(a) Access to major streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains the right-of-way of an expressway (see
appendix A, Thoroughfare Map), drainage way or railroad, the planning and zoning commission shall require either:
(1) A public service street that meets or exceeds the Texas Department of Transportation Roadway
Standards that is parallel to and on both sides of such right-of-way; or
(2) A lot without means of vehicular access.
(b) Driveway restrictions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/507
(1) Rear and side driveway access. Rear and side driveway access to expressway, arterial, and collector
streets (see appendix A, Thoroughfare Map) shall be prohibited.
(2) Distance between driveways and intersections. Driveways shall be located a minimum of 35 feet away
from the intersection of streets or other driveways, measured from the curb return of the street to the curb
return of the portion of the driveway closest to the street.
(3) Access points. No lot shall have more than two driveways accessing the same street.
(c) Driveway design requirements. See City of Plainview Street Design Technical Standards.
Sec. 10.02.009 Survey and monument specifications
(a) Information required.
(1) Generally. The following shall be used for mapping natural resources or other features of subdivision
plats, site development plans, or other plans or plats as otherwise required by this section. In general,
boundaries shall be measured as follows:
(A) Measurements for the boundary are to be made horizontally, perpendicular from, or radial from
any feature or point.
(B) Boundaries that are dependent on elevation shall be based upon on-site elevations and shall not
be interpolated.
(2) Water bodies and watercourses.
(A) Floodplains. All development within the city, not part of a previously approved plan or plat, shall
show the boundary of the floodplain and floodway, if such exists on the site. Such delineation shall be
by a registered professional land surveyor.
(B) Streams. Streams (perennial, intermittent, mapped, and unmapped) with identifiable banks and
beds shall have their boundaries set at the top of the bank.
(C) Wetlands. Wetlands shall be measured by the criteria of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
(D) Other water bodies/watercourses. Initial identification of other waterbodies/ watercourses not
otherwise classified shall be made using the U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle maps or more accurate
information, as available. Field survey verification to determine evidence and location of channelized
flow is required for subdivision plats and site development plans.
(3) Topography. Topographic lines shall be required only when the construction of a building is within the
100-year floodway and all other requirements permitting the land to be developed have been satisfied. When
topographic lines are required they shall be drawn at one-foot contour intervals unless such intervals are
impractical due to essentially flat topography.
(b) Monumentation. Survey monuments shall be required.
(1) Monument markers. All boundary corners, angle points, or points of curvature or tangency, including
block corners, lot corners, street intersections, and all angle points and points of curvature in street lines, must
be monumented by a surveyor using sufficient, stable and reasonably permanent survey markers.
(2) Monument size and material. Each monument shall be described in such a way as to clearly define the
size, type of material, and the nature of the monument (i.e., three-fourths-inch iron pipe, five-eighths-inch
iron rod, cotton spindle, mag nail, etc.).
(3) Standards. All monuments shall be set to the standard of the Texas Board of Professional Land
Surveying Practices Act and the general rules of practices and procedures of the state board of professional
land surveying and shall bear reference caps as indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/507
(4) Benchmarking.
(A) Location. A benchmark monument or survey marker of a sufficient, stable, and reasonably
permanent nature shall be found or placed within the boundaries of or within 300 feet of the boundaries
of the subdivision for project elevation control.
(B) Identification. The placement of the benchmark with the location, description, and elevation of
the benchmark shall be identified on the face of the plat.
(C) Reference. All project benchmarks and all project elevations shall be referenced to the published
National Geodetic Survey (NGS) datum adjustment of the current Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the property location. Equations may be used to
translate other datum adjustments to the required adjustment.
Sec. 10.02.010 Stormwater and flood management
(a) Stormwater. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Plainview Stormwater Control
Technical Standards.
(b) Flood management. Any parcel of property within the city which is also within the most recent Federal Emergency
Management (FEMA) 100-year flood zone will not be considered for subdivision until adequate drainage or flood
management protection has been provided.
Sec. 10.02.011 Water and sewer extensions and connections
(a) Connections required. Connection to the city's water system and the city's sewer system is required for all
properties within the city limits. See section 13.03.003, Connection to Existing Main, section 13.03.004, Extensions of
Mains, and the City of Plainview Water/Sewer Construction Standards.
(b) Approval required to cover. No sanitary sewer, water, or storm sewer pipe shall be covered without approval of the
director of public works, or his representative.
ARTICLE 10.03 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS
Sec. 10.03.001 Development and public improvement agreements
The city shall not participate in the cost of any new utility or transportation improvement:
(1) Outside the corporate limits of the city; or
(2) Without a signed and agreed-upon development agreement with a developer and contractor.
Sec. 10.03.002 Performance guarantees
(a) Applicability. An applicant is required to furnish the requirements of this section when proposing to either:
(1) Add infrastructure that will be dedicated to the city; or
(2) Temporarily remove and/or reinstall any infrastructure that is either owned by the city or is proposed to
be deeded to the city.
(b) Financial agreement. If required by subsection (a), the applicant shall furnish a good and sufficient surety bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow agreement (as approved by the city attorney) to provide funds, to indemnify the
city against any repairs which may become necessary for any part of the construction work performed in connection with
the subdivision, arising from defective workmanship or materials used therein, for a full period of one year from the date
of final acceptance of the entire project.
(c) Public acceptance. Final acceptance will be withheld until said sufficient funds are furnished to the public works
director for approval. The surety funds shall have attached thereto a copy of the contract for such improvements and
such other information and data necessary to determine the validity and enforceability of such bond.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/507
(d) Permits. No permits shall be issued by the administrator for any development project that requires a performance
guarantee until the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) have been satisfied.
Sec. 10.03.003 Property owner associations
(a) Generally. The city shall have a limited right of approval concerning the incorporation documents for a property
owners' association that is proposed to be enacted within its city limits. This right of approval is limited only to the items
specifically listed in subsection (c) below which directly affect the city.
(b) No dispute intervention. The city will not seek to intervene in purely private disputes pertaining to a private
covenant, condition, or restriction.
(c) Review of agreement. The developer shall submit to the city attorney all proposed property owners' association
incorporation documents to ensure that the following provisions are included in a format that is acceptable to the city:
(1) All items that are required by either this chapter, chapter 14, Zoning, or any additional conditions of
approval, which may include specific rights of enforcement being granted to the city.
(2) Membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for all owners of property in the
subdivision or condominium.
(3) Dues are payable to the property owners' association at regular intervals.
(4) The property owners' association has lien rights with respect to unpaid dues.
(5) The property owners' association has a perpetual existence.
(6) The property owners' association has all responsibilities for the maintenance of common open space,
green space, and other facilities provided for benefit and enjoyment of members.
(7) The property owners' association has the capacity to sue and be sued.
(8) Plats and site plans shall be approved subject to the submission of a legal instrument setting forth a plan
or manner of permanent care and maintenance of open spaces, recreational areas and other communally
owned facilities.
(9) A homeowners' association (HOA) or other similar management entity shall be organized as a nonprofit
corporation with automatic membership in the HOA when property is purchased. This shall be specified in
the covenants which run with the land and which bind all subsequent owners. Covenants for maintenance
assessments shall also run with the land. Included in the maintenance covenants shall be procedures for
changing them at stated intervals. Deeds shall also reference the rights and responsibilities of property owners
to the HOA. The HOA shall also be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of all
commonly held facilities through the use of a pro-rata formula for all property owners.
(d) Approval. Approval of any property owners' association shall occur via the Planned Development (PD) zoning
district. See section 14.02.006, Planned Development District Regulations.
ARTICLE 10.04 ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES
Sec. 10.04.001 Administrator
(a) Right of inspection. The administrator is empowered to enter any building, structure, or premises in the city upon
which a development or land use is located, as follows:
(1) Entry shall be for the purpose of inspection to ensure compliance;
(2) Inspection shall be performed during business hours, unless an emergency exists; and
(3) Inspection shall be made only after:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/507
(A) Contact and permission is granted by the owner or tenant; or
(B) An order from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Recommendations. The administrator shall make a report and recommendations with regard to all applications for
development approval, except those which are decided by the director of public works.
(c) Interpretation. The administrator shall have the right to interpret provisions of this chapter. Should an applicant not
agree with the administrator's interpretation, he or she has the right to appeal as per section 10.07.008, Appeals.
(d) Decisions. The administrator shall:
(1) Establish deadlines for how far in advance an initial application must be submitted to be reviewed by
either the city council and/or the planning and zoning commission;
(2) Provide application materials for applicants;
(3) Schedule all development review committee (DRC) meetings;
(4) Decide all administrative approvals as defined in section 10.05.001, Table of Administrative and Public
Meeting Approvals; and
(5) Submit in writing to an applicant any specific conditions required as a part of conditional approval for
any and all applications.
Sec. 10.04.002 City council
(a) Home rule charter. The city council is established by City of Plainview Home Rule Charter, article II, City
Council.
(b) Powers and duties. The city council reserves to itself all of the powers and duties that are not expressly delegated
within this chapter of the Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 10.04.003 City manager
The city manager is responsible for the city's minor plat amendment process and the final plat vacation process. See
section 10.06.005, Minor Plat Amendments, and section 10.07.004, Final Plat Vacation.
Sec. 10.04.004 Development review committee (DRC)
(a) Generally. The development review committee (DRC) is established for the following purposes:
(1) Administering the requirements of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances;
(2) Ensure that all information necessary to determine compliance with this chapter of the Code of
Ordinances has been provided;
(3) Formulating staff recommendations;
(4) Rectifying review comments between city departments and referral agencies; and
(5) Providing cohesive and timely review of subdivision applications.
(b) Membership.
(1) The DRC shall be comprised of the city staff designated by the administrator and representatives from
each referral agency that reviews development projects in conjunction with the city.
(2) Based on the nature of a development, DRC meetings can be limited to those staff and agencies
affected by the development, or can be expanded to include additional agencies or staff with review
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/507
responsibilities.
(c) Powers. The DRC shall have the role to review and provide technical recommendations concerning any
application specified in this chapter of the Code of Ordinances.
(d) Meetings. DRC meetings shall be convened by the administrator, as necessary.
Sec. 10.04.005 Director of public works
(a) Right of inspection. The director of public works is empowered to enter any building, structure, or premises upon
which a development or land use is located, as follows:
(1) Entry shall be for the purpose of inspection to ensure compliance with the any construction inspections
including, but not limited to, the requirements of subsection (b) of this section;
(2) Inspection shall be performed during business hours, unless an emergency exists; and
(3) Inspection shall be made only after:
(A) Contact and permission granted by the owner or tenant; or
(B) An order from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The city, via the director of public works, shall be given the opportunity to inspect all phases of
subdivision construction.
(5) The applicant, or his contractor, shall maintain diligent contact with the director of public works, or his
designee, during construction of improvements.
(b) Recommendations. The director of public works shall make a report and recommendations with regard to all
applications for development approval, except those which are decided by the administrator.
(c) Decisions. The director of public works shall decide all administrative approvals as defined in section 10.05.001,
Table of Administrative and Public Meeting Approvals.
Sec. 10.04.006 Planning and zoning commission
(a) Creation, membership, rules, and regulations. See section 14.10.005, Planning and Zoning Commission.
(b) Decisions. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct all administrative or public hearing approvals and
decide as defined in section 10.05.001, Table of Administrative and Public Meeting Approvals.
State law reference–Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.007.
ARTICLE 10.05 STANDARDIZED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
Sec. 10.05.001 Table of administrative and public body approvals
Table 10.05.001. Administrative and Public Body Approvals
Permit/Plan Required For Timing Exceptions Issued By Fee Cross Reference 1
Administrative Approval
Building permit Construction,
reconstruction,
Prior to
commencement of
None Administrator See sec. 3.03.004,
Building Permit Fees
Art. 3.03, Buildings, and
sec. 10.06.001, Building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/507
improvement, or repair of
any building or structure for
which an additional permit
or approval is required
construction Permit
Certificate of occupancy Occupancy of buildings and
structures including new,
reconstruction, and the
conversion of residential to
nonresidential and vice
versa
Prior to occupancy None Administrator $25 Sec. 14.12.002 [14.12.003],
Certificate of Occupancy
Concept plan Preliminary plat
applications, where due to
the size and/or complexity
of the project, a
development phasing
process is required
48 hours prior to a
pre-application
conference
Plat applications
that require only
one phase
Administrator No fee in addition to
preliminary plat fee
Sec. 10.06.003, Concept
Plan
Floodplain development
permit
See sec. 3.13.032, Permit Development Procedures
Minor plat amendment Amendments to plats which
fall under TLGC sec.
212.016, Amending Plat
Whenever
requirements can be
identified as being met
None City manager or
planning and zoning
commission
$125 per plat, plus $5
per lot
Sec. 10.06.005, Minor Plat
Amendments
Public Body Approval
Preliminary plat Subdivision of real property Required prior to final
plat and after concept
plan
See TLGC
chapter 212,
Municipal
Regulation of
Subdivisions and
Property
Development,
and sec.
10.07.003,
Consolidated
preliminary and
final plats
Planning and zoning
commission
$150 per plat, plus $5
per lot
Sec. 10.07.001, Preliminary
Plats
Final plat Subdivision of real property Required after
preliminary plat and
prior or concurrent
with site development
plan
See TLGC
chapter 212,
Municipal
Regulation of
Subdivisions and
Property
Development
Planning and zoning
commission
$150 per plat, plus $5
per lot
Sec. 10.07.002, Final Plats
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/507
Consolidated preliminary
and final plat
Subdivision of real property
(only applicable for projects
meeting the requirements of
sec. 10.07.003)
Required after concept
plan
N/A Planning and zoning
commission
$150 per plat, plus $5
per lot
Sec. 10.07.003,
Consolidated Preliminary
and Final Plats
Final plat vacation Vacating a previously
approved subdivision of real
property
Prior to the sale of real
property or with all
owners' consent
None Planning and zoning
commission
$125 per plat Sec. 10.07.004, Final Plat
Vacation, and TLGC sec.
212.013, Vacating Plat
Replats Subdivision of real property After plat approval
when edits to a plat
are necessary
See TLGC
chapter 212,
Municipal
Regulation of
Subdivisions and
Property
Development
Planning and zoning
commission
$150 per plat, plus $5
per lot
Sec. 10.07.005, Replats
Text amendments Text additions and changes
to this chapter of the city's
Code of Ordinances
N/A None City council None Sec. 10.07.006, Text
Amendments
Variance Deviation from the
standards of this chapter
Prior to a building
permit for
improvements which a
variance is required
None Planning and zoning
commission
$50 Sec. 10.07.007, Variances
Appeals to planning and
zoning commission
Appeals from decisions of
city staff (administrator,
public works director, etc.)
Within 30 days of the
decision appealed
None Planning and zoning
commission
$200 Sec. 10.07.008, Appeals
Appeals to city council Appeals from decisions of
the planning and zoning
commission
Within 30 days of the
decision appealed
None City council $200 Sec. 10.07.008, Appeals
Table notes:
1 Cross references are provided for convenience only and do not exempt the application from complying with all applicable standards of this
chapter, any other provision within the city's Code of Ordinances, or state law.
Sec. 10.05.002 Pre-application conference
(a) Applicant responsibilities. An applicant shall:
(1) Consult early and informally with the administrator;
(2) Avail himself to the advice and assistance of the administrator; and
(3) Submit a concept plan, in accordance with section 10.06.003, Concept Plan, to the administrator at
least 48 hours in advance of the pre-application conference.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/507
(b) Administrator responsibilities. The administrator shall:
(1) Informally confer with the applicant; and
(2) Advise and assist the applicant in understanding and interpreting the city's land development
requirements.
Sec. 10.05.003 Application filing process
Every process established by this chapter of the Code of Ordinances shall be submitted on a form approved by the city
with the appropriate application fee. The city may revise any applicable form periodically to comply with any new or
revised requirements of this chapter.
Sec. 10.05.004 Application completeness review
(a) Generally. Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this chapter, the administrator shall provide the applicant
with a dated receipt. Within five working days of receipt of an application, the administrator shall review the application
and determine if:
(1) The application includes all required materials and information; and
(2) Those parts of the application which are required to be prepared by licensed professionals are, in
fact, prepared by such professionals.
(b) Determination of completeness.
(1) If the application is complete, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of this
determination and require the applicant to provide a sufficient number of copies of the application.
(2) No application is complete until all up-front fees for review are paid.
(3) The time period for processing an application after completeness review does not start unless the fees
are paid.
(4) Once an application has been accepted by the administrator, the filing fee is nonrefundable.
(c) Determination of incompleteness. If the application is incomplete, the administrator shall notify the applicant in
writing, specifying the additional materials or information required to complete the application. The applicant shall
provide these materials within five working days of the request or the application will be withdrawn. An application that
is withdrawn may be re-filed at a future date however a new filing fee will be required.
Sec. 10.05.005 Inactive and expired applications
(a) Generally. Applications must be diligently pursued by the applicant. This section extinguishes applications that
become stale due to applicant inaction.
(b) Expiration of inactive applications.
(1) An application becomes an “inactive application” for failure to comply with this chapter, preventing it
from being docketed for action or approved.
(2) Inactive applications become “stale” after 90 days of the filing of the application if the applicant fails to
address staff or referral agency review comments to allow further processing of an application, unless the
applicant is actively pursuing action to address comments with staff, in which case the application shall
become stale after 180 days of the date when the action was originally requested.
(3) Stale applications are automatically voided six months after the original date when the action was
requested if the applicant fails to take action or requests an extension of time for cause.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/507
(4) If a plat becomes stale and is voided, application fees will not be refunded and a new application and
fees are required to file a subsequent plat.
(c) Extension of time.
(1) Prior to the expiration of an inactive plat, the application may be extended for up to six months upon
written request of the applicant for cause only; and
(2) If the city amends this chapter or adopts other regulations during the period of time when the
application was inactive or stale, the application shall:
(A) Not be subject to compliance to the new regulations until the original application is considered to
be voided; and
(B) The application shall be subject to the new regulations and ordinances if the period of time to
request an extension lapses.
(3) Stale applications shall expire:
(A) After a six-month extension lapses; or
(B) If an extension was not requested.
(d) Effect of expiration. Applications that expire pursuant to this section are automatically null and void without
further notice or action by the city.
Sec. 10.05.006 Public notice
(a) Generally.
(1) Notice by publication, when required, shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
Texas Local Government Code (TLGC).
(2) Notice by mail, when required, shall be provided to each owner and other affected persons as required
by law, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll of real property.
(3) Table 10.05.006, Required Notice, sets out the specific notice requirements for each type of application.
Table 10.05.006. Required Notice
Type of Application By Mail By Publication
Preliminary plats Not required Required
Final plats Not required Required
Consolidated preliminary and final plats Not required Required
Final plat vacation Not required Not required
Replats Required 1 Required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/507
Text amendment Not required Required
Variance Not required Required
Appeals Not required Required
Notes:
1 Required per Texas Local Government Code (TLGC) section 212.015.
(b) Content of notice. Notice shall include:
(1) The date, time, and place of the hearing;
(2) Staff contact and phone number;
(3) A description, address, or location of the matter to be heard; and
(4) A statement that the public is invited to review and comment on the application.
(c) Time of hearing. For all matters properly brought before the city council or the planning and zoning commission,
the city shall select a reasonable time and place for such hearing; provided, however, that such time shall be no later than
30 days following the submission of a complete application per section 10.05.004, Application Completeness Review.
(d) Computation of time. In computing the time periods for notice, the day of mailing, publication, or posting shall not
be counted, but the day of the public hearing shall be counted.
(e) Constructive notice.
(1) Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice
if there was a bona fide attempt to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice shall
be limited to errors in a location map, typographic or grammatical errors, or errors of actual acreage that do
not impede communication of the notice to affected parties.
(2) Failure of a party to receive written notice, when notice has been actually mailed, shall not invalidate
subsequent action.
(3) If questions arise at the public hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the administrative body shall
direct city staff to make a formal finding as to whether there was substantial compliance with the notice
requirements of this chapter and the TLGC. City staff's findings shall be made available to the administrative
body prior to final action on the request.
ARTICLE 10.06 ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS: PERMITS AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 10.06.001 Building permit
(a) Generally. The administrator shall be responsible for issuing all building permits.
(b) Record required. No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued
unless the plot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the planning and zoning commission and city
council and filed in the plat records of Hale County, Texas.
(c) Issuance. No building permits shall be issued until all improvements are in place and all necessary plans have been
approved as required by the city's Code of Ordinances, unless a developer has entered into a binding development
agreement with the city that has been authorized by the city council pursuant to article 10.03, Special Agreements. See
also article 3.03, Buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/507
Sec. 10.06.002 Certificate of occupancy
Cross reference: Section 14.12.002 [Section 14.12.003], Certificate of Occupancy.
Sec. 10.06.003 Concept plan
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the concept plan is to ensure that future and directly adjacent growth to the location of a
submittal will be similar in both form and development.
(b) Applicability. A concept plan is required for phased large-scale development projects. When property proposed for
a subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned or controlled by the subdivider, a concept plan shall be required
showing the conceptual layout of the entire area of the tract, including the tentative layout of streets, blocks, drainage,
water, sewer, and other improvements.
(c) Procedure.
(1) Concept plans are to be prepared for and presented in accordance with section 10.05.002, Pre-
Application Conference, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies, as applicable.
(2) The administrator shall be responsible for acceptance of the proposed concept plan which will become
part of the applicant's official application for a preliminary plat.
(3) When a concept plan is required, every subsequent preliminary plat must substantially comply with the
approved concept plan.
(4) The overall layout of the concept plan shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved
subdivision plat.
Sec. 10.06.004 Floodplain development permit
Cross reference: Section 3.13.032, Permit Development Procedures.
Sec. 10.06.005 Minor plat amendments
(a) Applicant responsibilities. The applicant for a minor plat amendment shall submit to the city manager a statement:
(1) Detailing the specific minor plat amendment requested; and
(2) Identifying the specific subsection of TLGC section 212.016, Amending Plat, that permits the plat to be
amended without requiring a replat.
(b) City manager responsibilities. The city manager may:
(1) Administratively approve minor plat amendments when the requirements of TLGC section 212.016,
Amending Plat, are met; or
(2) Elect to present the plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval, conditional approval, or
denial.
ARTICLE 10.07 PUBLIC BODY APPROVALS: PERMITS AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 10.07.001 Preliminary plats
(a) Applicant responsibilities.
(1) Basic submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit to the city no later than 30 days prior to the
commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered:
(A) Full filing fee;
(B) An electronic copy in PDF format which:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/507
(i) Can be easily printed at a scale of 24 x 36 inches;
(ii) Shall be stamped “Preliminary Plat”; and
(iii) Meets or exceeds the requirements of this subsection;
(C) Letter of transmittal, stating briefly the type of street surfacing, drainage, sanitary facilities, and
water supply proposed;
(D) The name and address of the owner or agent, engineer, and surveyor; and
(E) Supplementary materials as applicable in other sections of this chapter.
(2) Plat specifications. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
(A) Scale. Drawn to not smaller than 200 feet.
(B) Existing features inside subdivision.
(i) Boundary lines. The existing boundary lines (accurate in scale) of the land to be subdivided.
Boundary lines shall be drawn in heavy lines for easy identification.
(ii) Legal description. A metes and bounds description of the property.
(iii) Drainage. The location of existing watercourses, railroads, and other similar drainage and
transportation features.
(iv) Location and width. The location and width of existing streets, alleys, easements, buildings,
structures, sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground structures within or adjacent to the
tract.
(v) Survey. All of the survey requirements of section 10.02.009(a), Information Required, shall
be met.
(C) Existing features outside subdivision.
(i) The platted property lines of adjoining property owners.
(ii) The name and location of adjacent subdivisions, streets, alleys, easements, pipelines, and
watercourses.
(iii) All lines outside of subdivision boundaries are to be dashed lines.
(D) New features inside of subdivision.
(i) The proposed name of the subdivision.
(ii) The location, right-of-way width, and names of proposed streets.
(iii) The approximate width and depth of all lots. If the side lines are not parallel, the
approximate distance between them at the building line and at the narrowest point should be
given.
(iv) The location of building lines, alleys and easements.
(v) The location and approximate size of sites for any educational services, place of public
assembly, park and recreation facility or center, and/or any land use that is required to be approved
as a special use pursuant to either table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by Zoning District, or table
14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/507
(vi) The approximate acreage of the property to be subdivided.
(vii) Key map. A key map showing the relationship of the subdivision to major thoroughfares in
all directions within a distance of at least one mile.
(viii) Title, date, scale, and north arrow. The date, scale, north arrow and title under which the
plat is to be recorded, with the name, address, and phone number of the owner and surveyor
platting the tract.
(b) Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall:
(1) Act within 30 days after the preliminary plat has been properly filed and the requirements of section
10.05.004, Application Completeness Review, have been satisfied.
(2) Conclude one of the following:
(A) Approval;
(B) Conditional approval per subsection (c); or
(C) Disapproval.
(3) Make notes on two copies of the preliminary plat as to the action taken.
(c) Conditional approval.
(1) Conditional approval shall be considered to be the status of a plat or replat until such conditions are
complied with.
(2) All conditions imposed as part of a conditional approval shall be furnished to the applicant in writing.
(d) Effect of no decision. If no decision is rendered by the planning and zoning commission within 30 days after the
preliminary plat has been filed and the requirements of section 10.05.004, Application Completeness Review, have been
satisfied, the preliminary plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved.
(e) Effect of approval.
(1) Approval of the preliminary plat shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout only and shall
not constitute acceptance of the final plat.
(2) Should an applicant decide to not move forward with a final plat application, there is no requirement
that the plat be vacated.
(f) Expiration and extension. Preliminary approval will expire six months after the approval by the planning
commission of the preliminary plat or of sections thereof. The applicant may apply in writing for an extension prior to
the end of such six-month period. This period may be extended six months, but not beyond a total of one year.
(g) Required public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 10.07.002 Final plats
(a) Applicant responsibilities (pre-approval).
(1) Basic submittal requirements. The applicant shall:
(A) Submit a proposal that conforms to a preliminary plat as approved per section 10.07.001,
Preliminary Plats.
(B) Incorporate all changes, directions, and additions imposed by the city through the preliminary
platting process.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/507
(C) Submit a tax certificate as proof that city taxes and city assessments have been paid in full.
(D) Submit to the city no later than 20 days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting the
following documents in an PDF electronic format (printed at a scale of 24 x 36 inches):
(i) A set of detailed plans signed by a State of Texas registered professional engineer showing
streets, alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water mains, sanitary sewers and other engineering
details; and
(ii) One original final plat with all required changes and proper signatures, prepared and signed
by a State of Texas registered land surveyor.
(2) Plat specifications. The final plat shall be sized and contain the information, details and documents as
follows:
(A) Features inside subdivision.
(i) Easements. All easement lines whether existing or proposed shall be dashed.
(ii) Boundary lines. The proposed boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings of the
land to be subdivided. Boundary lines shall be drawn in heavy lines for easy identification.
(iii) Survey. An accurate metes and bounds description of the proposed subdivision, including
reference to the following items that shall be described in a manner sufficient to determine its
specifications per Federal Emergency Management Agency maps:
a. Section or abstract corners;
b. Established subdivisions;
c. Primary control points; and
d. Total acreage being platted.
(iv) Location and width.
a. The location of existing watercourses and other similar drainage features, flood-prone
land, railroads, highways, and other transportation features.
b. True bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines, official monuments
or subdivision corner, which shall be accurately described on the plat.
c. The location and width of all existing and/or proposed streets, alleys, easements, and
right-of-ways.
(v) Deed filing. An accurate location of the subdivision with reference to the deed records of
the county which shall include the volume and page of the deed of the property to be subdivided.
(B) Features outside subdivision.
(i) The name and property lines of adjoining subdivisions and of the adjoining property owners,
together with the respective plat or deed references.
(ii) The name and location of adjacent streets, alleys, easements, and watercourses.
(C) Streets, alleys, easements. The lines and names of all proposed streets or other ways or easements
to be dedicated to public use, with the following engineering and surveying data:
(i) For streets and alleys.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/507
a. Complete curve data (delta, length, radius, tangent, point of curve, point of reverse
curve, point of tangent) shown on the centerline or on each side of street or in a chart on the
plat which lists all such data for each curve.
b. Length and bearings of all tangents.
c. Dimensions from all angle points and points of curve to an adjacent side lot line.
(ii) For watercourses and easements.
a. Distances to be provided along the side lot lines from the front lot line or the high bank
of a stream.
b. Traverse line to be provided along the edge of all large watercourses in a convenient
location, preferably along a utility easement, if paralleling the drainage easement or stream.
(iii) Lots and blocks. The city reserves the right to provide any and all block numbers.
Applicants need not submit plats and/or plans with block numbering.
(D) Reservations. The use and property dimensions of all special reservations identified for the
project, including sites for educational services, places of public assembly, and park and recreation
facilities or centers and/or any land use that is required to be approved as a special use pursuant to either
table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by Zoning District, or table 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning
District.
(E) Monuments and control points.
(i) The description and location of all permanent survey monuments and control points.
(ii) Suitable primary control points to which all dimension(s), bearings and similar data shall be
referred. Dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot.
(F) Key map. A key map showing the relationship of the subdivision to all expressways, arterials, and
collector streets, as defined by appendix A, Thoroughfare Map, in all directions within a distance of at
least one mile.
(G) Title, date, scale, and north arrow. The date, scale, north arrow and subdivision title; name and
address of applicant; name, address and seal of surveyor.
(H) Dedication statement. All dedication statement statements are required to be on the final plat and
must be in the format as shown in appendix B, Required Dedication Statement.
(I) Special restrictions. Where restrictions of use of land, other than those given in these regulations,
are to be imposed by the applicant, such restrictions shall be placed on the final plat or on a separate
instrument filed with the plat.
(J) Subdivision improvements.
(i) Final plats may be approved on portions of a large area of land for residential or other uses
for which a preliminary plat has been approved, provided that the required improvements for said
portion are developed as part of the required improvements for the entire area.
(ii) Water mains, storm sewers, trunk sewers, and any sewage treatment plant shall all be
designated, designed, and built to serve the entire area owned by the applicant or designed and
built in such a manner that they can easily be expanded or extended to serve the entire area.
(iii) Construction plans as required by this section will be designed to serve the entire area
shown on the preliminary plat.
(b) Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/507
(1) Act within 30 days after the final plat has been filed and the requirements of section 10.05.004,
Application Completeness Review, have been satisfied along with the submittal of an engineering plan, if
necessary.
(2) Conclude one of the following:
(A) Approval;
(B) Conditional approval per subsection (c); or
(C) Disapproval.
(3) Make notes on six copies of the final plat as to the action taken.
(c) Conditional approval.
(1) Conditional approval shall be considered to be the status of a plat or replat until such conditions are
complied with.
(2) All conditions imposed as part of a conditional approval, shall be furnished to the applicant in writing.
(d) Administrator. The administrator shall, within 30 days after planning and zoning commission approval:
(1) For plats located inside the corporate limits of the City of Plainview:
(A) Review the final plat for proper signature and approval; and
(B) Record the final plat at the county clerk's office.
(2) For plats located outside of the corporate limits of the City of Plainview but within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction:
(A) Review the final plat for proper signature and approval; and
(B) Forward copies to the Hale County administrative offices for action and approval by the
commissioner's court prior to recording at the county clerk's office.
(3) Retain three copies of plat recorded in the county records for the city files.
(4) Distribute copies as directed.
(e) Applicant responsibilities (post-approval). Upon approval the applicant shall:
(1) Direct his engineer to design, stake and supervise the construction (to be inspected by the city) of
facilities in accordance with approved plans and specifications and these regulations.
(2) Direct his contractor(s) to construct all improvements as identified in the approved engineering plans
and to provide to the city:
(A) A one-year maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the contract price;
(B) Three blue-line sets; and
(C) One original tracing set of “AS-BUILT” plans, checked and corrected by the engineer.
(3) The developer shall install all survey monuments and markers, street paving, curbs and gutters, alley
grading, storm drainage, water and sanitary sewer mains and laterals, fire hydrants, water valves, traffic signs,
streetlights, street signs and sidewalks, within and adjacent to the subdivision, or shall provide cash deposit or
other guarantee acceptable to the city for the payment of the cost of such installations prior to the final
approval by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/507
(f) Expiration of approval. Final approval will expire one year after approval unless the plat has been filed for record.
(g) Filing. No subdivision plat shall be filed or recorded, and no lot in a subdivision inside the corporate limits of the
city shall be improved or sold, until the final plat shall have been approved by the planning and zoning commission.
(h) Public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 10.07.003 Consolidated preliminary and final plats
(a) Applicability. The applicant may, at his option, elect to combine the preliminary plat and final plat, whenever the
following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The tract of land is to be re-subdivided into no more than three lots; and
(2) The dedication of streets, utilities, and infrastructure is not required.
(b) Procedural process. Should an applicant elect to consolidate the preliminary and final plat, the procedural process
of the final plat as designated in section 10.07.002, Final Plats, is applicable.
(c) Public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 10.07.004 Final plat vacation
(a) Applicability. The owner(s) of a tract of property for which a final plat approval has been granted by the city has
the right to vacate the plat:
(1) At any time prior to any lot in the plat being sold; or
(2) If any portion of the final plat has been sold, then all of the owners may request to the city that the final
plat be vacated.
(b) Applicant responsibilities. The applicant for a final plat vacation shall submit to the administrator a statement:
(1) Detailing the specific plat that is requested to be vacated;
(2) Submittal of a signed acknowledged instrument declaring the owner(s) desire that the previously
approved final plat be vacated; and
(3) If applicable, evidence that no portion of the tract, prior to the city's final plat approval, has been sold.
(c) Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall approve the final plat vacation
request if after inspection of the signed acknowledged instrument it concurs that the requirements of Texas Local
Government Code (TLGC) section 212.013, Vacating Plat, have been satisfied.
(d) Administrator. After planning and zoning commission approval of a vacated plat, the administrator shall review
the vacated plat for proper signature and request that the county clerk record the vacated plat pursuant to TLGC section
212.013, Vacating Plat.
(e) Public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 10.07.005 Replats
(a) Application required. Any person who wishes to revise a subdivision plat which has been previously filed for
record must submit an application of the proposed revised plat to the administrator.
(b) Public notice requirement.
(1) After an application is filed for a replat affecting single-family residential property (single-family
detached dwelling, duplex, or townhouse), then the administrator shall cause a notice of the application to be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/507
published in the official newspaper of the city at least 15 days before the date of the planning and zoning
commission meeting at which it is to be considered.
(2) Such notice must include a statement of the time and place at which the planning and zoning
commission will meet to consider the replat and to hear public comments to the revision at a public hearing.
(c) Written notice requirement. Written notice must be sent to all owners of property located within 200 feet of the
original plat. Such notice must be served by depositing the notice, properly addressed and postage paid, at the local post
office.
(d) Legally protested supermajority.
(1) Vote requirement. If a proposed replat is protested (as described in subsection (2) below) the replat
must receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of all members of the
planning and zoning commission.
(2) Legal protest standard. For the legal protest approval standard to be applied, a written petition signed
by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the land immediately adjoining the area covered by the
proposed replat and extending 200 feet from that area, must be filed with the administrator no more than 24
hours prior to the opening of the public hearing.
(e) Public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
(f) Procedural process. Replats may be submitted through the consolidated preliminary and final plat process. See
section 10.07.002, Final Plats, and section 10.07.003, Consolidated Preliminary and Final Plats.
Sec. 10.07.006 Text amendments
(a) Generally. Requests for amendments to the text of this chapter may be initiated by the request of the planning and
zoning commission, city council, or city manager to amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal any portion of this
chapter that is not expressly required by state or federal law.
(b) Decision by city council. The city council shall:
(1) Receive the written recommendation of the commission and staff regarding the proposed amendment;
(2) Hold a public hearing prior to taking action on the proposed amendment;
(3) By majority vote, approve or deny the amendment, or continue the item to a future meeting.
(c) Criteria for approval. The following criteria should be considered by the planning and zoning commission and city
council. The proposed amendment should:
(1) Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
(2) Promote the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the city;
(3) Be consistent with other regulations within the city's Code of Ordinances; and
(4) Be consistent with the policies of the most recent comprehensive plan for the city.
(d) Non-substantive amendments. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the city council may, by
resolution:
(1) Correct spelling or punctuation errors;
(2) Cross-reference changes (because another area of the city code has been moved or changed);
(3) Cross-reference errors; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/507
(4) Correct other matters herein determined by the city attorney to be non-substantive and not requiring a
public notice requirement per either state law or section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
(e) Nonconformities and retroactive cure of violations.
(1) The amendment of the text of this chapter may transform a legally nonconforming situation into a
conforming one.
(2) No petition for a text amendment shall be used expressly to cure, or to create, a violation of any part of
this chapter.
(f) Public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 10.07.007 Variances
(a) Unnecessary hardship standard. The planning and zoning commission may authorize a variance when an applicant
can show that a provision of these regulations:
(1) Would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to; and
(2) Is because of a physical condition peculiar to the land.
(b) Procedural requirements.
(1) Any variance authorized is required to be entered in writing into the minutes of the planning and zoning
commission meeting specifically stating the reason(s) for which the variance was approved.
(2) Not less than two-thirds of the entire membership of the planning and zoning commission must approve
the request.
(c) Public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 10.07.008 Appeals
(a) Generally.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the appeals process is to provide an opportunity for affected parties to seek
review of a decision in a timely and inexpensive way.
(2) Administrator, city manager and public works director decisions. All decisions of the administrator, the
city manager, and the public works director, pertaining to this chapter, may be appealed to the planning and
zoning commission.
(3) Planning and zoning commission decisions. All decisions of the planning and zoning commission,
pertaining to this chapter, may be appealed to the city council.
(4) City council decisions. All decisions of the city council, pertaining to this chapter, may be appealed to a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Deadline to appeal. All appeals must be fully completed and submitted to the city 30 days after an official decision
by any city official, committee, or governing body.
(c) Content. The request for appeal shall clearly state each alleged error or ground for protest which the appellant
intends to assert. It cannot be amended, supplemented, or modified after the public notice of meeting is posted.
(d) Scope of review. The planning and zoning commission and/or city council shall review the application in the same
manner, using the same approval criteria as the decision-maker. However:
(1) No new evidence shall be presented to the planning and zoning commission and/or city council that
was not considered by the decision-maker; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/507
(2) No issues shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and/or city council that were not
described or obviously implied by the notice or request for appeal.
(e) Parties to appeal.
(1) Only parties shall have standing to bring an appeal. No appeal by a person who is not a party shall be
heard.
(2) The parties to an appeal are the petitioner and the respondent. The city is always a respondent. Other
interested parties may also join as respondents pursuant to subsection (e)(3), below.
(3) A person or entity is an interested party if it demonstrates:
(A) That final action of the city caused it injury;
(B) The injury is different in kind or degree from injury to members of the general public; and
(C) The injury can be remedied if the appeal is granted.
(4) The applicant is always a party, and shall not be required to demonstrate injury if:
(A) The applicant is appealing an adverse decision or an adverse condition of approval, in which case
the applicant is a petitioner; or
(B) The applicant's application is the subject of an appeal by another party, in which case the
applicant is a respondent.
(5) Any person or entity that owns property within 300 feet of any parcel line of the parcel that is the
subject of the appeal shall not be required to demonstrate injury.
(f) Public notice. See section 10.05.006, Public Notice.
ARTICLE 10.08 ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 10.08.001 Non-judicial remedies
The city may enforce any violation of this chapter prior to, and without, judicial process by:
(1) Withholding permits. The city may deny or withhold permits, approvals, or other forms of
authorization for failure to comply with the requirements of the chapter or those of a referral agency.
(2) Temporary revocation of permits. The city may temporarily revoke permits for due cause to address an
imminent danger to public health, public safety, or public or private property or to prevent irreparable harm.
(3) Suspension of permits. The city may suspend any permits to allow for the correction of a violation or in
response to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) Revocation of permits and approvals.
(A) Generally. Any permit or other approval required by this chapter may be revoked when it is
determined that:
(i) There is a violation of any provision of this chapter;
(ii) The permit or approval was issued in error or based on false representation;
(iii) Upon the request of a referral agency with jurisdiction and due cause; or
(iv) There is a departure from approved plans required under the permit, this chapter, or the
construction requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/507
(B) Notice. Written notice of revocation shall state a timeframe to correct the violation.
(C) Effect of notice. No work or construction may proceed after service of the revocation notice
except work necessary to correct a violation.
(D) Failure to correct. After the period to correct the violation lapses, and arrangements acceptable to
the city have not been made, the city may:
(i) File litigation in a court of competent jurisdiction; and/or
(ii) Remove or correct such violation and cause to be placed a lien upon the property or
improvements to the property in an amount to cover all costs related to correction or abatement of
the violation.
Sec. 10.08.002 Judicial remedies
The city may seek the following judicial remedies to enforce this chapter:
(1) Injunctive relief.
(A) The city may seek an injunction to stop any violation granted under this chapter. Such relief may
include revocation or termination of permits, including limited or special use permits.
(B) In any court proceedings in which the city seeks a preliminary injunction, it shall be presumed
that a violation of this chapter is, or may be, an injury to the public health, safety or general welfare or
that public health, safety or general welfare may be irreparably injured.
(2) Abatement. The city may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement, or other action to
abate or remove a violation, or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they
existed prior to a violation.
(3) Civil liability. The administrator, or his or her designee:
(A) Has the authority to issue citations and deliver it to a person believed to be committing a civil
violation; and
(B) Is declared to be the official with the duty of enforcing this chapter with respect to:
(i) Appearing and testifying in any trial held with respect to the citation.
(ii) Notifying the court of competent jurisdiction of any notice of intention to stand trial or any
request for adjudication when a fine is not paid after formal notice has occurred.
(iii) Mailing formal notices of the violation to persons who do not give notice of intention to
stand trial or pay the established fine within the time set in the citation; and
(iv) Receiving and filing a copy of each original citation and any fines or notices of intention to
stand trial.
(4) Criminal liability.
(A) Punishment. Upon conviction, any person in violation of, or showing failure to comply with, any
of the provisions of this chapter may be punished by fines and/or imprisonment, as prescribed by law,
for each week or portion thereof, that the violation or noncompliance has continued.
(B) Responsible parties. Every person concerned in the violation of, or showing failure to comply
with this chapter, whether the person directly commits the act, or aids or abets the same, and whether
present or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal.
Sec. 10.08.003 Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/507
Any person violating this chapter or any portion thereof shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined any sum not exceeding $2,000.00 and each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense
and punishable accordingly. Cross references: Section 1.01.009 and section 1.01.010.
ARTICLE 10.09 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 10.09.001 Rules of construction
(a) “Shall,” “will,” “should,” and “may.”
(1) The words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory.
(2) The words “should” and “may” are always discretionary.
(b) Representative of the city. Any office referred to in this chapter by title means the person employed or appointed
by the city in that position, or his duly authorized representative, and includes any person designated to perform the
duties of such office.
(c) Customary usage. Definitions not expressly prescribed in this chapter are to be construed in accordance with
customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.
Sec. 10.09.002 Definitions
Administrator shall mean the city manager or his designee to administer the regulations and provisions of this chapter of
the Code of Ordinances.
Alley shall mean a minor way used primarily for vehicular and/or utility service to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
Applicant shall refer to any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
subdivision. The term “applicant” shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent to
such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided.
Arterial streets shall mean streets used primarily for fast or heavy traffic with generally four or more travel lanes that are
capable of carrying large volumes of traffic to and from collector streets as designated by appendix A, Thoroughfare
Map.
Block shall mean an area of land entirely bounded by streets.
City shall mean the City of Plainview, Texas.
City council shall mean the city council of the City of Plainview.
Collector streets shall mean those streets which carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets and expressways,
including the principal entrance streets of a residential development or business park and those streets for circulation
within such a development as designated by appendix A, Thoroughfare Map.
Concept plan shall mean a plan for the development of land brought by the applicant to a pre-submittal meeting that
shows in general terms the proposed land use, circulation, natural characteristics and typical layout of the area to be
developed including the affected adjacent properties.
Cul-de-sac shall mean a short minor street having only one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a
vehicular turn-around.
Dead-end street shall mean a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Easement shall mean a granted right to a person, governmental agency, or organization to use land owned by another for
a specific purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/507
Expressway shall mean a divided highway of at least four lanes designed for through traffic that has full or partial control
of access and generally has grade separations at major intersections.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) shall mean that area of land lying outside and adjacent to the corporate limits of the
city over which the city has legal control as set forth in chapter 42 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Half-street shall mean a dedicated right-of-way that provides only half of the required street width.
Local streets shall mean those streets which are used primarily for access to residential and small properties as
designated by appendix A, Thoroughfare Map.
Lot shall mean land occupied or to be occupied by a building and any accessory buildings with its principal frontage
upon a public street or right-of-way.
Lot width shall mean the minimum distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured along a straight line at the rear
of the required front yard and parallel to the street line.
Open space shall mean property held in private ownership and regularly available for use by the occupants of more than
one dwelling.
Partial street shall mean a dedicated right-of-way that provides only a portion of the required street width.
Planning and zoning commission shall mean the planning and zoning commission of the City of Plainview.
Property owners' association shall mean any homeowners' association or any joint association that has been created to
maintain property through co-ownership.
Replat shall mean a subdivision plat representing land that has previously been included in a recorded subdivision plat.
Right-of-way shall mean land intended to be occupied for streets, sidewalks, utilities, and other public purposes. On a
plat, rights-of-way are to be separate and distinct from other lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for public facilities
shall be dedicated to public use and title transferred to the appropriate public agency.
Street shall mean a public right-of-way for vehicular traffic (including bicycles) whether designated a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated.
Subdivision shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, building development or transfer of ownership with the exception of transfer to heirs of an
estate, and shall include any replats.
Subdivision plat shall mean a map or chart of a subdivision including replats.
Temporary turn-around shall mean an easement temporarily granted by the subdivider of property to the city for the
purpose of maintaining, replacing, and repairing a facility to be used by automobiles until such time that the remainder
of the subdivision can be completed.
Through lot shall mean a lot having a pair of opposite property lines along two or more public streets, and that is not a
corner lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/507
APPENDIX A. THOROUGHFARE MAP
APPENDIX B. REQUIRED DEDICATION STATEMENT
DEDICATION
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/507
THE STATE OF TEXAS §
Know all men by these presents:
COUNTY OF HALE §
That Joe Public and wife, Joan Public, being the owners of the land shown and described on this plat has caused all of
said lands to be surveyed, subdivided, platted, and designated as PLAT NAME UNIT NO. 1, a suburban subdivision –
an addition to the City of Plainview, Texas and does declare that all streets, alleys, lanes, and easements shown upon
such map or plat are dedicated to the public forever to be used as streets, alleys, lanes, and easements unless noted
otherwise.
Executed this 00 day of MONTH, YEAR.
SIGNATURE LINE
SIGNATURE LINE
Joe Public
Joan Public
1234 Street
1234 Street
Plainview, Texas
Plainview, Texas
79072
79072
NOTARY ATTEST
THE STATE OF TEXAS §
Know all men by these presents:
COUNTY OF HALE §
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared JOE PUBLIC, known to me to be the person
whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he/her executed the same for the
purposes and consideration herein expressed.
Given under my hand and seal of authority on this 00 day of MONTH, YEAR.
NOTARY SIGNATURE LINE
Notary Public
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/507
(Ordinance 19-3686 adopted 1/22/19)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 11.01.001 Adoption of state law relative to payment of taxes and penalties
The provisions of state law applicable to municipalities shall apply to and govern the payment of taxes due and owing to
the city and penalties in connection therewith, to the same extent as if such provisions have been, by the terms hereof,
made applicable to city taxes by ordinances of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 23-1)
Sec. 11.01.002 Tax lien created
A lien is hereby created on all property in favor of the city for all taxes, ad valorem, occupation or otherwise. Such lien
shall exist from the first day of January in each year, until all the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other
claims and liens then existing or thereafter arising, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind or judicial writ of
any kind shall ever defeat such lien. The lien for taxes created above shall attach to all property of the taxpayer owned
on the first day of January or subsequently acquired, whether assessed or not. (2000 Code, sec. 23-2)
State law reference–Tax liens, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 32.01.
Sec. 11.01.003 Collection of delinquent taxes
(a) Whenever any accounts for delinquent taxes owed the city are given to its tax attorney for collection, on or after
July 1 of the year they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall collect, from the Hale County Appraisal
District Chief Appraiser-Collector, costs and expenses due on each delinquent property at the time of collection, either
before or after suit and/or foreclosure sale as provided by section 33.48 of the Texas Property Tax Code.
(b) In addition to the collection expenses provided for in subsection (a) above, the city shall be entitled to collect the
actual expenses incurred by the city in providing all data and information as to the name, identity and location of
necessary parties and the legal description of property necessary to the filing of any suit for delinquent taxes.
(2000 Code, sec. 23-5; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.01.004 Goods in transit
All of that property described in the Texas Constitution, article VIII, section 1j, shall be fully taxable in the city
beginning January 1, 1990, and in conjunction with the goods in transit, as defined in Texas Tax Code, section 11.253(a)
(2), as amended by Senate Bill 1, enacted by the 82nd Texas Legislature in Special Session, shall remain subject to
taxation by the city, until such time that official action rescinds, repeals, or otherwise determines the exemption
prescribed by subsection (b) will apply. (Ordinance 11-3565, sec. I (23-6), adopted 11/17/11)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
ARTICLE 11.02 SALES AND USE TAX*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 11.02.001 Adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/507
The majority of the qualified voters of the city having voted for the adoption of a local sales and use tax, the tax is
hereby imposed in the city and shall become effective as provided by state law. The city secretary is hereby instructed to
forward to the state comptroller of public accounts, by registered or certified mail, a certified copy of the ordinance
codified in this section and a map of this city clearly showing the boundaries thereof. (2000 Code, sec. 23-3)
Editor's note–The voters, at an election held on August 8, 1987, adopted an additional one-half of one percent local sales and use tax within the
city to be used to reduce the property tax.
Sec. 11.02.002 Retention of tax on sale and use of gas and electricity for residential use
The city council, by majority vote of its governing body, hereby votes to retain the taxes authorized by the local sales
and use tax (Tex. Tax Code, section 321.001 et seq.) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental
of, and the use, storage or other consumption of, gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by section 6 of
House Bill No. 1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session. (2000 Code, sec. 23-4)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Secs. 11.02.003–11.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Telecommunications Services Tax†
Sec. 11.02.031 Authorized; administration
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the
sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device
from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 321.210, is hereby repealed by the
city as authorized by Tax Code, section 321.210(b) thereof.
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and
use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.
(d) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered or certified mail a copy
of the ordinance codified in this section along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and discussion on
such ordinance.
(e) This section shall become effective as of October 1, 1987.
(2000 Code, sec. 23-41)
Sec. 11.02.032 Scope
This division shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this division shall
not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve as an offset to
be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city pursuant to any franchise, street use ordinance, or
remuneration otherwise payable by any provider of telecommunications service, it being the express intent hereof that all
such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without
reduction or limitation hereby. (2000 Code, sec. 23-42)
ARTICLE 11.03 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases as applicable to the construction of this article and as used herein are hereby
defined as follows:
Assessor and collector, tax assessor and collector. The tax assessor and collector of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/507
Consideration. The cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include
the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and
readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The
term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses, or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, or other
buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include hospitals,
sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a period of
less than thirty (30) days.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the
room is one ordinarily used for sleeping.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms in a hotel for at
least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
Quarterly period. A regular quarterly period corresponding to that period for which tax reports are filed with the state
comptroller.
(2000 Code, sec. 23-16)
Sec. 11.03.002 Levied
There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel or motel where such cost
of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent (7%) of the
consideration paid by the occupant of such room or space to such hotel or motel. (2000 Code, sec. 23-17)
Sec. 11.03.003 Exceptions
(a) No tax shall be imposed under the provisions of this article upon a permanent resident. (2000 Code, sec. 23-18)
(b) Other persons exempt from imposition of the hotel occupancy tax are provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section
351.006. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.03.004 Purpose; use of revenue
(a) The revenue derived from the occupancy tax levied by this article may be used only for those purposes as provided
in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 351.101.
(b) Provided, however, that a portion of said tax revenue equal to at least one percent (1%) of the cost of occupancy
shall be used for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public
meeting and convention facilities of the city, and for promotion of tourism to the city, and advertising the city and its
vicinity, as provided in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 351.101. The money used for this purpose may be expended either
by the city for said purpose or through contract with persons or organizations as may be hereafter selected by the city
council.
(2000 Code, sec. 23-19)
Sec. 11.03.005 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this
article for the city. (2000 Code, sec. 23-20)
Sec. 11.03.006 Monthly report; payment
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/507
(a) A person required to collect the tax imposed by this article shall pay the tax collector the tax collected during the
preceding reporting period and at the same time shall file with the collector a copy of the quarterly report filed with the
state comptroller in connection with the hotel occupancy tax, stating:
(1) The total amount of the payments made for rooms at the person's hotel/motel during the preceding
reporting period;
(2) The amount of tax collected by the person during the preceding reporting period; and
(3) Other information the collector requires to be in the report.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), each calendar month is a reporting period and the taxes imposed by and
collected under this article are due and payable to the collector on or before then 20th day of the month following the
end of each calendar month.
(c) If a taxpayer owes less than $500 for a calendar month, the taxpayer qualifies as a quarterly filer having a reporting
period of a calendar quarter and the taxes are due and payable on the 20th day after the end of the calendar quarter.
(2000 Code, sec. 23-21; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.03.007 Reimbursement for collection
The hotels and motels required to file a report under this article may deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due
to the city on a quarterly return, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one percent (1%) of the amount of
the tax due shown on the report. If taxes due under this article are not paid to the city within the time required or if the
hotels and motels required to file a report fail to file when due, such hotels and motels then forfeit a claim to
reimbursement. (2000 Code, sec. 23-22)
Sec. 11.03.008 Administrative procedures, rules and regulations
The tax assessor and collector shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to
effectively collect the tax levied by this article, and shall, upon request of any person owning, operating, managing or
controlling any hotel, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules and regulations for the guidance of such person and to
facilitate the collection of such tax, as such collection is required herein. Such procedures, rules and regulations shall be
in writing and a copy thereof shall be placed on file with the city secretary. (2000 Code, sec. 23-23)
Sec. 11.03.009 Access to records
The tax assessor-collector shall be permitted to have access to books and records during reasonable business hours as
shall be necessary to enable the tax assessor-collector to determine the correctness of the amount due under the
provisions of this article, or to determine whether or not a report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of
taxes due. (2000 Code, sec. 23-24)
Sec. 11.03.010 Authority to contract with outside agency for administration of funds
The city may enter into a contract with an agency outside the city government to administer the funds made available
under this article and to carry out the purpose of this article; provided, however, that an amount of said tax equal to at
least one percent (1%) of the cost of occupancy shall be used as provided in section 11.03.004(b). (2000 Code, sec. 23-
25)
Sec. 11.03.011 Penalty for noncompliance
If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed by this article, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall
fail to pay to the assessor and collector the tax as imposed herein, when said report or payment is due, or shall file a false
report, then such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine as provided in
section 1.01.009 of this code. (2000 Code, sec. 23-26)
Sec. 11.03.012 Delinquency penalty; interest on delinquent taxes
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/507
In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this article, any person who fails to remit the tax or
violates the reporting provisions imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit an additional fifteen
percent (15%) of such tax owed if the tax has been delinquent for at least one complete city fiscal quarter; provided,
however, that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Said person shall also be liable to the city for the
municipality's reasonable attorney's fees and the costs of an audit conducted under V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section
351.004(a-1)(1), as determined by the city using a reasonable rate, but only if the tax has been delinquent for at least two
complete city fiscal quarters at the time the audit is conducted. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate provided
for in Texas Tax Code, section 111.060. (2000 Code, sec. 23-27; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 11.04 HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION*
Sec. 11.04.001 Amount; eligibility
The city does hereby exempt from ad valorem taxes assessed by the city the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000) of
the market value of residence homesteads of persons, married or unmarried, including those persons living alone, who
are sixty-five (65) years of age or older. Upon compliance with all requirements of this article and all other applicable
laws and ordinances, three thousand dollars ($3,000) of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons sixty-five
(65) years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied by the city. (2000 Code, sec. 23-31)
Sec. 11.04.002 Effective date
Eligibility for the exemption shall be determined annually as of January 1 of each year. (2000 Code, sec. 23-32;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.04.003 Application
(a) Said exemption shall not be allowed for such year unless a sworn affidavit is filed by the person claiming such
exemption with the chief appraiser of the county appraisal district between January 1 and April 1 of each year for which
the exemption is claimed. (2000 Code, sec. 23-33; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) The person claiming such residence homestead exemption shall file with the chief appraiser of the county tax
appraisal district a sworn affidavit verifying that such person is sixty-five (65) years or age or older and describing the
property for which the exemption is sought on forms prescribed by the chief appraiser, giving complete information as
provided in such forms.
(c) In the event of good cause shown to the satisfaction of the chief appraiser, late applications may be accepted, but
no later, in any event, than ten (10) days prior to the time for the submission of assessment rolls to the board of
equalization. After the filing of such proof of age and claim for exemption, the chief appraiser may, if he deems it
necessary, require such further information in order to determine the eligibility of such exemption, which information
shall be provided by the applicant as a prerequisite to the granting of such exemption. Such application for exemption
shall be made annually as provided for herein for each year that such exemption is sought.
(2000 Code, sec. 23-33)
Sec. 11.04.004 Determination of eligibility
After said application, all necessary proof and any other necessary information has been filed, the chief appraiser shall
determine eligibility for such exemption. The determination of the chief appraiser shall be final, and the property in
question shall be placed on the tax rolls of the city in accordance with such determination. However, in the event the
chief appraiser should deny such application for residence homestead exemption, notice shall be given to the applicant
within ten (10) days of such determination and, in any event, no later than the submission of all assessment lists to the
board of equalization. There shall be no appeal of the decision of the chief appraiser to the city council. (2000 Code, sec.
23-34)
Sec. 11.04.005 Limitations
The exemption authorized hereby shall extend only to a residential homestead as defined by the laws of the state. Such
exemption shall be allowed only if the property in question is in fact a residential homestead of that applicant and such
person has attained the age of sixty-five (65) years on January 1 of the taxable year in question. Exemption shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/507
granted if one spouse has attained the age of sixty-five (65) years on such application date even though the other spouse
has not attained such age. (2000 Code, sec. 23-35)
Sec. 11.04.006 Annual affidavit and qualification
A determination of eligibility for such exemption shall be made as of January 1 of each year. The person claiming such
exemption shall each year file an affidavit within the period of time designated herein claiming the residence homestead
exemption. The chief appraiser shall annually determine the qualification for eligibility of said exemption as provided
herein. There shall be no portion of the exemption provided for in this article for any taxable year. (2000 Code, sec. 23-
36)
ARTICLE 11.05 TAX ABATEMENT ZONES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 11.05.001–11.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Other Zones
Sec. 11.05.031 Enterprise zone established by Ordinance 92-2927
(a) The city hereby nominates a 6.8-acre tract of land within the city and its ETJ and described on exhibit A of
Ordinance No. 92-2927 as an enterprise zone in accordance with the Texas Enterprise Zone Act (V.T.C.A., Government
Code, chapter 2303).
(b) The city council finds that the zone meet the qualifications of the act.
(c) The city council will provide certain incentives applicable to business enterprises in the zone as follows:
(1) The city may abate taxes on the increase in value of real property improvements for non-retail
businesses that locate in a designated enterprise zone. The level of abatement shall be based on the
investment and/or the extent to which the business receiving the abatement creates jobs.
(2) The city may provide tax increment financing in accordance with state law.
(3) The city will work with qualified businesses to submit enterprise project applications.
(4) Reduced building permit fees, subdivision fees, zoning fees, and alarm ordinance fees (offered
exclusively within the zone).
(5) Transfer of city-owned surplus land at below-market prices for the public purpose of economic
development (offered exclusively within the zone).
(6) Capital improvements in water and sewer facilities and road improvements.
(7) The city will apply for training grants for new permanent jobs as available and appropriate to the
industry.
(d) The area described in this section is designated as an enterprise zone and a reinvestment zone, subject to the
approval of the state department of economic development.
(2000 Code, sec. 23-60; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Texas Enterprise Zone Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 2303.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/507
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Definitions
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section:
Alley. Any street having no regular or official name other than “alley” and being twenty (20) feet or less in width.
Authorized emergency vehicles. Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, public and private
ambulances for which permits have been issued by the state board of health, and emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city council, and private vehicles
operated by volunteer firemen while answering a fire alarm.
Bus. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons,
and every motor vehicle other than taxicabs designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
Business district. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when within six hundred (600) feet along such
roadway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or office
buildings, railroad stations and public buildings, which occupy at least three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side
or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the roadway, or any other area so classified by the city zoning
ordinance.
Bus stop. A section of the roadway along the edge thereof marked by signs reading “bus stop” as a place for the sole use
and convenience of the general public to board and depart from any bus.
Controlled-access or limited-access highway. Every highway as to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and
other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be
determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway.
Crosswalk. That part of a roadway at any intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks
on opposite sides of the street, whether marked or not, measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway. The word “crosswalk” also includes any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
Curb. The edge of a street, roadway or highway.
Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading
of passengers, freight, merchandise or other material.
Digging out. The practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing position by applying a sudden burst of power,
recognized by spinning rear wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway.
Double parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street or roadway in the rear of an angleparked
vehicle at the curb of such street or alongside a vehicle parked parallel with the curb of such street.
Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of the movements of a vehicle.
Driveway, private. Any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a means of ingress or
egress for vehicles to or from any public property.
Freight loading zone. See “curb loading zone.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/507
Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral
boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets or highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets or highways joining at any other angle may
come in conflict. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each
roadway of such divided street or highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the
event such intersecting street or highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every
crossing of the two (2) roadways of such highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
Laned street. A street which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
Light commercial vehicle. Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property with a
weight of less than fifteen hundred (1,500) pounds.
Limit lines. Boundaries of parking areas, loading zones, or safety or danger zones, and lines marked for the purpose of
excluding traffic or parking.
Map, official traffic-control. An engineering drawing of such dimensions and scale as to show clearly all streets, alleys,
speed limits, traffic movement regulations and prohibitions, types of traffic-control devices, right-of-way dimensions
and names of all streets within the boundaries of the city.
Motor-assisted bicycle. A bicycle which may be propelled by human power or a motor, or by both, with a motor of a
capacity of less than sixty (60) cubic centimeters piston displacement, which is capable of a maximum speed of not more
than twenty (20) miles per hour on a flat surface with not more than one percent (1%) grade in any direction when the
motor is engaged.
Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three
(3) wheels in contact with the ground but excluding a tractor or motor-assisted bicycle.
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained
from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
Negligence. The failure to use that degree of care that a reasonable and prudent person would use under the same or
similar circumstances.
No-parking zone. A space or area on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether marked by official signs or not, in which
no vehicle may be parked.
Official traffic-control devices. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
One-way street. A street on which all vehicular traffic is required to move in the same general direction as indicated by
direction signs.
Parking stall or parking space. That portion or section of a roadway adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart, marked
and bounded by lines painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the roadway for the use of
parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked by official signs showing such space to be a parking zone.
Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading materials or passengers.
Passenger. Any person in or on a vehicle other than the driver, whether or not the vehicle is moving.
Passenger loading zone. See “curb loading zone.”
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
Police officer. Every officer of the municipality authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/507
Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those
having expressed or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons.
Procession or parade. A group of pedestrians or vehicles standing or moving on a street and occupying more than six
hundred (600) feet of the street and having a common destination, purpose or direction.
Public place. A place where people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for purposes of business,
amusement, recreation or other lawful purposes, and for the purpose of this chapter shall include all streets and alleys
within the boundaries of the city.
Railroad. A carrier of persons or materials upon cars operated upon stationary rails, including a motorized locomotive
with or without cars coupled thereto operated upon rails.
Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a street or highway not comprising a business district when
the property on such street or highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is, in the main, improved with
residences, or residences and buildings in use for business, or any area so classified by the city zoning ordinance.
Right-of-way. When pertaining to traffic, the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. When pertaining to land,
that portion of land that is publicly owned and primarily designated either all or in part for the use of the public as a
street or roadway.
Roadway. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the
berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” as used herein
shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
Route. A street on which signs are erected giving notice thereof that certain types of vehicles may or may not be
operated.
Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is
protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety
zone.
School bus. Every motor vehicle that complies with the color and identification requirements set forth in the standards
produced and sponsored by the National Commission on Safety Education of the National Education Association,
Washington, D.C., and is being used to transport children to or from school or in connection with school activities, but
not including buses operated by common carriers in urban transportation of schoolchildren.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signs and signals.
(1) When pertaining to drivers of vehicles, the position of a driver's hand or arm to indicate to the drivers
of other vehicles that he intends to stop, start or change his direction of travel.
(2) When pertaining to a physical object or marking, any official traffic-control device.
Stand or standing. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
Stop. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
Stop, stopping or standing. When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/507
Through street or highway. A street or highway, or a portion thereof, on which vehicular traffic is given preferential
right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the
right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to a stop sign, yield sign or other official traffic-control
device, when such signs or devices are erected as provided in this chapter.
Tractor. A motor vehicle other than a truck which is designed, maintained or used primarily for the pulling, pushing or
dragging of other objects.
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while
using any street for purposes of travel.
Tunnel or underpass. A complete enclosure through which passes a street, roadway or walkway.
U-turn. The turning or causing the turning of a vehicle, so that when such turn is completed such vehicle will be headed
in the opposite direction from that in which it was headed before such turning was begun, whether or not such vehicle is
pulled into a driveway or any space beyond the curbline of the street.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Walks. Areas in public ways designed primarily for pedestrian use.
Zones. Areas in public ways designed for limited or specialized use.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-1)
Sec. 12.01.002 Compliance with chapter
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. (2000
Code, sec. 24-41)
Sec. 12.01.003 Roller skates or coaster vehicles
No person upon roller skates or by riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any
roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When so crossing, such person shall be granted all rights and
shall be subject to all duties as applies to pedestrians. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.01.004 Removing or damaging traffic barriers
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to remove or damage any barriers, either closing a street
or for the purpose of warning traffic of an obstruction in the street, erected under the direction of the chief of police or
street superintendent. (2000 Code, sec. 24-5)
Sec. 12.01.005 Causing tires to screech; causing rear portion of vehicle to sway from side to side
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to start and accelerate a motor vehicle on a public street or highway in the city
from a stopped position in such manner as to cause the driving wheels to spin and thereby create a loud, screeching
noise.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person while driving a motor vehicle on any street or highway in the city to accelerate
or turn said motor vehicle while it is moving in such manner as to cause the driving wheels to spin and thereby create a
loud, screeching noise.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person while driving a motor vehicle on a street or highway in the city to cause the rear
portion of the motor vehicle to sway or swing from side to side.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-274)
Sec. 12.01.006 Obstructions declared public nuisance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/507
(a) No wall, fence or other structure, or any hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth shall be erected or maintained in any
location so as to cause an obstruction of the view of an official traffic-control device from the adjacent street.
(b) Any obstruction prohibited by this section is declared a public nuisance.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.01.007 Entering intersection or crosswalk when traffic obstructed
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or
pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (2000 Code, sec. 24-276)
Sec. 12.01.008 Turning movements
When markers, signs, or signal indicators are placed within an intersection by authorized persons of the city within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.01.009 Operation of motorcycles, minibikes and other vehicles in parks
(a) The city council may authorize the designation of areas in the city park system where motorcycles, minibikes or
other vehicles may be operated.
(b) All designated areas will be properly signed indicating areas where motorcycles, minibikes or other motor vehicles
may be operated. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an unregistered and unlicensed motorcycle or minibike in
any city park, other than in the designated areas.
(c) Only properly registered and licensed motor vehicles may be operated upon designated public roadways or parking
areas within the city park system.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-286)
Sec. 12.01.010 Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use
of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (2000 Code, sec. 24-290)
Sec. 12.01.011 Boarding or alighting from vehicle in motion
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (2000 Code, sec.
24-291)
ARTICLE 12.02 ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 12.02.001 Duties of police department
It shall be the duty of the city police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter, all other street and traffic laws
of the city and all the state traffic laws applicable to traffic in the city. (2000 Code, sec. 24-16)
Sec. 12.02.002 Authority of police officers to direct traffic
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the police chief, are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (2000 Code, sec. 24-18)
Sec. 12.02.003 Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/507
Members of the city fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat
or in the immediate vicinity when requested by a police officer. (2000 Code, sec. 24-19)
Sec. 12.02.004 Temporary traffic-control officers
Under unusual conditions the chief of police may appoint temporary traffic-control officers until such unusual conditions
cease to exit. These temporary officers shall have the same authority as regular officers of the police department unless
they are specifically limited by the chief of police. (2000 Code, sec. 24-20)
ARTICLE 12.03 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
Sec. 12.03.001 Traffic citation forms
The municipal court shall provide books to include traffic citation forms for notifying alleged violators to appear and
answer charges of violating traffic laws and this code in the municipal court of the city. Said books shall include serially
numbered sets of citations in triplicate in the form prescribed and be approved by the chief of police. The chief of police
shall be responsible for the issuance of such books to individual members of the police department. The chief of police
shall require a written receipt for every book so issued and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set of
citations contained therein. (2000 Code, sec. 24-61; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.03.002 Arrest procedure for moving violations
The procedure stated in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 543, shall govern police officers in making arrests for
moving traffic violations insofar as applicable. (2000 Code, sec. 24-62)
Sec. 12.03.003 Illegal cancellation of citations
It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than as
provided by law. (2000 Code, sec. 24-63)
Sec. 12.03.004 Payment of fine at municipal court
Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this chapter may, within the time
specified in the notice, appear at the municipal court and answer the charge set forth in such notice by paying a
prescribed fine, and in writing pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and paying such fine in court.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-64; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.03.005 Disposition of fines and forfeitures
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund. (2000 Code,
sec. 24-65)
Sec. 12.03.006 Failure to obey notice or summons
(a) Any person who violates his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally arrested.
(b) Any driver of a motor vehicle who unlawfully neglects to answer the charges set forth in a written notice affixed to
such motor vehicle by a police officer shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the
charge for which the notice was originally given.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-66)
ARTICLE 12.04 ACCIDENTS
Sec. 12.04.001 Duty of driver to stop and remain at scene
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person, or damage to any vehicle or
other property to an apparent extent of approximately two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) or more, shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/507
immediately give notice of such accident to the city police department and shall, unless physically disabled, remain at
the accident scene until the investigating police officer releases them.
Sec. 12.04.002 Removing vehicle from scene
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other debris on the
highway from such vehicle.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.05 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
Sec. 12.05.001 Ambulances
An ambulance shall not exceed the speed limit on an emergency call within the city limits unless the ambulance
personnel first notifies the police department of such emergency call and the driver sounds an audible signal by bell,
siren, or exhaust whistle. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.05.002 Limitations on special privileges
No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privilege under the provisions of this article
except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator of the law. (2000 Code, sec. 24-105)
ARTICLE 12.06 SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
Sec. 12.06.001 Responsibilities of chief of police and director of public works
(a) The chief of police shall determine and establish the location of signals and devices when and as required under
this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and such other traffic-control devices as he may deem
necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or state law, or to guide or warn traffic, and shall inform the director of
public works of such determinations.
(b) The director of public works shall direct the appropriate department to place and maintain such traffic-control
signs, signals, and devices at locations established by the chief of police.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-201)
Sec. 12.06.002 Standards; conformance to state manual
(a) All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual of uniform traffic-control devices and
specifications approved by the state transportation commission. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a
particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city.
(b) All traffic-control devices erected within the city and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this
chapter shall be official traffic-control devices.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-202; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.06.003 Obedience
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter unless at the time, he is otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.06.004 When devices required for enforcement
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and
place of the alleged violation the official traffic-control device or sign is not in reasonable position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. (2000 Code, sec. 24-205)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/507
Sec. 12.06.005 When devices not required for enforcement
Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place. (2000 Code, sec. 24-206)
Sec. 12.06.006 Ratification of existing devices
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this code and in use for
the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official trafficcontrol
devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-209)
Sec. 12.06.007 Designation of crosswalks and safety zones
The police chief is hereby authorized to:
(1) Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
(2) Establish safety zones of such kinds and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-214; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.06.008 Marking of traffic lanes
(a) The director of public works is hereby authorized to direct the marking of traffic lanes, as determined and
established by the chief of police, upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
(b) Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to
keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to
making a lawful turning movement.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-215)
Sec. 12.06.009 Marking of no-passing zones
The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine those portions of any street or highway in the city where
overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may inform the
director of public works of such determination. The director of public works shall then direct the indication of the
beginning and ending of such zones by the use of appropriate signs or markings on the roadway. When such signs or
markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the
directions thereof. (2000 Code, sec. 24-216)
Sec. 12.06.010 Turning markers
(a) The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and inform the director of public works of locations for the
placement of markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as is
prescribed by law or this chapter. The director of public works shall then direct the installation of such markers, buttons
or signs as so indicated by the chief of police.
(b) When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-217)
Sec. 12.06.011 Restricted turn signs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/507
The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left or U-turn, and inform the director of public works of such determination. The director of public works shall
then direct the placement of proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or
they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (2000 Code, sec. 24-218)
ARTICLE 12.07 SPEED*
Sec. 12.07.001 Applicability of state law
The laws of the state regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this
chapter, as authorized by law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that
certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared when signs are in place giving notice
thereof. (2000 Code, sec. 24-156)
Sec. 12.07.002 General speed limit; reasonable and prudent speed required
(a) Where no hazard exists that requires lower speed to comply with state law, the maximum reasonable and prudent
speed for vehicle operation as determined upon the basis of a traffic investigation study on city streets is thirty (30) miles
per hour, and any excess speed of thirty (30) miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable
or prudent and therefore unlawful.
(b) Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with state law, the maximum, reasonable
and prudent safe speed for which operation as determined upon the basis of a traffic investigation study on city alleys is
fifteen (15) miles per hour, and any speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence that the
speed is not reasonable or prudent and therefore unlawful.
(c) This section shall not apply at specific city locations where the city council upon the basis of a traffic investigation
study found and declared by ordinance a different speed to be the maximum, reasonable safe speed.
(d) No person shall drive a vehicle on a street, highway, or alley at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions and having due regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Speed shall be controlled as
necessary to avoid colliding with a person, vehicle, other conveyance or object upon such street, highway, or alley.
(e) No person shall operate a vehicle upon a city street or alley exhibiting sudden vehicle speed or acceleration which
produces noise, smoking tires, or causes one or more tires to lose contact with the surface of the street or alley.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.07.003 Speed limits on specific streets
The city council may alter the maximum speed limits established by this article on any street or portion thereof within
the city in accord with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 545.356. When no special hazard exists
that requires lower speed for compliance with state law, the maximum, reasonable and prudent safe speed for vehicle
operation as determined upon the basis of a traffic investigation study on city streets as set out in the speed zone
schedule below are those speeds set out in connection with specific streets, and any speed in excess of such speeds shall
be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent, and therefore, unlawful.
Street Extent MPH
Andy Taylor Road
Northbound Beginning north of U.S. 70, northbound traffic on 40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/507
Andy Taylor Road to U.S. Highway 194
Southbound South of U.S. Highway 194 for southbound traffic
on Andy Taylor Road to U.S. Highway 70
40
Broadway Street From 2nd St. to Southwest 19th St. 40
From Crestway St. to U.S. Hwy. 87 40
Columbia Street
Southbound From north city limit to West 27th St. 50
From West 27th St. to West 15th St. 45
From West 15th St. to a point 0.153 miles north of
West 11th St.
40
From a point 0.153 miles north of West 11th St. to
West 5th St.
30
From West 5th St. to West 3rd St. 40
From West 3rd St. to a point 0.104 miles south of
West 2nd St.
50
From a point 0.104 miles south of West 2nd St. to
south city limit
55
Northbound From southwest city limit to a point 0.096 miles
south of West 2nd
55
From a point 0.096 miles south of West 2nd St. to
West 3rd St.
50
From West 3rd St. to West 5th St. 40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/507
From West 5th St. to a point 0.153 miles north of
West 11th St.
30
From a point 0.153 miles north of West 11th St. to
West 16th St.
40
From West 16th St. to West 27th St. 45
From West 27th St. to north city limit 50
Columbia Street, South
Southbound From Southwest 10th St. to a point 0.006 miles
south of Southwest 10th St.
40
From a point 0.033 miles north of Lindberg St. to
the south city limit
45
Northbound From south city limit to St. Louis St. 55
From St. Louis St. to a point 0.232 miles north of
St. Louis St.
50
From a point 0.232 miles north of St. Louis St. to
Southwest 8th St.
40
Columbia Street, Interstate
Hwy. 27 Business Route Beginning at the point of intersection with the north
city limit, a point 1.565 miles north of the point of
intersection with the centerline of West 29th Street,
the maximum speed limit for both southbound and
northbound traffic for a distance of 1.465 miles, a
point 0.100 miles north of the centerline of 29th
Street
60
Thence for a distance of 0.308 miles, a point 0.105
miles north of the centerline of 24th Street
55
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/507
Thence for a distance of 0.671 miles, a point 0.162
miles north of the centerline of 13th Street
50
Thence for a distance of 0.277 miles, a point 0.065
miles north of the centerline of 11th Street
intersecting from the west
40
Thence for a distance of 0.632 miles, a point 0.043
miles north of the centerline of west 4th Street
35
Thence for a distance of 0.319 miles, a point 0.219
miles north of the centerline of Southwest 3rd
Street
50
Thence for a distance of 0.654 miles, a point 0.054
miles south of the centerline of Southwest 10th
Street intersecting from the east
55
Thence for a distance of 0.404 miles, a point 0.220
miles north of the centerline of Southwest 20th
Street
60
Thence as established by the state transportation
commission's Minute Order Number 107691 dated
November 19, 1998, for a distance of 0.712 miles,
a point 0.492 miles south of the centerline of
Southwest 20th Street which corresponds with the
south corporate limits of the city
65
Date Street From 24th St. to 14th St. 40
From 14th St. to 8th St. 35
From 8th St. to 5th St. 30
Date Street
Northbound From the south city limit a distance of 0.250 miles 55
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/507
Thence for a distance of 0.200 miles to a point
0.050 miles south of the centerline of Oak St. to
the west
50
Thence for a distance of 0.844 miles to East 2nd
St.
45
North Date St. (FM 400)
Northbound From the centerline intersection of U.S. 70 (East
5th St.) for a distance of 0.260 miles to the
centerline intersection of East 8th St.
35
Thence for a distance of 1.186 miles to the
intersection with the north city limit, a point 0.010
miles north of the centerline of East 24th St.
40
North Date St. (FM 400)
Southbound From a point 0.010 miles north of the centerline of
East 24th St. southerly a distance of 0.620 miles to
the centerline intersection of East 14th St. from the
west
40
Thence for a distance of 0.823 miles to the
centerline intersection of U.S. 70 (East 5th St.)
35
South Date St.
Southbound From the centerline of East 5th St. 0.272 miles to
the centerline of East 2nd St.
40
Thence for a distance of 0.844 miles to a point
0.055 miles south of the centerline of Oak St. to
the west
45
Thence for a distance of 0.200 miles 50
Thence for a distance of 0.250 miles to the south 55
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/507
city limit
Thence for a distance of 0.272 miles to U.S. 70
(East 5th St.)
40
Interstate I-27 service roads
Beginning at U.S. I-27 state mile post 27.830
(currently mile marker 49) of the West Frontage
Road north one (1) mile to state mile post 28.830
(currently mile marker 50) within the north city
limits, the maximum legal speed limit for both
southbound and northbound traffic of said West
Frontage Road
45
Beginning at U.S. I-27 state mile post 27.830
(currently mile marker 49) of the East Frontage
Road north one (1) mile to state mile post 28.830
(currently mile marker 50) within the north city
limits, the maximum legal speed limit for both
southbound and northbound traffic of said East
Frontage Road
50
Industrial Boulevard Entire length 55
Joliet Street Beginning 50 feet north of the centerline of the
intersection of Joliet Street and West 32nd Street,
northbound traffic to Industrial Boulevard
35
South of Industrial Boulevard for southbound
traffic, to a point 50 feet north of the centerline of
Joliet Street and West 32nd Street
35
Ennis Street From 11th St. to Olton Rd. 35
From its intersection with the Olton Highway
south to its intersection with S.W. 3rd St.
35
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/507
Quincy Street NW city limits (Highland Rd.) for a distance of
0.872 miles
55
From that point to W. 24th Street 45
From W. 24th Street to W. 11th Street 40
From W. 11th Street to State Hwy. 70 (5th Street) 35
From the south edge of U.S. 70 (5th Street) south a
distance of 0.553 miles to the north edge of FM
3466 (S.W. 3rd Street)
50
U.S. Highway 87 service roads
Southbound From U.S. Highway 87 to U.S. Highway 70 45
From U.S. Highway 70 to U.S. Highway 87 40
Northbound From U.S. Highway 87 to U.S. Highway 70 40
From U.S. Highway 70 to U.S. Highway 87 40
Southbound From U.S. Highway 87 to State Highway 194 45
From State Highway 194 to U.S. Highway 87 45
5th Street (U.S. 70, Olton Road)
Eastbound From west city limits to a point 0.328 miles west
of U.S. Highway 87
55
Thence a distance of 0.200 miles 50
Thence a distance of 0.620 miles to Ennis Street 45
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/507
From Ennis St. to Columbia Street (2.021 miles) 40
From Columbia St. to Ash Street (0.293 miles) 30
From Ash St. to Elm St. (0.285 miles) 35
Thence a distance of 0.534 miles 45
Thence a distance of 0.115 miles to the east city
limits
50
Westbound From east city limits to a point 0.099 miles east of
Milwee St.
50
Thence a distance of 0.534 miles to Elm St. 45
From Elm St. to Ash St. (0.285 miles) 35
From Ash St. to Columbia St. (0.293 miles) 30
From Columbia St. to Ennis St. (2.021 miles) 40
Thence a distance of 0.620 miles to a point 0.128
miles west of U.S. Hwy. 87
45
Thence a distance of 0.200 miles 50
Thence a distance of 0.246 miles to west city
limits
55
6th Street From Columbia St. to Joliet St. 35
11th Street From its intersection with the west boundary line of
Date St. west to its intersection with Ennis St.
35
Thence from Ennis St. west to the intersection of 30
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/507
Jefferson St.
24th Street From east city limit to west city limit 40
Grandview Drive From the intersection of Grandview Dr. and the
Olton Highway thence in a southwesterly direction
along Grandview Dr. for a distance of 721 feet
20
Beginning at a point on Grandview Dr. 721 feet
south of the intersection of Grandview Dr. and the
Olton Highway, thence to the west end of
Grandview Dr. at its intersection with the Highway
I-27 service road
25
S.W. 3rd (FM 3466) Beginning at the west right-of-way of I-27 and
extending east for a distance of 0.927 miles
50
Thence east for a distance of 0.833 miles 55
Thence east for a distance of 0.0502 miles 50
Thence east for a distance of 0.487 miles to the
point of intersection with the west right-of-way
line of Business I-27 (Columbia Street)
45
S.W. 3rd (FM 3466)
Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning at the west right-of-way line of the
grade separation for S.W. 3rd Street, for a distance
of 0.927 miles, a point 900 feet east of the
centerline of Ennis Street
50
Thence for a distance of 1.335 miles, this point
being the centerline of Joliet Street extending to
the north
55
Thence for a distance of 0.487 miles, this point 45
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/507
being the west right-of-way line of Business I-27
(Columbia Street)
FM 3466 Beginning at I-27 exchange and the west city limits
on S.W. 3rd (west end of FM 3466 and I-27
crossover bridge) and running the full length of FM
3466 to FM 400 (Date Street and SE 4th Street), for
vehicles traveling eastward on FM 3466 is as
follows:
Point (1): From the west city limits (west side of I-
27 overpass) eastward for 0.200 miles to point (2)
45
Point (2): From point (2) eastward for 0.450 miles
to point (3)
50
Point (3): From point (3) eastward for 1.406 miles
to point (4)
55
Point (4): From point (4) for 0.590 miles to point
(5)
50
Point (5): From point (5) for 0.433 miles to Date
Street (FM 3466)
40
FM 3466 Beginning at Date Street (FM 3466) and running
the full length of FM 3466 to the west side of I-27
overpass and to the city limit, for vehicles traveling
westward on FM 3466 from Date Street is as
follows:
Point (1): From FM 400 (Date Street and S.E. 4th
Street) westward for 0.617 miles to point (2) on
FM 3466
40
Point (2): From point (2) westward for 0.406 miles
to point (3)
50
Point (3): From point (3) westward for 1.406 miles
to point (4)
55
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/507
Point (4): From point (4) westward for 0.450 miles
to point (5)
50
Point (5): From point (5) westward for 0.200 miles
to the city limits
45
Westridge Road
Northbound and
southbound
Beginning at the south right-of-way line of the
grade separation for U.S. Highway 70 (north city
limits on Westridge Road) to the south city limits
of Westridge Road
40
(2000 Code, sec. 24-158; Ordinance 08-3500, sec. I, adopted 8/12/08; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.07.004 Minimum speed
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement
of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. (2000 Code, sec. 24-
159)
Sec. 12.07.005 School zones
The portion or portions of the streets of the city hereinafter described and designated are hereby declared to be school
zones:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any automobile, motorcycle, motor scooter or any type of
motor vehicle which is self-propelled at speeds greater than twenty (20) miles per hour between the hours of
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., and 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, and Friday of each week on the following portions of the following streets:
West Alpine Drive between West Crestway Street and the intersection of West Alpine Drive and
Columbia Street by Hillcrest School.
18th Street between Independence Street and Joliet Street (Lakeside School).
Independence Street between 18th Street and 20th Street (Lakeside School).
Joliet Street between 18th Street and 20th Street (Lakeside School).
16th Street between Quincy Street and Smythe Street (High School).
(2) Provided further, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any automobile, motorcycle, motor
scooter, or any type motor vehicle which is self-propelled at a speed greater than 20 (twenty) miles per hour
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday of each week on the following portions of the following streets:
11th Street between Oakland Street and Raleigh Street (Highland).
10th Street between Portland Street and Quincy Street (Highland).
Portland Street between 10th Street and 11th Street (Highland).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/507
32nd Street between Joliet Street and Lexington Street (Thunderbird).
Lexington Street between 31st Street and 32nd Street (Thunderbird).
Joliet Street from 24th Street to 26th Street (Coronado).
Ash Street between 9th Street and 10th Street (Ash).
9th Street between Ash Street and Beech Street (Ash).
20th Street between Utica Street and Yonkers Street (Estacado).
Southwest Fifth Street between South Garland Street and South Ennis Street (PCA).
South Ennis Street from the north curbline of the intersection of South Ennis Street and Southwest
Fifth Street hence 750 feet south (PCA).
That portion of South Ennis Street from the south curb of the intersection of South Ennis Street
and S.W. 3rd Street, south to the north curb of the intersection of South Ennis Street and S.W. 5th
Street (PCA).
That portion of Quincy Street from 10 feet north of the centerline of West 10th Street to 10 feet
north of the centerline of West 12th Street.
That portion of West 24th Street from the radius of the northeast corner of 24th Street and Joliet
Street to within a distance of 460 feet east of said intersection (24th Street and Joliet Street), and
within the same distance (460 feet) to the west from the same intersection of 24th Street and Joliet
Street.
The necessity to change the time providing for the hours of maximum speed limit for the
operation of motor vehicles was brought about by the fact that some schools do not have children
leaving the school grounds during the 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. time period.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any automobile, motorcycle, motor scooter, or any type of
motor vehicle which is self-propelled at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour when the school zone traffic
signal control light is flashing on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays of each week on
the following portions of the following streets:
South Broadway Street beginning at the north curbline of the intersection of South Broadway and
West Crestway Street, north a distance of 192 feet, and beginning at the south curbline of this
intersection of South Broadway Street and West Crestway Street, south, a distance of 114 feet
(Hillcrest School).
Texas 194 (Quincy Street) between West 13th Street and West 16th Street (high school).
(2000 Code, sec. 24-160)
Sec. 12.07.006 Speed limit in parks
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle which is self-propelled, automobile or motorcycle on the
following designated portions of streets in Broadway Park and Running Water Draw Regional Park at a speed greater
than twenty (20) miles per hour:
(1) Broadway Park:
Ash Street between East 1st and Southeast 1st Streets;
Beech Street between East 1st and Southeast 4th Streets;
Southeast 1st Street between Broadway and Beech Streets;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/507
Southeast 2nd Street between South Beech and Date Streets.
(2) Running Water Draw Regional Park:
West 4th Street between Garland Street, West, and the end of 4th Street.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-161)
Sec. 12.07.007 Regulation of speed by traffic signals
The chief of police, by and with the approval of the city council, is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so
as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds
otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (2000
Code, sec. 24-162; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.08 TURNING; TURN AND STOP SIGNALS
Sec. 12.08.001 U-turns
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street or at any
intersection controlled by traffic lights. (2000 Code, sec. 24-185)
Sec. 12.08.002 Right turn on red light prohibited in certain places
At the intersections of West Eleventh Street and Quincy Street and West Twentieth Street and Yonkers Street, it shall be
and is hereby declared unlawful for any vehicular traffic or any automobile, motorcycle, motor scooter and/or any type
of motor vehicle which is self-propelled to make a right turn on red during the hours specified and posted, these hours
being 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days only. (2000 Code, sec. 24-186)
ARTICLE 12.09 STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
Sec. 12.09.001 Stop at through streets
The driver of any vehicle on any street or other way intersecting with a through street shall bring such vehicle to a full
and complete stop before entering such through street and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching on
such through street. (2000 Code, sec. 24-231)
Sec. 12.09.002 Signs or signals at through streets
Whenever the chief of police designates and describes a through street, he shall determine the type of signs or trafficcontrol
signals which should be installed and determine the location thereof. When notified of such determinations, the
director of public works shall direct the installation and maintenance of such signs or traffic-control signals. Stop signs,
or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign, [shall be erected] on each and
every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by trafficcontrol
signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2) such through streets, or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such
streets as may be determined by the chief of police upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (2000 Code, sec.
24-232)
Sec. 12.09.003 Signs and signals at intersections other than through streets
The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon
other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection,
in which event he shall so inform the director of public works, who shall direct the erection of a stop sign at every such
place where a stop is required. The chief of police is further authorized to determine and designate whether vehicles shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection, in which event he shall notify the director of
public works, who shall direct the erection of a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. (2000
Code, sec. 24-233; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.09.004 Duties of driver entering stop intersection
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/507
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop, and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which
has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. (2000 Code, sec. 24-
235; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.10 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Sec. 12.10.001 Signs required
Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the director of public works shall direct the
placement and maintenance of signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs
are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where
movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (2000 Code, sec. 24-241)
Sec. 12.10.002 Obedience to signs
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular
traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and
maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. (2000 Code, sec. 24-242)
Sec. 12.10.003 Authority to restrict direction of traffic temporarily or during certain periods
(a) The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon
upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another
period of the day and shall notify the director of public works, who shall direct the placement and maintenance of
appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The chief of police may determine the need
for traffic to temporarily move in a particular direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway, and shall notify the
director of public works, who shall then direct the erection of markings, signs, barriers or other traffic-control devices to
so direct the movement of traffic.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other
devices so placed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-243)
Sec. 12.10.004 Standing or parking on lefthand side
(a) The chief of police is authorized to determine the need and the location for the erection of signs upon the lefthand
side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when so notified the director of public
works shall direct the installation of such signs at the designated locations. When such signs are in place, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon such lefthand side in violation of any such sign.
(b) In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon
any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the lefthand side of such one-way roadway unless signs
are erected to permit such standing or parking. The chief of police is authorized to determine when standing or parking
may be permitted upon the lefthand side of any such one-way roadway and may so inform the director of public works,
who shall direct the erection of signs giving notice thereof.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-244)
ARTICLE 12.11 TRUCK ROUTES AND TRUCK TRAFFIC
Sec. 12.11.001 Truck routes designated
The following streets and portions of streets in the city are hereby designated as truck routes for all trucks and motor
vehicles having a gross tonnage in excess of one ton:
Street Extent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/507
Columbia Street Entire length
Date Street (FM 400) Entire length
Dimmitt Road, Northwest (U.S. Highway 194) Entire length
Milwee Street U.S. 70 to E. 9th Street
Quincy Street Industrial Blvd. to S.W. 3rd Street
11th Street Date St. to Columbia St.
5th Street and U.S. Highway 70 Yonkers Street to east city limits
Olton Road (U.S. Highway 70) Yonkers Street to west city limits
16th Street Date St. to east city limits
24th Street Date St. to State Hwy. 194
Industrial Blvd. Entire length
Farm Market 3466 Entire length
(2000 Code, sec. 24-251)
Sec. 12.11.002 Compliance
The use of all streets in the city by the operators or drivers of any truck, tractor, truck-tractor, trailer, or combination
truck and trailer having a carrying capacity in excess of one ton, or the driving of any of said vehicles on any street or
streets in the city, except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article, is hereby prohibited. (2000 Code,
sec. 24-252)
Sec. 12.11.003 Use of truck routes required
Any person driving or operating a truck, tractor, truck-tractor, trailer, or combination truck and trailer, having a carrying
capacity in excess of one ton, when traveling through the city, shall drive same on the street or streets designated as a
truck route, and shall not operate said truck, tractor, truck-tractor, trailer, or combination truck and trailer on any other
street or highway in the city. (2000 Code, sec. 24-253)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/507
Sec. 12.11.004 Maps of truck routes
The city secretary shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is
permitted. The maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary and shall be available to the public. (2000
Code, sec. 24-254)
Sec. 12.11.005 Defense for operation on street not designated as truck route
(a) It shall be a defense to prosecution that a person drives or operates a truck, tractor, truck-tractor, trailer, or
combination truck and trailer, having a carrying capacity in excess of one ton, upon a street or streets not designated as a
truck route in order to accomplish a commercial purpose.
(b) The defense provided herein shall not be applicable if the commercial purpose could have been accomplished
without deviation from the truck route.
(c) “Commercial purpose” as used herein shall mean for the purpose of loading or unloading or for the purpose of
making deliveries to a destination within the city, whether for hire or not.
(d) The word “person” as used in this section shall be construed to import the singular and plural as the case demands
and shall include individuals, partnerships, corporations, societies, associations, and all other legal entities.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-255)
Sec. 12.11.006 Weighing of vehicles
The chief of police and city policemen shall have the authority to require the person driving or in control of any
commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any
public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied
with, and such person's failure or refusal to proceed as required shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (2000 Code, sec. 24-
256)
Sec. 12.11.007 Ready-mix concrete trucks
(a) It shall be unlawful to drive or operate, on or over any street in the city, a vehicle transporting ready-mix concrete
of a weight exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds on a single axle, or exceeding thirty-six thousand (36,000)
pounds on a tandem axle, or exceeding forty-eight thousand (48,000) pounds gross vehicle weight.
(b) Any person who is found guilty of violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be fined an amount as provided in
section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-257)
ARTICLE 12.12 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.12.001 Unattended vehicles
(a) No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the
engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition and effectively setting the brakes thereon and, when
standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway.
(b) No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle having a trailer attached to said motor vehicle shall permit said
trailer to be detached and parked upon any public street.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-341)
Sec. 12.12.002 Presumption regarding responsibility for violations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/507
(a) In any prosecution charging violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered
owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle is
the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-342)
(b) If a vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied upon a street, highway, or alley or other public place in violation of
this article, then such vehicle shall be declared a nuisance. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.12.003 Blocking streets and crossings
No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, crossing or other city thoroughfare by allowing to stand thereon any
car or rolling stock for a longer time than five (5) minutes. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.12.004 Parking, stopping or standing prohibited in specified places
(a) Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police
officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall:
(1) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(A) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(B) On sidewalks;
(C) Within an intersection;
(D) On a crosswalk;
(E) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or
markings;
(F) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
(G) Upon a bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
(H) On any railroad track;
(I) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(J) Beside any curb painted red in color or in otherwise a fire lane;
(K) In a manner or location that prevents access to a trash container by a trash collection truck which
is attempting to empty the trash container.
(2) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a
passenger or passengers:
(A) In front of a public or private driveway;
(B) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
(C) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(D) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or trafficcontrol
signal located at the side of a roadway;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/507
(E) Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when properly
signposted;
(F) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(G) In any manner or location that prevents access to a mailbox, postal drop box, or similar postal
receptacle used by the United States Postal Services, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
(3) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers:
(A) Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(B) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb
such a distance as is unlawful.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-345; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.12.005 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in the city for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale;
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-346)
Sec. 12.12.006 Parallel parking required in specific places
All motor vehicles which are parked on the north side of West 7th Street in the following designated area shall be
parallel with the curb:
(1) Beginning at the west boundary line of the alley in the 600 block of West 7th Street, west for a distance
of one hundred sixty-two (162) feet to the intersection of West 7th Street and Fresno Street.
(2) Beginning at the east boundary line of the alley in the 900 block of West 8th Street, east for a distance
of one hundred seventy-six (176) feet to the intersection of West 8th Street and Houston Street.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-348)
Sec. 12.12.007 Angle parking
Vehicles may be parked at any angle, not to exceed forty-five (45) degrees, to the curb or edge of the roadway at those
places and angles where signs or markings clearly indicate that it is permissible and provided that no part or contents of
such vehicle shall protrude into or cause a hazard with other vehicles or pedestrians in the nearest adjacent traffic lane,
sidewalk or crosswalk. In no case shall this exceed seventeen (17) feet from the curb in a perpendicular direction where
thirty-degree parking is permitted or nineteen (19) feet from the curb in a perpendicular direction where forty-fivedegree
parking is permitted. (2000 Code, sec. 24-349)
Sec. 12.12.008 Marking of parking spaces
The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to cause lines or marking to be painted or placed upon the
curb and upon the street adjacent to the curb for the purpose of designating the parking spaces to be used by the vehicles
parking on or along the street so marked, and each vehicle shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/507
be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park said vehicle in such a position
that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. (2000 Code, sec. 24-350)
Sec. 12.12.009 Parking not to obstruct traffic
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (2000 Code, sec. 24-
351)
Sec. 12.12.010 Parking in alleys
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in control of any vehicle to park or permit the same to be parked in or on any
public alley in the city. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to vehicles which are continuously attended by a
person capable of driving the vehicle, or vehicles which are parked or stopped in such alley and are in the process of
being loaded or unloaded, or are being used for the purpose of furnishing a service or services to adjacent businesses,
buildings or residences, or for the purpose of repairing the alley or any utility located in the alley.
(b) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less
than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(2000 Code, secs. 24-352, 24-353)
Sec. 12.12.011 Parking of vehicles transporting hazardous cargo
(a) No person driving or in charge of any vehicle used for the purpose of transporting any inflammable materials such
as butane, gasoline or coal oil shall stop, stand or park or cause to be parked any such vehicle on any public street in the
city at any time unless said vehicle is at all times while so parked on said public street attended by a driver who is in
charge of said vehicle at all times.
(b) No person driving or in charge of any vehicle used for the purpose of transporting anhydrous ammonia, ammonia,
or any other similar material which is dangerous to human beings shall stop, stand or park or cause to be parked any
[such vehicle on any public street in the city at any] time unless said vehicle is at all times while so parked on said public
street attended by a driver who is in charge of said vehicle at all such times.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-354)
Sec. 12.12.012 Parking on narrow streets
The director of public works is hereby authorized to cause to be erected signs indicating no parking upon any street
when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs
when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon
narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-355)
Sec. 12.12.013 Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places
(a) The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in
which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause
unusual delay in traffic and the locations of signs for such designation, and shall so inform the director of public works,
who shall then direct the placement of such signs.
(b) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-356)
Sec. 12.12.014 Parking of vehicles containing livestock
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/507
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge of any vehicle traveling with livestock of any kind to park
or leave any such vehicle, or permit the same to remain standing, in any one place for any length of time not to exceed
one (1) hour during any one day on any paved street within the city limits. (2000 Code, sec. 24-357; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 12.12.015 Parking of lengthy vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or combination of vehicles and trailers exceeding an indicated
length at any place where signs are erected prohibiting the parking of such vehicles. (2000 Code, sec. 24-358; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 12.12.016 Special permits for parking of unusual nature
(a) The chief of police may issue special permits for a definite period of time to allow parking of an unusual nature
which may be contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to use this permit for purposes, places or times other than that clearly indicated
in the written permit.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person other than those named in the permit to use the permit for any purpose
whatsoever.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-359; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.12.017 Enforcement of handicapped parking regulations by volunteers
(a) Implementation of a program to allow our handicapped parking citizens to enforce handicapped parking violations
under the direction of the chief of police.
(b) Whenever a volunteer under the jurisdiction of the handicapped enforcement specialist program of the city shall
observe any motor vehicle in violation of section 12.12.004, that volunteer shall have the authority to attach to such
vehicle a parking ticket, which shall be directed to the owner of such vehicle and shall set forth the nature of the
violation. Any such citations shall be treated in the same manner as a citation issued by any police officer or public
safety employee of the city.
(c) Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section as hereafter amended shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-382)
Secs. 12.12.018–12.12.040 Reserved
Division 2. Restrictions and Prohibitions
Sec. 12.12.041 Applicability
The provisions of this division prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times
herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. (2000 Code, sec. 24-371)
Sec. 12.12.042 Regulations not exclusive
The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified
places or at specified times. (2000 Code, sec. 24-372)
Sec. 12.12.043 Parking prohibited at all times on designated streets
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/507
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described
by ordinance. (2000 Code, sec. 24-373)
Sec. 12.12.044 Parking prohibited during certain hours on designated streets
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified
by ordinance on any day, except Sundays and public holidays, within the district or upon any of the streets described by
ordinance. (2000 Code, sec. 24-374)
Sec. 12.12.045 Signs required
Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets by this division or any
ordinance of the city, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to direct the director of public works to erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the
time of any alleged offense. (2000 Code, sec. 24-375; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.12.046 Parking overtime
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by
such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking zone, street or
portion of a street. (2000 Code, sec. 24-376)
Sec. 12.12.047 Notice of overparking; charge for overparking
(a) Issuance of notice; amount of charge. It shall be the duty of each parking patrol officer and any police officer of
the city to issue a notice of overparking to the operator of any vehicle found to be overparked. The overparking notice
shall be numbered and shall give the date it was issued and the license number of the vehicle that is overparked and shall
be signed or initialed by the officer issuing the notice. The notice shall be delivered to the operator of the vehicle, or it
shall be attached to the vehicle, and such notice shall notify the operator of the vehicle that the charge for overparking is
two dollars ($2.00) if paid within ten (10) days, four dollars ($4.00) if paid between the tenth (10th) and twentieth (20th)
days, and ten dollars ($10.00) if paid after thirty (30) days.
(b) Procedure if charge is not paid. If the charge for overparking is not paid within twenty-four (24) hours, notice of
the amount due for overparking shall be mailed to the operator or owner of the vehicle which was overparked. If the
charge for overparking is not paid promptly after the mailing of said charges, a formal complaint charging the
appropriate violation of this division shall be filed in the municipal court.
(c) Failure to give notice or mail charges. Failure of any parking patrol officer or police officer or any other employee
of the city to comply with the giving of notices or the mailing of charges as provided in this division shall not be a
defense to the violation of any of the provisions of this division, and such duties are hereby declared to be
administrative.
(2000 Code, secs. 24-277–24-379)
Sec. 12.12.048 Parking, stopping or standing prohibited on specific streets
(a) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on that portion of the north side of U.S. Highway 70
(East 5th Street) between the intersection of U.S. Highway 70 (East 5th Street) and Milwee Street and the intersection of
U.S. Highway 70 (East 5th Street) and Ronald Street, being the 1100 block of East 5th Street through the 1500 block of
East 5th Street, inclusive, is prohibited.
(b) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on that portion of both the north and south sides of
Industrial Boulevard from its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Joliet Street East for a distance of four
hundred fifty (450) feet is prohibited.
(c) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the east side of that portion of Smythe Street from
588 feet north of its intersection with the north boundary line of West 13th Street thence north for a distance of 392 feet
north is prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/507
(d) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the east and west sides of that portion of North
Quincy Street from its intersection with the north right-of-way line of West 24th Street to the south right-of-way line of
Industrial Boulevard is prohibited.
(e) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on both I-27 frontage roads within the city limits is
prohibited.
(f) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the north and south sides of that portion of
Southwest 3rd Street from its intersection with the east right-of-way line of Interstate 27 to the west right-of-way line of
South Columbia Street is prohibited.
(g) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the north side of that portion of Southwest Alpine
Drive, east of its intersection with the east boundary line of South Columbia Street thence east for a distance of 143 feet,
is prohibited.
(h) Parking, stopping, or standing of any kind of vehicle on that portion of the east side of the 2400 block of Joliet
between the intersection of 24th Street and the intersection of 25th Street is prohibited.
(i) Parking, stopping or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the east side of the portion of Independence Street
from its intersection with 18th Street to its intersection with 20th Street between the timeframes of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.
and 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, is prohibited.
(j) Parking of vehicles on Quincy Street between S.W. 3rd (FM 3466) and 5th Street (U.S. 70) is hereby prohibited.
(k) Parking, stopping, or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the east side and the west side of south Ennis Street
from a point 580 feet south of said intersection of S.W. 3rd and South Ennis is prohibited.
(l) Parking or parking, stopping, or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the east side of Xenia Street from West
24th Street northward to Dimmitt Road (U.S. 194) is prohibited.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-380)
(m) Parking, stopping, or standing of any kind of motor vehicle on the east side and the west side of South Ennis
Street at the location of four feet on either side of the eight-foot wide marked crosswalk, including such marked
crosswalk, between 4th Street and Kirchwood Drive. (See map attached to Ordinance 12-3577 depicting the location of
such prohibited parking.) (Ordinance 12-3577 adopted 7/24/12)
Sec. 12.12.049 Parking of large trucks, buses and trailers
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any truck, bus, or trailer having a carrying capacity
in excess of one ton or which is more than twenty (20) feet in length, or seven (7) feet in width, to park the same upon
any street not designated as a truck route in the city or upon any street at a location that is within 100 feet of any singlefamily
residence zone in the city; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the
parking of any truck, bus, or trailer on any street for the purpose of the actual loading and unloading of goods, wares,
and merchandise when such vehicle is accompanied by the driver; and provided further, “loading” and “unloading” as
used in this section shall be limited to the actual time necessarily consumed in such operation.
(b) Exemptions to this section are vehicles commonly known and used as recreational vehicles. These are, and may
not be limited to include, motor homes, camping trailers and boats.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-381)
Secs. 12.12.050–12.12.070 Reserved
Division 3. Loading and Unloading
Sec. 12.12.071 Determination of location; placement of signs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/507
The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine the location and notify the director of public works of the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones. The director of public works shall then direct the placement and
maintenance of appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this division
are applicable. (2000 Code, sec. 24-386)
Sec. 12.12.072 Request for designation of loading zone; permits
(a) The chief of police shall not hereafter designate or assign any zone as curb loading or as a freight curb loading
zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and two (2)
signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. The chief of police, when granting a permit and issuing such signs, shall
take from the applicant an application giving such information as may be necessary to determine the need for such
permit, and the applicant shall be required to agree in writing to abide by the terms and provision of this division. Each
such permit shall expire at the discretion of the chief of police and by the removal of said signs signifying a loading zone
by city officials.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed as giving the person who makes application for a loading zone of any
kind as having any more rights or privileges for the use of such zone than has the general public or any other person; nor
shall the person or persons owning the property, building, or business in front of which a loading zone is located have
any more rights or privileges in the use of such loading zone than the general public. The use of such loading zone by all
persons shall be in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-387)
Sec. 12.12.073 Standing in passenger curb loading zone
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. (2000
Code, sec. 24-388)
Sec. 12.12.074 Standing in freight curb loading zone
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during the
hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of
materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(b) The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with
any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-389)
Sec. 12.12.075 Designation of public carrier stops and stands
The chief of police is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for
other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall
determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and he shall notify the director of public works of
such determinations. The director of public works shall direct that every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other
stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (2000 Code, sec. 24-390)
Sec. 12.12.076 Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs
(a) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street or place other than a bus stand so
designated as provided herein.
(b) The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or
unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as
provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/507
(c) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a
manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front
wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb
so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(d) The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab
stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily
stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-391)
Sec. 12.12.077 Use of bus and taxicab stands by other vehicles
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand,
when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-392)
ARTICLE 12.13 PARKING LOTS AND PARKING AREAS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.13.001 Operation and parking of vehicles in Box Parking Lot
(a) Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays of each week, the following location is
hereby designated a public place under the terms and conditions as set forth herein: 2801 Olton Road, Plainview, Hale
County, Texas, or more properly described as College Hill Addition, Plainview, Block 86, 36' x 752', herein referred to
as the Box Parking Lot.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon the Box Parking Lot at a speed that is greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the circumstances than existing, and the speed limit specified in this section shall be the
lawful speed limit, and any speed in excess of the limits specified and authorized by law shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(c) Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation study heretofore made, the prima facie speed limit of 10
miles per hour is determined and declared to be the reasonable and prudent speed limit upon the Box Parking Lot, and
the rate of 10 miles per hour is hereby fixed as the speed limit for vehicles traveling upon the Box Parking Lot between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. each Friday until 12:00 a.m. each Saturday next following and between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
[each Saturday] to 12:00 a.m. each Sunday next following, continuing for as long as said parking lot is leased to the city
pursuant to Resolution R89-160.
(d) The chief of police or his designee, except as otherwise directed from time to time by the city council, shall have
the power and is hereby authorized to regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the Box Parking Lot during
the times such parking lot is used as a public place. Such authority shall include the power to erect or place proper signs,
markers, lights, or other devices indicating, prohibiting or limiting parking, restricted speed areas, one-way traffic,
restrictions or limitations on vehicular traffic, through or arterial rights-of-way, stop signs, or U-turns, and other signs or
markers indicating the place and manner of operating or parking vehicles.
(e) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a sum of not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(2000 Code, sec. 24-164)
Secs. 12.13.002–12.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. Conduct in Parking Areas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/507
Sec. 12.13.031 Definition
For the purposes of this division, the words “parking area” shall mean a privately owned or publicly owned accessway or
parking area commonly used by the general public without charge, maintained for the convenience of customers, clients
or patrons of one or more business establishments or public offices. (2000 Code, sec. 24-396)
Sec. 12.13.032 Unlawful operation of vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area to:
(1) Accelerate or race the motor of a vehicle so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to disturb
the person or persons present;
(2) Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop or blow the horn of the vehicle when there is no
necessity for the protection of a person or property, in such a manner calculated to disturb the person or
persons present; or
(3) Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle or vehicles, without the written consent of
the parking area owner or his authorized representative.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-397)
Sec. 12.13.033 Unlawful activities
It shall be unlawful for any person in a parking area to:
(1) Fight with another person;
(2) Use loud, obscene, vulgar, or indecent language, swear, curse, yell or shriek in such a manner
calculated to disturb the person or persons present;
(3) Throw any object capable of causing bodily harm or property damage at another person or property
with intent to injure or damage;
(4) Congregate with another person or persons or loiter after entering the premises, and willfully refuse to
leave after having been notified to leave by the owner or the person in possession and control of the premises
or his agent.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-398)
ARTICLE 12.14 PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 12.14.001 Prohibited crossings
(a) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any
place except in a crosswalk.
(b) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the central business district.
(c) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk on any street designated as a through street.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-416)
Sec. 12.14.002 Walking along roadway
(a) Where sidewalks are provided, no pedestrian shall walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
(b) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable,
walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may be approaching from the opposite
direction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/507
(2000 Code, sec. 24-417)
(c) No person shall stand on or in proximity to a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, contributions,
employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
(d) No pedestrian shall cross or use freeway lanes of any expressway.
(e) The chief of police may determine that a special hazard exists for pedestrians using part of a roadway and may
erect signs restricting pedestrian traffic. No person shall walk along any part of a roadway which is so restricted.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.14.003 Use of sidewalks and safety zones
(a) Where sidewalks or safety zones are provided, pedestrians shall stand on the sidewalk or in the safety zone while
waiting for a bus, taxi or other vehicle.
(b) Pedestrians shall enter or leave a vehicle only at a safety zone or crosswalk.
(c) Pedestrians shall, while waiting on a sidewalk, stand either near the curb or away from the curb so as not to
interfere with other pedestrians.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-420)
Sec. 12.14.004 Blind pedestrians
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons whole or partially blind, to carry or use on the public streets of
the city any cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red.
(b) Any driver of a vehicle, operator of a motor-driven vehicle or pedestrian who approaches or comes in contact with
a person wholly or partially blind and carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red shall
immediately come to a full stop and take such other precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid an
accident or injury to the person carrying such cane or walking stick.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-421)
ARTICLE 12.15 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.15.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Convoy. A vehicle, or more than one vehicle (when each vehicle is following the other as in a procession) being led by a
police officer of the city or a patrolman of the state department of public safety, or the county sheriff or one of his
deputies.
Funeral procession. Any procession whereby a funeral is in progress and the city police are leading the procession.
Parade. Any procession whereby a parade is in progress.
Police escort. The leading of vehicles or a vehicle through or on a street or highway in the city by a police officer
driving a vehicle plainly marked in such a way as to indicate that the same is operated by a peace officer of the city or
the county or of the department of public safety of the state.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-311)
Sec. 12.15.002 Policy regarding police assistance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/507
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for the control of traffic by city policemen in funeral
processions, convoys or parades in the city, and to lead same when necessary in the opinion of the agents of the police
department, and to direct traffic on such occasions. (2000 Code, sec. 24-312)
Sec. 12.15.003 Right-of-way of funeral processions
All traffic within the city shall yield the right-of-way according to the directions of the police department or other peace
officer directing traffic on any occasion wherein funeral processions are in progress, whether going through or coming to
the city, or from the home of the family to the church or funeral home, or from the church or funeral home to the
cemetery. (2000 Code, sec. 24-313)
Sec. 12.15.004 Authority to disregard stop signs and signals
All persons driving motor vehicles in any funeral procession, parade or convoy having a police escort may proceed
through stop signs or red light signals if the police escort vehicle proceeds through same without stopping. (2000 Code,
sec. 24-314)
Sec. 12.15.005 Driving through parade or procession
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive between vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
parade or procession while they are in motion, provided that said vehicles are conspicuously so designated. This
provision shall not apply to intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. (2000
Code, sec. 24-315)
Sec. 12.15.006 Interrupting or disrupting parade or procession
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle or person to interrupt, enter or otherwise disrupt the free movement of a parade or
procession unless specifically directed to do so by an official law enforcement officer. (2000 Code, sec. 24-316)
Secs. 12.15.007–12.15.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 12.15.031 Required
It shall be unlawful to conduct a processional parade unless a permit for such event has been issued by the chief of
police. (2000 Code, sec. 24-326)
Sec. 12.15.032 Exceptions
The provisions of this division shall not apply to movement of the military forces of the United States of America or of
the state, nor to the funeral procession being held as a part of the burial services of a human body. (2000 Code, sec. 24-
327)
Sec. 12.15.033 Application
The application for a parade permit shall be submitted to the chief of police within ten (10) days prior to the event and
shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade;
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address,
and telephone number of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization;
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will
be responsible for the parade conduct;
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/507
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point;
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade,
the type of animals and the description of said vehicles;
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets
proposed to be traversed;
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas;
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade;
(12) If the parade is designated to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant,
the applicant for such permit shall file with chief of police a communication in writing from the person
proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; and
(13) Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
(2000 Code, sec. 24-328)
Sec. 12.15.034 Changes to application
If the proposed parade does not comply with the rules and regulations for the city or the rules and regulations for
parades, the chief of police may present alternative locations, times, routes, or other conditions that will comply. The
applicant can either accept the police chief's changes or submit a new application within forty-eight (48) hours of the
event that does comply with the issues raised by the police chief. (2000 Code, sec. 24-329)
Sec. 12.15.035 Issuance
Upon compliance with this division, a permit shall be issued by the chief of police. (2000 Code, sec. 24-330)
Sec. 12.15.036 Issuance prohibited during state of emergency
If the mayor shall have declared a state of emergency to exist within this city, no parade or assembly permit shall be
issued during the existence of such emergency. (2000 Code, sec. 24-332)
ARTICLE 12.16 SIGHT OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS
Sec. 12.16.001 Restricted areas
The areas in the city restricted by the provisions of this article are as follows:
(1) On no corner lot which abuts an open intersection or intersection controlled by yield signs, within a
triangular area described by the intersection of the adjacent curblines, or if none exist, the normal curblines,
and a point at each curbline forty-five (45) feet from the intersection, shall be erected or maintained any wall,
fence, or other structure, or any hedge, shrub, or other growth higher than three (3) feet from the top of the
adjacent curblines, or if no curb exists, then from the top of the normal curbline, except trees which are
pruned to a height of eight (8) feet; provided, however, this provision shall not apply at intersections
controlled by stop signs or by official traffic-control signals.
(2) On no corner lot which abuts an intersection of a through street and an intersecting street shall be
erected or maintained any obstruction described in subsection (1) of this section, within a triangular area
described by the intersection of the adjacent curblines, or if none exists, the normal curblines, and a starting
point ten (10) feet from the intersection on the intersecting street and one hundred (100) feet from the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/507
intersection on the through street provided, however, this provision shall not apply at intersections controlled
by official traffic-control signals.
(3) No wall, fence, or other structure, or any hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth, shall be erected or
maintained in any location so as to cause an obstruction of the view of an official traffic-control device from
the adjacent street.
Sec. 12.16.002 Enforcement
(a) The property owner maintaining an obstruction prohibited by section 12.16.001 shall be notified in writing by the
police chief or his designee. Such notice shall be by personal delivery or depositing such letter by certified mail
addressed to the last known property owner.
(b) If the obstruction is not removed within ten (10) days from the notice being delivered or signed, the police chief or
his designee shall go on the premises and summarily remove the obstruction.
(c) A bill for actual costs, in no case less than one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00), incurred by the city resulting
from the abatement of the condition existing by reason of the owner's failure to comply with the notice provided above,
shall be mailed to the property owner and must be satisfied within thirty (30) days of the bill's mailing date.
(d) If such bill is not satisfied, a privileged lien shall be filed with the county clerk for expenses incurred, such lien
being second only to tax liens and street improvements, for the cost and ten (10) percent on the amount from the
payment due date.
(e) For any such expenditure and interest as specified, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the
name of the city.
(f) The statement made by the police chief as provided in subsection (d) shall be prima facie proof of the costs
incurred in any such work performed by the city.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Definition
For the purposes of this chapter the word “utility” shall be construed to mean and include water, sewer and/or any other
utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof. (2000 Code, sec. 25-1)
Sec. 13.01.002 Provisions of chapter made part of terms and conditions of service
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish
any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections or perform any work of any kind
in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the city council. (2000
Code, sec. 25-2)
Sec. 13.01.003 Service to comply with technical regulations
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all
applicable technical provisions of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. (2000 Code, sec. 25-3)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/507
Sec. 13.01.004 Authority to establish additional standards and specifications
The city council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be
deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by
the city within or without the city and under the management of the council. Such rules, regulations, standards and
specifications shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. Violations of such rules, regulations, standards and
specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (2000 Code, sec. 25-4)
Sec. 13.01.005 Right of entry
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility service by
the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility service from abusive use. (2000 Code, sec. 25-5)
Sec. 13.01.006 Grounds for termination or refusal of service
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law;
(2) Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service;
(3) Nonpayment of bills;
(4) Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or
otherwise;
(5) Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service;
(6) Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor;
(7) Vacancy of premises.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-6)
Sec. 13.01.007 Liability of city for damage
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow
of the sewer system, failure to supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-7)
Sec. 13.01.008 Application for service
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for the same to the city utility office.
Such application shall contain the applicant's name and address and the uses for which such utility service is desired.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-8)
Sec. 13.01.009 Right to refuse service to persons in debt to city
The city may decline or fail or cease to furnish utility service to any person who may be in debt to the city for any
reason, except ad valorem taxes and special assessments. (2000 Code, sec. 25-9)
Sec. 13.01.010 Permission for service
Approval of the application for any utility service by the city council shall be deemed permission for such service. (2000
Code, sec. 25-10)
Sec. 13.01.011 Use of service assumed when premises are connected
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/507
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner
or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises shall remain connected with the utility service. (2000
Code, sec. 25-11)
Sec. 13.01.012 Use of service for unauthorized purpose
Any person having a permit from the city for the use of any utility service offered by the city who shall use such utility
service for any purpose other than as mentioned in such permit or who shall make any unauthorized changes in such
service shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (2000 Code, sec. 25-12)
Sec. 13.01.013 Damaging, tampering with or trespassing on utility equipment or premises
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any utility
service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or
premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. (2000 Code, sec. 25-13)
Sec. 13.01.014 Temporary interruption of service
The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without notice in case of emergencies. When an interruption in
service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as
circumstances permit. (2000 Code, sec. 25-14)
Sec. 13.01.015 Authority to restrict or prevent use
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city
during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. (2000 Code, sec. 25-15)
Sec. 13.01.016 Reselling service
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell to others any utility service obtained from the city except only by special
arrangement with the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 25-16)
Sec. 13.01.017 Supervision of connections
Connections for any utility service furnished by the city shall be made only under the supervision of the city council.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-17)
Sec. 13.01.018 Separate connection required for each building, structure and consumer
Every building, structure or consumer in the city shall have a separate utility service connection. (2000 Code, sec. 25-18)
Sec. 13.01.019 Unlawful connections
Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or not,
without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-19)
Sec. 13.01.020 Work to be done by city employees
No person, other than employees of the city, shall be authorized to connect, turn on, turn off or disconnect any utility
service offered by the city, or remove, replace or repair any equipment connected to any such utility service. (2000 Code,
sec. 25-20)
Sec. 13.01.021 Maintenance of equipment by consumer
The consumer of any utility service furnished by the city shall maintain and keep in good repair all connections,
appliances and other apparatus installed and used in connection with such utility service. (2000 Code, sec. 25-21)
ARTICLE 13.02 RATES AND CHARGES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/507
Sec. 13.02.001 Water meters
Meters for the measurement of water utility services by the city shall be furnished and installed by and shall remain the
property of the city, and the charges for water, based on the rates as set out in section 13.02.009, shall be determined by
the amount of water used as measured by meters. (2000 Code, sec. 25-31)
Sec. 13.02.002 Deposit required; amount of deposit
As security to guarantee the payment for all water and services furnished by the city, a deposit shall be made with the
utility accounting department at the time of making application for water service. The minimum amount of said deposit
shall be as follows:
(1) Residential:
(A) Single-family (per meter): $100.00.
(B) Multifamily on one meter:
(i) First unit: $100.00.
(ii) Each additional unit: $40.00.
(2) Commercial: Estimated 1-1/2 times monthly bill or minimum of $125.00.
(Ordinance 13-3600 adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 13.02.003 Refund of deposit
(a) The deposit shall be refunded to the depositor when he discontinues city water use. All bills and accounts due the
city for water service must be paid first.
(b) Such deposit guarantees payment of water, sewer, and sanitation service accounts or damages to service
connections or meters caused through neglect, abuses or failure of the customer or his agents to use proper care. The city
may apply the deposit or any part thereof to the payment of any such accounts when they become past due.
(c) Customer's failure to pay the water, sewer, and sanitation bill when due is considered notice from the customer to
discontinue service and apply so much of the deposit as is necessary for the payment of the then past due account.
(d) Should a deposit or any part thereof be applied in payment of past due accounts, service may not be reestablished
until the deposit is restored to the appropriate current amount.
(Ordinance 11-3563, sec. I (25-33), adopted 9/27/11)
Sec. 13.02.004 Determination by council
The rates and charges for the consumption of utility services furnished by the city, as well as the charges and fees for
connection thereto, shall be as determined by the city council from time to time and on file in the office of the city
secretary. (2000 Code, sec. 25-34)
Sec. 13.02.005 Billing; delinquency
(a) The charges provided for by this chapter for the various classes of service shall be payable monthly upon bills
rendered by the waterworks department.
(b) The charges provided for in this chapter shall become delinquent ten (10) days after said bill is rendered and as
printed on the face of the bill. The bill as rendered shall be the net amount of the bill. All bills shall be considered
rendered when sent to the customer by the accounting and collections division of the utility department, and the failure
to receive any such bill by any consumer shall in no manner relieve such consumer of the duty and necessity of paying
for water or sewer service under the terms specified in this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/507
(c) The net amount due may be paid on or before the past-due date printed on the bill. All payments must be in the
possession of the utility accounting department by the 5:00 p.m. close of business on the past-due date to prevent a
penalty charge being assessed.
(d) A one-time penalty of ten (10) percent of the total utility bill shall be assessed on all bills not paid on or before the
past-due date printed on the bill. All payments must be in the possession of the utility accounting department by the 5:00
p.m. close of business on the past-due date to prevent a penalty charge being assessed. The gross due, which includes
penalty, shall be the amount due after 5:00 p.m. on the past-due date.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-35)
Sec. 13.02.006 Discontinuance of service for nonpayment
It shall be the duty of the director of finance, upon the failure or refusal of any person, firm or corporation to promptly
pay within ten (10) days from date of delinquency any charge or charges levied and assess under the term of this chapter,
to discontinue such water or sewer service and refuse further service to such person, firm or corporation until said
charges are paid or satisfactory arrangement for payment have been made. The director may at his option extend the
payment time period for one additional month before discontinuing such water or sewer service. To avoid additional
charges for cut-off services, such payment must be received by 5:00 p.m. the day before the cut off-date. In addition, the
sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby assessed for making a service call for the purpose of cutting off service for failure
on the part of the consumer to pay water or sewer service or installment charges or for the purpose of collecting a
delinquent account or for both if both purposes are accomplished in one service call. Until the account at the premises
where service is cut off is paid in full or until the consumer or his agent has made arrangements satisfactory with the
director of finance to pay such amounts, such service shall remain cut off. (Ordinance 09-3518, sec. 1 (25-36) adopted
9/22/09; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.02.007 Collection fee for bad checks
Should collection be required for the purpose of collecting a check given by the customer in payment of a water bill, said
check having been presented to the bank and bank having not honored said check, a charge of thirty dollars ($30.00)
may be assessed. (Ordinance 10-3536, sec. 1 (25-37), adopted –/–/10)
Sec. 13.02.008 Approval of rates of franchised public utilities
The city council shall fix and approve the rates charged by any private public utility company franchised by the city and
doing business within the city. It shall be unlawful for any such public utility company or any officer or employee
thereof to assess or charge for services rendered at any rate other than the rate so fixed and approved. (2000 Code, sec.
25-40)
Sec. 13.02.009 Water rates
The city shall charge and collect, and every consumer of water shall pay for the water furnished by the city to the
consumer the amounts calculated by application of the rates to metered readings as provided in this chapter. This
amendment is effective by ordinance with the first billing of October 1, 2018 upon its passage and publication as
required by law.
(1) The following are established as the monthly rates to be charged for water furnished by the city for all
consumers, unless otherwise noted:
(A) The city shall make a minimum monthly charge of thirty-one dollars ($31.00) to each consumer
inside the city limits using city water. An additional charge will be assessed according to the
conservation step rate structure as shown below:
Conservation Step Rate Structure Inside City Limits
Range Single-Family
Residential
Irrigation Use by
Commercial/Residential
Commercial/
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/507
(in gallons) Multi-Family Public
Entity/Education
0-10,000 $2.12 $2.12 $2.12
11,000-25,000 $2.50 $2.50 $2.50
26,000-50,000 $3.00 $3.00 $2.56
Over 51,000 $3.63 $3.63 $2.63
(B) The city shall make a minimum monthly charge of thirty-one dollars ($31.00) to each consumer
outside the city limits using city water. An additional charge will be assessed according to the
conservation step rate structure as shown below:
Conservation Step Rate Structure Outside City Limits
Range
(in gallons)
Single-Family
Residential
Irrigation Use by
Commercial/Residential
Commercial/
Multifamily Public
Entity/Education
0-10,000 $2.28 $2.28 $2.28
11,000-25,000 $3.04 $3.04 $3.04
26,000-50,000 $3.66 $3.66 $3.12
Over 51,000 $4.41 $4.41 $3.20
(Ordinance 18-3682 adopted 9/25/18)
(2) All rates and charges for utility services shall be billed on one bill. Payment of the amount due on such
bill shall be in full for the total amount billed. Partial payment will not be accepted without prior approval
from the water department.
(3) State prison rates. The city shall charge ninety cents ($0.90) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for water
furnished by the city to the Wheeler Unit and Formby Unit prison facilities. This rate is guaranteed for five
(5) years, said period to begin after the facility begins to accept inmates; thereafter, charged rates will be
equal to the rates charged commercial customers inside the city limits. The date the Wheeler Unit will change
rates is March 20, 2000. The date the Formby Unit will change rates is September 6, 2001.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-41)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/507
Sec. 13.02.010 Sewer rates
For the furnishing of sewer service and sewer connections by the city, the following schedule is hereby established as the
monthly rates to be charged:
(1) Residential rates.
(A) Single-family dwellings: Thirteen dollars ($13.00) minimum plus one dollar and seventy-three
cents ($1.73) per one thousand gallons.
(B) The monthly charge for the use of sewer shall be calculated on the basis of water meter readings
for the months for which said charge is made. A maximum of fourteen thousand (14,000) gallons shall
be used to determine the sewer charge for each month.
(C) Duplexes, apartment houses, rooming houses, and multiple mobile homes: Thirteen dollar
($13.00) minimum each month for 1st dwelling unit, and eleven dollars and eighty-five cents ($11.85)
per unit for each additional unit plus one dollar and seventy-three cents ($1.73) per one thousand
gallons for all water consumed, per the water meter reading for each month. The maximum gallon cap
available to single-family dwellings shall not apply to duplexes, apartment houses, rooming houses, and
multiple mobile homes. The monthly charge for the use of sewer shall be calculated on the basis of the
water meter reading for the month for which the charge is made.
(2) Commercial rates. For all other commercial establishments, including hotels and motels, the rates to be
charged for such sewer service shall be as follows: The minimum charge shall be thirteen dollars ($13.00)
and for each one thousand gallons metered an additional charge of one dollar and seventy-three cents ($1.73)
per thousand on all consumption. The monthly charge for the use of sewer for such commercial
establishments shall be calculated on the basis of the water meter readings for the months for which said
charge is made. The commercial rate shall apply to all consumers not described under residential rates. The
maximum gallon cap available to single-family dwellings shall not apply to commercial rates.
(3) Should there be a residential or commercial establishment not using city water, or using city water for
only a portion of its total water use, then the sewer rates for such establishment in excess of the minimum rate
of thirteen dollars ($13.00) per month shall be based upon the estimated gallons of water used by said
establishment, the same to be arrived at on the basis that it is reasonable and fair to both the resident or
commercial establishment and to the city, as approved by the director of finance.
(4) A sewer charge shall not be applied to water meters which are exclusively used for yard watering or an
irrigation system. The director of public works shall develop and administer an application procedure for
exemptions and said exemptions shall be renewed annually.
(5) Any consumer who wishes to install sewer sampling and meter device may do so if such meets city
specifications and the consumer pays acquisition and installation costs. The metering equipment shall become
city property and the city shall be responsible for maintaining such. Said consumer shall be exempt from the
above charges and shall pay a minimum of thirteen dollars ($13.00) per month, two dollars and ninety-two
cents ($2.92) per thousand gallons of sewage discharged to the city sewer system, plus additional charges
based on quality as addressed in the city industrial waste ordinance.
(6) State prison rates. The rates to be charged for sewer service to the prison facility shall be as follows:
Forty-four cents ($0.44) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. The rate is guaranteed for five (5) years, said
period to commence after the facility begins accepting inmates; thereafter, charged rates shall equal rates
charged to commercial customers inside the city limits. The date the Wheeler Unit changed rates was March
20, 2000. The date the Formby Unit changed rates was September 6, 2001.
(Ordinance 17-3664 adopted 9/26/17)
Sec. 13.02.011 Consolidated billing; responsibility for payment
The charges for sewer service, refuse collection and vector control shall be made monthly and shall be added to the
water bill of each residence, apartment house and commercial establishment connected to the city's water and sewer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/507
service. The person responsible for the payment of the water bill shall also be responsible for the payment of the charges
for sewer service, refuse collection and vector control. (2000 Code, sec. 25-43)
Sec. 13.02.012 Transfer service connection fee
Customers requesting service to be transferred from one address to another will be charged a twenty-five dollar ($25.00)
nonrefundable utility account transfer fee. (Ordinance 15-3625 adopted 9/17/15)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS AND CONNECTIONS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Definitions
Where used in this article, the following words and terminologies shall be defined as set forth herein:
Along-site main. Water and/or sewer mains adjacent to a lot or tract of land also servicing adjacent property which will
be connected to said main and/or mains in the future.
City representative. The person or individual designated by the city council to perform the duties and responsibilities of
city representative as set forth in this article.
Connection charge. The charge to be paid per linear foot of existing water and/or sewer mains to connect a lot or tract of
land to said existing water and/or sewer mains which shall constitute a charge for the use of such water and/or sewer
mains in place.
Connection charge escrow fund. A separate account established by the city into which [shall be deposited] connection
charges collected for the connection of property or subdivisions to along-site or off-site mains constructed and paid for
after the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted July 24, 1990) by a previous individual property owner or
developer and from which refunds will be paid to said previous individual property owner or developer.
Developer. An owner or agent of the owner subdividing and installing utilities to serve lots or tracts for resale as homes,
commercial sites or industrial sites.
Individual owner. A property owner, personal or corporate, or the agent thereof, desiring connection to existing water
and/or sewer mains or the extension of new water and/or sewer mains for service to a single lot or tract of land not
previously connected to permanent water and/or sewer mains of a size adequate to serve the requirements of said
property owner.
Off-site main. Water and/or sewer mains totally outside a lot or tract of land but which must be installed to provide
service to the lot or tract of land for which connection is requested.
On-site main. Water and/or sewer mains totally within or adjacent to a lot or tract of land and serving only such lot or
tract of land.
Oversize cost. The difference between the cost of the oversize main as constructed and the estimated cost of the actual
size (not less than 8") required to adequately serve the property or development, based upon the then-current unit costs
of the sizes of mains and appurtenances plus engineering.
Oversize main. Any water and/or sewer mains required to be constructed by the city representative and which are larger
in size than those actually needed to adequately serve the property or subdivision being served but not less than eight
inches (8").
Permanent sewer main. A sanitary sewer main 6 inches or larger in diameter installed in the proper location to serve a
lot or tract of land for which a connection request has been made.
Permanent water main. A water main 2 inches or larger in diameter installed in the proper location to serve a lot or tract
of land for which a connection request has been made.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/507
Tap fees. The charges to be paid for each service tap installed and made by the city for connection of residences,
buildings or structures to water and/or sewer mains. The tap shall include the service line from the main to the property
line or water meter and the water meter and box.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-61)
Sec. 13.03.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article, or causing same to be violated, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this
code, and each and every violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (2000 Code, sec.
25-80)
Sec. 13.03.003 Connection to existing main
(a) Generally. Connection of property to existing water and/or sewer mains shall be permitted to be made to serve
only lots or tracts which have been properly subdivided and platted for development in compliance with the subdivision
regulations of the city and for which a plat with accompanying dedication deed has been approved and filed for record,
unless such connections are otherwise specifically permitted and approved by the city council.
(b) Connection by individual owner. Where an individual owner requests connection of a single lot or tract to an
existing permanent water and/or sewer main said individual owner shall pay to the city the appropriate tap fees plus the
connection charges as set forth below.
(1) Where the connection is to be made to a permanent on-site main the connection charge shall be $16.90
per linear foot for water mains and $31.80 per linear foot for sewer mains, which charge shall be paid for the
entire length of the main across or abutting the lot or tract for which the connection is requested. (These rates
are subject to adjustment as set forth in section 13.03.007 of this article.)
(2) Where the connection is to be made to an existing permanent along-site main the connection charge
shall be $8.45 per linear foot for water mains and $15.90 per linear foot for sewer mains, which charge shall
be paid for the entire length of the main abutting the lot or tract for which the connection is requested. (These
rates are subject to adjustment as set forth in section 13.03.007 of this article.)
(3) Where the connection is to be made to an existing permanent on-site or along-site main of size
adequate to serve the requirements of the individual owner of a lot or tract of land for which pro-rata water
and sewer payments have been previously made in full or for which the actual construction cost for the main
has been paid by a previous owner or developer of the lot or tract for which connection is requested, the
individual owner shall not be required to pay a connection charge but shall pay only the appropriate tap fee or
fees and utility account deposit or deposits.
(4) Where the individual owner requires service greater than can be provided through an existing water
and/or sewer main, whether permanent or not, the individual owner shall provide water and/or sewer mains
adequate to serve his requirements by the methods set forth in section 13.03.004 of this article, with no credit
given for the existing water and/or sewer mains.
(c) Connection by developer.
(1) Where water and/or sewer mains exist in a street, alley or easement in or along an area or tract of land
to be subdivided and developed for resale, before extension from or connection to such lines shall be made by
a developer, he shall pay to the city a connection charge of $16.20 per linear foot for all on-site water mains,
$8.45 per linear foot for all along-site water mains, and $15.90 per linear foot for all along-site sewer mains,
or the then-current estimated construction cost of such mains and their appurtenances plus 10% for
engineering, whichever is less. (The rates per linear foot set forth herein are subject to adjustment as set forth
in section 13.03.007 of this article. Current estimated construction costs shall be based on unit construction
costs determined and/or approved by the city representative.)
(2) Where the developer requires water and/or sewer mains larger and/or deeper than existing mains, the
developer shall provide for water and/or sewer mains adequate to serve his requirements by the methods set
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/507
forth in section 13.03.004 of this article, with no credit given for the existing water and/or sewer mains.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-62)
Sec. 13.03.004 Extension of mains
(a) Generally. Extensions of water and/or sewer mains will be permitted to be made to serve only lots or tracts which
have been properly subdivided and platted for development in compliance with the subdivision regulations of the city
and for which a plat with accompanying dedication deed has been approved and filed for record, unless such extensions
are otherwise specifically permitted and approved for construction by the city council.
(b) Extensions for individual owners. Where extensions of water and/or sewer mains are required to serve lots or
tracts of land owned by individual owners, such extensions shall be provided for by said individual owners in the same
manner as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. Where the term “developer” is used in subsection (c) of this section
it shall also mean “individual owner” regarding extensions for single lots or tracts of land for which connection requests
by individual owners have been made.
(c) Extensions for developers.
(1) Where extensions of water and/or sewer systems are required to serve property which has been
subdivided or platted for development and resale, water and/or sewer facilities may be extended to such
properties on the following basis and in accordance with minimum standards and procedures described
below. Where property has been subdivided or platted for development and resale, the developer shall lay,
install and/or construct water and/or sanitary sewer lines on all of the subdivided or platted property at the
same time. The sizes, gradients, locations and depths of water mains and sewer mains and their
appurtenances shall be determined by the city representative.
(A) On-site mains. The developer shall defray the entire cost, including engineering, of on-site mains
up to and including eight-inch or larger sizes required to adequately serve the property being developed.
Any oversize costs will be paid by the city upon acceptance of the completed system by the city.
(B) Along-site mains. The developer shall defray the entire cost, including engineering, of along-site
mains up to and including eight-inch or larger sizes required to adequately serve the property being
developed. Any oversize costs will be paid by the city upon acceptance of the completed system by the
city, and refunds made as connection charges are collected for connections to such along-site mains by
adjoining property as set forth in section 13.03.010 of this article.
(C) Off-site mains. The developer shall defray the entire cost, including engineering, of off-site mains
which are required to adequately serve the property being developed. Any oversize costs will be paid by
the city upon acceptance of the completed system by the city. All other costs will be refunded at a
prorated value per linear foot of such off-site mains as the property along or through which they pass is
developed until all costs, including engineering, for such off-site mains are refunded to the property
owner or developer who originally constructed such off-site mains as set forth in section 13.03.010 of
this article.
(2) Methods by which water and sewer mains for subdivisions or developments may be constructed.
(A) Water and sewer main extensions to serve a real estate subdivision or addition to the city, the plat
of which has been finally approved by the city, filed of record, and properly annexed, may be
accomplished in the following manner:
(i) By private contract.
a. Upon approval by the city, a developer of a subdivision or an addition may design and
prepare construction plans of water and sanitary sewer facilities, or either of them, to serve
the subdivision, including any access or off-site facilities that may be required. The sizes,
gradients, locations and depths of water mains and sewer mains and their appurtenances
shall be designed to adequately serve adjoining areas subject to development and shall
conform to the requirements for system networks for the general area. The developer's
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/507
engineer should confer with the city representative to determine these criteria prior to the
design and preparation of construction plans.
b. Plans and profiles submitted by the developer's engineer shall be prepared on standard
24" x 36" sheets of tracing paper. Plans and profiles shall be shown at scales of 1" to 50'
horizontal and 1" to 5' vertical. The engineer submitting the plans and profiles must be a
registered professional civil or sanitary engineer licensed to practice in the state, and he must
affix his seal and signature to each tracing of all plans and profiles. The completed tracings
for water and sewer plans and profiles shall be submitted to the city representative for
approval, accompanied by two copies of the plans and profiles of the storm sewers and street
grades as approved by the city representative and one copy of the plat of the addition that
has been recorded in the records of the county and has been so stamped. Upon final
approval, these tracings will be returned to the developer's engineer for the purpose of
making such prints as he may require. Two copies of the final plans, specifications and
profiles, together with the reproducible tracings, shall be submitted to the city representative,
to become part of the permanent files of the city.
c. Upon approval of the plans by the city representative, all plans and profiles, along with
the city's standard specifications, shall be submitted to the department of state health
services, state commission on environmental quality or other appropriate state agency
having jurisdiction for approval.
d. Upon approval of the plans by the city representative and appropriate state agencies, the
developer may begin the procedures for construction of the extensions.
e. Where off-site and/or oversize water and/or sewer mains are to be constructed which
will involve cost participating or refunds by the city, the developer shall follow the same
bidding procedures, including legal advertising, bidding, bonding and other requirements
required by law for municipalities, as though the city were constructing said extensions.
Complete records of all such bidding procedures shall be kept by the developer and copies of
said records provided to the city representative. Should the developer desire to personally
construct said off-site and/or oversize mains, he shall submit a bid in the same manner as
other bidders for the extensions. The developer shall award a contract based on the lowest
and best bid submitted, which bid shall be approved by the city.
f. Upon completion of the bidding procedures, the developer may enter into a contract
with any individual or himself to construct the system as so planned; provided, however, that
the construction and installation of the water lines and sewer lines, or either of them, shall be
supervised by the inspectors for the city to see that the installation is made in accordance
with the plans and the city's standard specifications, which, in every instance, shall be a part
of said installation contract.
g. When the project is ready for construction, line and grade stakes shall be set by a
registered professional engineer or licensed public surveyor; but these stakes shall not be set
until after the developer's surveyor has properly staked on the ground iron pins on all points
of curves, all points of tangency, all block corners and all lot corners within the subdivision,
in accordance with the city subdivision regulations.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-63)
h. No installation of water mains or sewer mains shall be made at any other locations
except a dedicated street or alley or an easement or both running in favor of the city, which
shall be furnished and filed of record by the developer of said addition. Any such
installation, when made, shall become the property of the city, free and clear of all
encumbrances, and any contract entered into between the developer and a contractor shall
provide for performance, payment and maintenance bonds such as the city uses in its
standard specifications and as required by law, which, in every instance, shall be part of said
installation contract. The city shall be named as one of the obligees in such bonds. (2000
Code, sec. 25-63; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/507
i. In the event the developer makes the installation himself, then he shall furnish said
performance, payment and maintenance bonds in favor of the city in the same form and
conditioned in the same manner as provided for in the standard contract documents used by
the city in contracting for the construction of water and sanitary sewer installation.
j. Off-site mains. Off-site water and/or sewer mains required to provide service to the
property being developed must be provided for and/or constructed by the developer through
a private contract as set forth above.
(ii) By city contract (for on-site and along-site mains). A developer of an addition or
subdivision may deposit with the city the total estimated costs of on-site and along-site water
and/or sewer mains required to serve the property being developed. The total estimated cost shall
include estimated construction cost plus 20% for contingencies and engineering. Upon deposit of
the required funds, the city will construct such mains and upon determination of final completion
cost will refund any excess amount deposited or require of such developer additional funds
required to defray the entire cost of the project. Where the city furnishes the engineering required
for the project, a charge of eight percent (8%) of the final construction cost shall be made against
the developer for such engineering and shall be included in the final completion cost.
(3) All right-of-way necessary for the installation of the proposed water and/or sewer mains shall be
furnished by the developer in favor of the city.
(4) Any developer desiring to make the installation of water and sewer lines, or either of them, shall file a
letter in writing with the city representative stating that he elects to make the installation under the terms and
provisions of this article, which said letter when received and accepted by the city shall then be binding upon
both parties, i.e., the city and the developer, providing all financial and other requirements as set forth in this
section and in section 13.03.008 have been met.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-63)
Sec. 13.03.005 Sanitary sewer tap fees
(a) The city may install and maintain all sewer taps from the city sewer main to the nearest property or easement lines,
both inside and outside of the city limits, and shall charge for the installation and maintenance of such sewer taps a sum
sufficient to cover the average cost thereof. Such sum is to be determined and collected by the water and sewer
department and shall be at the following rates or basis:
(1) Sewer service tap charges except in business areas:
(A) Where alley or street is paved: $500.00.
(B) Where alley or street has earth or gravel surface: $260.00.
(2) For business areas, or where deep cut connections are involved, estimates of cost will be furnished
upon request. Such estimated cost must be deposited with the water and sewer department before work is
started.
(3) The term “paved” is defined as any concrete pavement or compacted caliche base with asphaltic
surfacing type of pavement or concrete driveway.
(b) The above charges shall include the cost of tapping the city sewer main, the installation of wyes, and placing the
lateral main to the nearest property or easement line. The street maintenance department shall make the necessary
pavement repairs, the cost of same to be included in the cost figures as above enumerated. Costs as set out herein shall
apply for connections to property inside and outside the city limits.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-64)
Sec. 13.03.006 Water service tap fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/507
(a) The city shall install and maintain all water service taps in the streets, alleys and easements, both inside and
outside the city limits, and shall charge for the installation and maintenance of all such service taps a sum sufficient to
cover the average cost thereof; such sum is to be determined and collected by the water and sewer department and shall
be at the following rates or basis:
Water service tap charges:
3/4" service tap $550.00
1" service tap $610.00
1-1/2" service tap $925.00
2" service tap $1,075.00
(b) For service taps larger than two inches in diameter:
(1) An estimate of the cost for all service taps larger than two inches (2") in diameter will be furnished by
the city representative, and a deposit of the estimated amount will be required before work is started on the
installation of such tap, the final cost to be adjusted upon completion of the work. Should the final cost of the
work exceed the amount of the deposit, a statement showing the amount of the excess will be furnished to the
party or parties having made the deposit, and a copy of same, constituting notice that the excess amount is
due, shall be furnished to the contractor or owner of the property to which service is being extended. Upon
failure to receive prompt payment of any excess amount due on such estimates, the city representative, at his
option, may refuse or discontinue water service to the property until full payment has been made for the work
performed.
(2) In the event that upon completion of the work for which deposit has been made the final cost is less
than the amount of estimate or deposit, a refund of the amount of over-payment will be made to the party or
parties from whom the deposit was received.
(c) The above flat rate charges, and the estimates of cost of all service taps larger than two (2") inches in diameter,
shall include all costs incident to making the installation of the service tap required. The street department shall make the
necessary pavement repairs, the cost of same to be included in the cost figures as above enumerated.
(d) There shall also be paid with and in addition to the water tap fee a utility account deposit, the amount of which
shall be determined by the type of property use served. The utility account deposits shall be as follows:
(1) Single family: $50.00 per meter.
(2) Multiple family: $50.00/1st unit plus $20.00/each additional unit.
(3) Commercial, institutional, or industrial: 1-1/2 times estimated bill ($50.00 minimum).
(e) Costs set out herein shall apply for connections to property inside and outside the city limits.
(f) The city will maintain, at its own expense, and at their original sizes, all services from the main to the meter so
long as the consumer continues the use thereof. Whenever use of a service is abandoned by the consumer, this obligation
to maintain the service shall cease.
(Ordinance 06-3472 adopted 9/26/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/507
Sec. 13.03.007 Rate adjustments
(a) Annual rate determination and adjustment. The rates and prices set forth in sections 13.03.003, 13.03.005 and
13.03.006 of this article shall be reviewed periodically and when considered appropriate by the city staff, with such
adjustments being made to such rates and prices as are necessary to incorporate the then-current prevailing costs of
construction of the items of extensions involved. The revisions resulting from such review shall then be presented to the
city council for consideration and adoption.
(b) Method of rate determination.
(1) Water and sewer connection charges shall be calculated such that the charges shall include the costs of
all mains required to serve a typical 600' length block having service connections on each side of any alley
running lengthwise through the block. The cost per linear foot of water or sewer main shall be the total
estimated costs of all such required to serve a typical 600' length block divided by 600 feet. These rates shall
be charged as follows:
(A) For on-site mains: 100% of calculated connection charge times the total length of the main across
from or abutting the lot or tract of land for which the connection is requested.
(B) For along-site mains: 50% of calculated connection charge times the total length of the main
abutting the lot or tract of land for which the connection is requested.
(2) Water and sewer connection charges shall be determined by means of the following typical extension
estimates using the then-current prevailing costs of construction:
(A) Typical water extension for 600' block:
Item Quantity
Current Unit
Price
Amount
8" class 150 pipe 345 L.F. @ $ = $
6" class 150 pipe 5 L.F. @ $ = $
4" class 150 pipe 665 L.F. @ $ = $
8" gate valve box 1 ea. @ $ = $
6" gate valve box 1 ea. @ $ = $
4" gate valve box 2 ea. @ $ = $
Fire hydrant 1 ea. @ $ = $
Wet connection 1 ea. @ $ = $
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/507
C.I. fittings 0.3 tons @ $ = $
Total estimated cost: $
Cost per linear
foot
= Total cost =
= $
600 ft.
600
The water connection charge shall be the above cost per linear foot rounded off to the nearest 1/10th
dollar.
(B) Typical sewer extension for 600' block:
Item Quantity
Current Unit
Price
Amount
8" V.C pipe, 12'–14' depth 345 L.F. @ $ = $
6" V.C pipe, 0'–8' depth 600 L.F. @ $ = $
Trench safety, over 5' depth 800 L.F. @ $ = $
Manholes, 0'–6' depth 2 ea. @ $ = $
Manholes, additional depth 6 V.F. @ $ = $
Manholes, drop units 4 V.F. @ $ = $
Cleanouts 1 ea. @ $ = $
Total estimated cost: $
Cost per linear = Total cost =
= $
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/507
foot
600 ft.
600
The sewer connection charge shall be the above cost per linear foot rounded off to the nearest 1/10th
dollar.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-66)
Sec. 13.03.008 Commencement of construction; limitation on obligations of city
(a) Upon approval of the city of a specific water and/or sewer extension to serve a lot, a tract of land, an addition or a
subdivision, the construction of such water and/or sewer extension may proceed in accordance with the terms of this
article, providing funds have been made available for engineering and construction.
(b) In no event shall the city be obligated to proceed under the terms of this article if funds are not available or if in
the discretion of the city council the extensions may not be practical.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-67)
Sec. 13.03.009 Deposit of monies collected
(a) Water and sewer utility fund.
(1) Monies collected as connection charges for connections to on-site water and/or sewer mains shall be
deposited in a water and sewer utility fund or funds established for the maintenance and construction of water
and sewer system mains and facilities.
(2) Monies collected as tap fees shall be deposited in a water and sewer utility fund or funds established for
the installation and maintenance of such taps.
(b) Water and sewer construction fund. Monies collected as deposits for the construction of water and/or sewer main
extensions shall be deposited in a water and sewer construction fund established for the funding of water and/or sewer
main extensions.
(c) Off-site and along-site escrow fund. Monies collected as connection charges for connections to off-site and/or
along-site water and/or sewer mains, which charges are to be refunded as set forth in section 13.03.010, shall be
deposited in a special escrow fund established for refundable monies and designated as the connection charge escrow
fund.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-68)
Sec. 13.03.010 Payment of refunds
(a) Refunds due to future development and/or connections will be made for the costs of off-site mains and a portion of
the costs of along-site mains when the tracts through or along which they pass are connected for service. Such refunds
will be paid to the owner or developer who initially defrayed the cost of the main to which connection is made and shall
be in the amount collected for the tract so connected; except, however, in no case shall total refunds exceed one-half of
the total original cost of the along-site main or the total original cost of the off-site main to which the connection is
made, whichever the case may be.
(b) Except as otherwise provided, all refunds provided for in this article shall be made on November 1 and May 1 of
each year, and shall include funds then accrued to the credit of the developers and others. The city shall never be liable
for payment of interest on any deposits, payments or refunds provided for herein.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-69)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/507
Sec. 13.03.011 Intent; inequitable charges; vested rights
The intent and purpose of this article is to provide an equitable charge for water and sanitary sewer connections as a
proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve property in the city. In case a
lot or a tract of land is so situated or shaped that the terms of this article create an inequitable basis as between it and
other tracts of land in the city, then, in that event, the city council shall determine the proper charges in accord with the
intent and purpose of this article. No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and provisions of this article.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-70)
Sec. 13.03.012 Prior agreements or contracts
This article shall not affect or change any agreement or contract for providing water and sewer services which was
entered into by the city on or before the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted July 24, 1990). (2000 Code, sec.
25-71)
Secs. 13.03.013–13.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Properties Subject to Article
Sec. 13.03.041 Generally
All lots, tracts of land, additions and subdivisions which are not connected to existing permanent water and/or sewer
mains or for which water and/or sewer mains must be constructed shall be subject to the terms of this article except as
set forth below. (2000 Code, ch. 25, art. III, div. 2 (intro))
Sec. 13.03.042 Redevelopment areas
Where areas located in a previously developed section of the city are proposed for redevelopment into a use which
requires additional or larger water and/or sanitary sewer mains, the city council may elect to share the costs of such
improvements and to adjust connection charges as it may deem to be appropriate and in the best interest of the city as an
encouragement for such redevelopment. (2000 Code, sec. 25-76)
Sec. 13.03.043 Previously connected property
Property which has been previously connected to existing permanent water and/or sanitary sewer mains but the
improvements of which have been abandoned or cleared from said property and for which said water and/or sewer
service has been disconnected may, at the discretion of the city council, be exempted from the connection charges set
forth in section 13.03.003 where reconnection to said existing permanent water and/or sanitary sewer mains will
adequately serve said property. However, said property shall be subject to all tap fees and account deposits. (2000 Code,
sec. 25-77)
Sec. 13.03.044 Certain existing improved property exempt
(a) All properly platted property which was in the city limits as of the first (1st) day of March, 1965, and which is
served by adequate water and sewer mains shall be exempt from the terms of this article except as set forth in sections
13.03.012 and 13.03.043 of this article. All unplatted property which was in the city limits as of the first (1st) day of
March, 1965, and which is served by adequate water and sewer mains shall comply with the requirements of the
subdivision regulations of the city in order to be connected to said mains but shall be exempt from the terms set forth in
section 13.03.003 except section 13.03.003(b)(4) and section 13.03.003(c)(2).
(b) All property, platted or unplatted, which was in the city limits as of the first (1st) day of March, 1965, but which
requires an extension to be made for connection to either water or sewer, or both, shall be subject to the terms of this
article and shall comply with those terms in order to receive and be connected to such water and/or sewer service.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-78)
Sec. 13.03.045 Property requiring larger or deeper mains
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/507
In the event the use of said property described in section 13.03.043 or section 13.03.044 requires water and/or sewer
mains larger and/or deeper than existing mains, the developer of said property may, at the discretion of the city council,
be required to provide for the larger and/or deeper water and/or sewer mains adequate to serve his requirements by the
methods set forth in section 13.03.004, with no credit given for the existing water and/or sewer mains. (2000 Code, sec.
25-79)
ARTICLE 13.04 INDUSTRIAL WASTES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.04.001 Definitions
(a) For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them:
Act. The Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended.
Approved metering device. A metering device approved by the city manager or his/her designee.
Approving authority. The city manager or his duly authorized representative.
Authorized representative of industrial user. An authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
(1) A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
(2) A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
(3) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible
for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20)
degrees Celsius.
Boiler blow-down. The discharge of waters or wastes from a boiler.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house
lateral and house connection).
Categorical standards. National categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard.
Cesspool. A covered pit into which raw sewage is discharged for final disposal by leaching into the porous soil.
City manager. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned wastewater collection
and treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his/her designee(s).
COD (chemical oxygen demand). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present
in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific
test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with
biochemical oxygen demand.
Commercial. Establishments which primarily discharge domestic wastes, but are not limited to such wastes.
Control authority. The city manager or his/her designee.
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes
with other discharges in the public sewer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/507
Control point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public
sewer.
Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only
pollutant added is heat.
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state.
Domestic wastewater. The wastewater normally discharging into the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including
apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free of stormwater, free of extraneous
nonpolluted water, and free of industrial waste.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the
term may also be used as a designation for other duly authorized officials of said agency.
Garbage. Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to
such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with
no particle greater than one-quarter inch (1/4") in any dimension.
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to flow in the waste
stream and without consideration of time.
Grease. Any material recovered as a substance soluble in trichlorotrifluorethane, including biological and mineral
hydrocarbons, such as, but not limited to, thick oils, viscous lubricants, fats, etc.
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks, receptacles in boats, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, etc.; and/or
any wastes from septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section
307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) into the wastewater disposal system (including holding tank waste discharged
into the system).
Industrial. Establishments that produce industrial waste.
Industrial user. Any industry that discharges industrial processing wastewater, including sanitary wastewater, into the
city's wastewater disposal system.
Industrial waste. Any waterborne solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from any commercial, industrial,
manufacturing or food processing operation or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these
with water or domestic sewage, as distinct from normal domestic sewage.
Industrial waste charge. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial waste into the city's sewer system.
Inspector. Any authorized agent or representative of the city.
Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the wastewater disposal system treatment processes or operations which
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's state or federal discharge permit. The term includes prevention
of sewage sludge use or disposal by the wastewater disposal system in accordance with section 405 of the act or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the wastewater
disposal system.
Land application site. The designated site for land application disposal of effluent from the city's wastewater disposal
system.
May. Term denoting permissiveness.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million, a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligrams-per-liter value
multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/507
Multifamily dwelling unit. Two (2) or more dwelling units on a single lot or tract, whether in one (1) building or more
than one (1) building or structure, including a mobile home or homes located on a single lot or tract of land, irrespective
of the fact that water service for each may or may not be on one (1) meter or all on the same meter. This definition also
applies to multifamily dwelling units with a private water supplier if connected to the city's wastewater disposal system.
National categorical pretreatment or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act which applies to a specific category of
industrial users.
National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of section
307(b) of the act and 40 CFR section 403.5.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.
New source. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations
prescribing a section 307(c) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is
thereafter promulgated within one hundred twenty (120) days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is
promulgated later than one hundred twenty (120) days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction
of which is commenced after the date of the promulgation of the standard.
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers
and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l and BOD
is not more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l.
Official notice. A registered or certified letter (return receipt requested) from the city manager or his/her designee.
On-site sewer system. Septic tanks, pit privies, cesspools, sewage holding tanks, injection wells used to dispose of
sewage, chemical toilets, treatment tanks, and all other facilities, systems, and methods used for the disposal of sewage
other than the disposal systems operated under a permit issued by state or federal agencies.
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design
capacity.
Owner. The person, firm, or public or private corporation using a lot, parcel of land, building or premises that discharges
waterborne wastes, either polluted or unpolluted, within the city limits, who pays or is legally responsible for the
payment of water rates or charges made against said lot, parcel of land, building or premises if connected to the water
distribution system of the city, or who would be legally responsible for such payment if so connected.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter.
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, and industrial,
municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
Polluted water. Any water or waterborne waste that is not approved for discharge into a watercourse or stream by the
appropriate governmental authority, or any water that requires treatment prior to acceptance for a domestic water supply.
Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of
water.
Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of
the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a wastewater disposal system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/507
also, pretreatment or treatment includes such devices as grease, oil or sand interceptors, and hydrocarbon removal units,
but is not limited to these.
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
Private water supplier. Water supplied from a private source, such as a well, or any source other than the public water
supply.
Public sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall
have the use, subject to control by the city.
Residential. Dwelling units that are individually metered and produce domestic wastewater, including those with a
private water supply but connected to the city's wastewater disposal system.
Reverse osmosis. The separation of a solvent and a solute by the application of pressure in excess of natural osmotic
pressure to the solution outside of the membrane, forcing the solvent to the other side.
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into
which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
Sewage. Domestic or industrial water carried in the drains and pipes of the wastewater disposal system.
Shall. Term denoting a mandatory nature.
Significant industrial user. Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who:
(1) Has an average discharge flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per average workday;
(2) Has a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow in the city's wastewater disposal system;
(3) Has in its wastes toxic pollutants or EPA priority pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the act
or the state statutes and rules;
(4) Is found by the city, state or federal agencies to have a significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the
system's effluent quality, or air emission generated by the system; or
(5) Is a categorical industry.
Single-family residence. One (1) building, structure or mobile home on a single lot or tract occupied as one (1) dwelling
unit.
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in
quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
Slug load. Any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a wastewater
disposal system.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the latest edition of the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of
“Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
State agency. The agency designated by the state to have jurisdiction over the subject matter contained in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/507
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater
or industrial waste is not intentionally passed.
Stormwater. Rainfall or any other form of precipitation.
Supervisor. The code enforcement officer of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
Suspended solids. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater,
or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
To discharge. To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow,
permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
Total suspended solids (TSS) or suspended solids. The solids that either float on the surface of, or in suspension in,
water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended
solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
administrator of the EPA under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
Toxic waste. Any waterborne liquid, solid or gaseous substance in sufficient quantity to damage, injure or interfere with
any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans, animals or plants, or create any hazard in the groundwater.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful
substances.
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing:
(1) No free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) No acids or alkalis;
(3) No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water;
(4) No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) Not more than ten (10) mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD; and
(7) Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as
specified in Standard Methods.
User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's wastewater disposal
system.
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic,
agricultural or industrial activities.
Wastewater. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with any ground, surface and storm water that may be present.
Wastewater contribution permit. As set forth in division 2 of this article.
Wastewater disposal system. A treatment works as defined in section 212 of the act, which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant and the designated land
application site (if any), but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. For the purposes of this article, the term shall include any sewers that convey wastewater to the wastewater
disposal system from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's
wastewater disposal system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/507
Wastewater facilities. All facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes.
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength
the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
Wastewater treatment plant. Any city-owned facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating
wastewater, industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers; the portion of the wastewater disposal system
designed to provide treatment to wastewater.
Waterborne. Supported or transported by water.
Watercourse. A natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently.
Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(b) The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
CWA Clean Water Act
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
FOG Fats, oils and grease
l liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
O&M Operation and maintenance
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
TDS Total dissolved solids
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/507
TSS Total suspended solids
(2000 Code, sec. 25-91)
Sec. 13.04.002 Penalty
(a) A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other
criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes, this code or other ordinances against a
person continuing prohibited discharges.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-116)
Sec. 13.04.003 Prohibited discharges generally
(a) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(b) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-92)
Sec. 13.04.004 Chemical discharges
(a) No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l;
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
(5) Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD);
(6) Any quantity of formaldehyde or carbide wastes;
(7) Any substance which contributes to the wastewater disposal system's violation of its state agency
and/or other disposal system permit;
(8) Any slug load, which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume or strength as to cause interference with
the city's wastewater disposal system; or
(9) Any substance which may cause the wastewater disposal system's effluent or any other product of the
wastewater disposal system, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or
to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the wastewater disposal
system cause it to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/507
(b) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
(2) Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one
hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (0° and 65° Celsius). Fats, wax, grease or oils in excess of one
hundred (100) mg/l shall be considered industrial waste;
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any
such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the approving authority for such materials; or
(4) Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions
of section 13.04.003.
(c) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel at the wastewater facilities.
(d) All waste, wastewater or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odor-producing
substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite
wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies with
jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-93)
Sec. 13.04.005 Heavy metals and toxic materials
(a) No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this
section.
(b) The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l) determined
on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are:
Substance Quantity (mg/l)
Arsenic 0.05
Barium 1.00
Boron 1.00
Bromide 100.00
Chlorine 100.00
Cadmium 0.02
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/507
Chloride 250.00
Chromium:
Hexavalent 0.70
Trivalent 3.00
Copper 1.00
Cyanide 0.04
Fluoride Other than contained in water
supply
Iodine 100.00
Iron 5.00
Lead 0.10
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.005
Nickel 0.50
Phenols 12.00
Selenium 0.02
Silver 0.15
Sulfates 500.00
Tin 1.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/507
Zinc 5.00
(c) No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the
approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions.
(d) Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to:
(1) Antimony.
(2) Beryllium.
(3) Bismuth.
(4) Cobalt.
(5) Molybdenum.
(6) Uranyl ion.
(7) Rhenium.
(8) Strontium.
(9) Tellurium.
(10) Herbicides.
(11) Fungicides.
(12) Pesticides.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-94)
Sec. 13.04.006 Garbage
(a) No person may discharge garbage into the public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-fourth inch
(1/4") in any dimension are prohibited.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder
equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
(c) A user may not contribute any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-95)
Sec. 13.04.007 Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
(a) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
(1) Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage;
(2) Unpolluted cooling water;
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters; or
(4) Other unpolluted drainage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/507
(b) In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm
sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be
discharged.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-96)
Sec. 13.04.008 Temperature
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit
(65° Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase
at a rate of ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to
one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit. (2000 Code, sec. 25-97)
Sec. 13.04.009 Radioactive wastes
(a) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the
approving authority.
(b) The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for
discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-98)
Sec. 13.04.010 Impairment of facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include but are not limited to materials which exert or cause
a concentration of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including but not limited to:
(A) Fuller's earth;
(B) Lime slurries;
(C) Lime residues;
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 1,300 mg/l, including but not limited to:
(A) Sodium chloride;
(B) Sodium sulfate;
(3) Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to:
(A) Dye wastes;
(B) Vegetable tanning solutions;
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(c) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/507
(2) Overload skimming and grease-handling equipment;
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes
due to the non-amenability of the substance to bacterial action;
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(d) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(e) The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(f) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this
section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes;
(2) Cinders;
(3) Sand;
(4) Mud;
(5) Straw;
(6) Shavings;
(7) Metal;
(8) Glass;
(9) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(10) Rags;
(11) Feathers;
(12) Tar;
(13) Plastics;
(14) Unground garbage;
(15) Whole blood;
(16) Paunch manure;
(17) Wood;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/507
(18) Hair and fleshings;
(19) Entrails;
(20) Slops;
(21) Chemical fertilizers;
(22) Chemical residues;
(23) Paint residues;
(24) Bulk solids.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-99)
Sec. 13.04.011 Use of sanitary sewers required
(a) Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all
persons discharging:
(1) Wastewater;
(2) Industrial waste; or
(3) Polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the state commission on environmental quality or other proper agency, no person may
deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to
any:
(1) Natural outlet;
(2) Watercourse;
(3) Storm sewer; or
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable
treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of the federal, state and local
government.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-100)
Sec. 13.04.012 Acceptance of discharges
(a) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: (i) deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes,
equipment or receiving waters; (ii) create a hazard to life or health; or (iii) create a public nuisance, the approving
authority shall require:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(2) Control over the quantities and rate of discharge; and
(3) Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under
subsection (a) of this section.
(c) The approving authority shall reject wastes when:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/507
(1) It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section;
and
(2) The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-101)
Sec. 13.04.013 Pretreatment, flow-equalizing or control facilities
(a) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve the design and installation
of equipment and processes.
(b) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances
and other laws.
(c) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and
maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-102)
Sec. 13.04.014 Traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; and
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving
authority:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority;
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and
(3) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-103)
Sec. 13.04.015 Requirements for building sewers
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and
as required by the approving authority:
(1) Install an accessible and safely located control manhole;
(2) Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
water; and
(3) Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-104)
Sec. 13.04.016 Sampling and testing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/507
(a) Sampling shall be conducted in accordance with 40 CFR 136, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage
works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property. (Note: The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite sample from all outfalls of the premises is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be
required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.)
(b) Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be:
(1) Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of 40 CFR 136; and
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point
authorized by the approving authority.
(c) BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling.
(d) The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD and suspended solids.
(e) The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken.
(f) In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the sanitary sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. In the event the nearest
downstream manhole is unsuitable for collection of a representative sample, the building sewer cleanout shall be used
for sample collection.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-105)
Sec. 13.04.017 Payment of cost of collection and treatment; agreement with city
(a) Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment.
(b) When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized
representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing:
(1) Terms of acceptance by the city; and
(2) Payment by the person making the discharge.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-106)
Sec. 13.04.018 Industrial waste charge; additional charges
(a) If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading of the sewage
collection, treatment, or disposal facilities of the city, then, prior to approval, the city and the person making the
discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be
determined from the schedule of charges.
(b) If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that wastewater collection, treatment, or
other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then, prior to approval,
the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full
all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste.
(c) The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and
the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste; and
(2) Operation and maintenance costs, including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and
supplies, and proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/507
(2000 Code, sec. 25-107)
Sec. 13.04.019 Schedule of charges
Industrial waste charges shall be separate and in addition to customary commercial sewer charges and shall be based
upon the strength of the waste above that of the normal domestic wastewater. The industrial waste charges shall be
calculated by the following formula:
S = Va (BOD - 250 mg/l + Vb (SS - 250 mg/l) + Vc (FOG - 100 mg/l) + (Vd)*
Where:
S = Surcharge expressed in dollars per month for waste containing excess
strength.
V = Monthly waste flow expressed in million gallons.
BOD = Actual biochemical oxygen demand expressed in mg/l measured at
customer's point of discharge.
SS = Actual suspended solids expressed in mg/l measured at customer's point of
discharge.
FOG = Actual fats, oils and grease expressed in mg/l measured at customer's point
of discharge.
a = Unit cost expressed in dollars for removing 1 mg/l BOD from 1 million
gallons.
b = Unit cost expressed in dollars for removing 1 mg/l SS from 1 million
gallons.
c = Unit cost expressed in dollars for removing 1 mg/l FOG from 1 million
gallons.
d = Unit cost expressed in dollars for transporting 1 million gallons of waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/507
* “Vd” portion of the formula shall be used only when a new sewer main (and lift station, if required) must be
constructed in order to adequately serve the customer due to volume of flow.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-108)
Sec. 13.04.020 Adjustment of charges
(a) The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the
results of sampling and testing.
(b) Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two (2) billing periods and shall continue for six (6) billing periods
unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased.
(c) The city shall review at least annually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in
the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience.
(d) The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the
regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for
payment of sewer charges.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-109)
Sec. 13.04.021 Existing dischargers
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to February 24, 1976, may continue without penalty so
long as he:
(1) Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority;
(2) Has discharged the industrial waste at least twelve (12) months prior to February 24, 1976; and
(3) Applies for and is granted a permit no later than July 23, 1976.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-110)
Sec. 13.04.022 Permit conditions
(a) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of section 13.04.021 provided that
the person:
(1) Submits an application within one hundred twenty (120) days after February 20, 1976, on forms
supplied by the approving authority;
(2) Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when
required;
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including, but not limited to,
provisions for:
(A) Payment of charges;
(B) Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and
(C) Sampling and analysis to determine quality and strength; and
(4) Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving
authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/507
(b) A person applying for a new discharge shall:
(1) Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and
(2) Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-111)
Sec. 13.04.023 Power to enter property
(a) The supervisor and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are
entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article.
(b) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety,
internal security, and fire protection.
(c) Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation.
(d) The supervisor and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are
entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of:
(1) Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
(2) Maintenance of any portion of the sewer system lying within the easement; and
(3) Conducting any other authorized activity.
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
(e) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the public sewers.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-112)
Sec. 13.04.024 Authority to disconnect service
(a) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the
system when:
(1) Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing
rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no
longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering
wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by
the city as normal domestic treatment; or
(3) The industrial customer:
(A) Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the
approving authority;
(B) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an
imbalance in the wastewater treatment system;
(C) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/507
(D) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
(b) If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer;
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent
information; and
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or
other facilities to remove the objectionable characteristic from his industrial wastes.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-113)
Sec. 13.04.025 Notice of violation
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. (2000 Code, sec. 25-114)
Sec. 13.04.026 Continuing prohibited discharge
No persons may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. (2000
Code, sec. 25-115)
Sec. 13.04.027 Failure to pay charges
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by this code or
the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water, refuse collection and sanitary sewer service when
due. (2000 Code, sec. 25-117)
Sec. 13.04.028 Appeals
The decision and act of the approving authority made and determined pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article
may be appealed to the city council by any person who feels that he has been aggrieved by the decision and action of the
approving authority, in which event the decision and action and authority given the approving authority herein shall be
made and determined by the city council. (2000 Code, sec. 25-118)
Sec. 13.04.029 Payment of costs of removing sewer line blockages
In the event any person, firm, or institution connected to the wastewater disposal system is determined to be the cause of
obstruction of the city's sanitary sewer line, the person, firm or institution responsible shall be assessed a charge of no
less than the cost of the personnel and equipment used to unblock the sewer line and the cost of the personnel and
equipment necessary to clean the sanitary sewer line. (2000 Code, sec. 25-119)
Sec. 13.04.030 Payment of costs of cleaning wastewater spillage
In the event any person, firm, or institution causes wastewater to be spilled into any storm sewer or natural water outlet,
the person, firm or institution responsible shall be assessed a charge of no less than the cost of the personnel and
equipment used to clean the wastewater spillage. (2000 Code, sec. 25-120)
Sec. 13.04.031 Discharge of polluted water into natural outlet
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and a permit to discharge such has been obtained from the state agency.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-121)
Sec. 13.04.032 Allowing oil, antifreeze or other drainings from motors to enter sewer system
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/507
It shall be unlawful for any person to pour or place any oil, grease, antifreeze, battery acid, or any other drainings from
automobile, tractor or other engines or motors at any place so that oil, grease, antifreeze, battery acid, or drainings will
run by gravity or otherwise into any sink, trap, grating, pipe or other plumbing connected with the sanitary sewer or
storm sewer system of the city. (2000 Code, sec. 25-122)
Sec. 13.04.033 Reverse osmosis, boiler and cooling tower discharges
Wastes discharged into the wastewater disposal system from units such as, but not limited to, reverse osmosis units,
boilers, and cooling towers may be subject to analysis such as TDS, TSS and chlorides. If the discharges are determined
to cause interference with the wastewater disposal system or pass the wastewater disposal system untreated or have
reasonable possibility to interfere with or pass through the wastewater disposal system untreated, the city manager or
his/her designee may require alternate disposal or treatment of such effluent discharges. (2000 Code, sec. 25-123)
Sec. 13.04.034 Compliance with federal and local pretreatment standards
Any industry falling within any industrial category subject to categorical pretreatment standards promulgated pursuant to
section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act of 1977 and any subsequent amendments applying to this act shall comply
with all federal regulations, pretreatment requirements, and/or discharge limits applicable to that particular industrial
category. These federal pretreatment regulations take precedence over this article; provided, however, such industry shall
continue to meet specific discharge limits set forth in this article which are not inconsistent with the categorical
pretreatment standards applicable to its industry, and shall meet more stringent local standards which have been justified
as necessary for the protection of the wastewater treatment process. (2000 Code, sec. 25-124)
Sec. 13.04.035 Compliance with state requirements
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this article. (2000 Code, sec. 25-125)
Sec. 13.04.036 City's right of revision
The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 25-126)
Sec. 13.04.037 Excessive discharge
No user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical
pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city, state or federal government.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-127)
Sec. 13.04.038 Accidental discharge
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
article within ninety (90) days from the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted June 8, 1993). Facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost
and expense. In the case of an accidental discharge it is the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the city water
treatment plant at (806) 296-1100, twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, of the incident. The notification
shall include the date, time, and location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-128)
Secs. 13.04.039–13.04.060 Reserved
Division 2. Permits, Reports and Pretreatment Standards
Sec. 13.04.061 Unauthorized discharge of wastewater prohibited
It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit into any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said city, and/or to the wastewater disposal system, any wastewater except as authorized by the city
manager or his/her designee in accordance with the provisions of this article. (2000 Code, sec. 25-141)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/507
Sec. 13.04.062 Wastewater contribution permit required
All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater
contribution permit before connecting to or contributing to the wastewater disposal system. All existing significant
industrial users connected to or contributing to the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater contribution
permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted June 8, 1993).
(2000 Code, sec. 25-142)
Sec. 13.04.063 Application for permit
(a) Users who discharge industrial wastewater and are required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the city manager or his/her designee at 901 Broadway, phone 296-1100, an application in the
form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35). Existing users shall apply for a
wastewater contribution permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article (ordinance adopted June 8,
1993), and proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the
wastewater disposal system. Applications can be obtained from the city manager or his/her designee. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, upon request, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, part or all of the following
information:
(1) Name, address, and location of the actual facility (if different from the mailing address).
(2) SIC number according to the current Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of Management
and Budget.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those mentioned in division 1
of this article, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40
CFR, part 136, as amended.
(4) Time and duration of contribution.
(5) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal
variations if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer
connections, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which
are or could be discharged.
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or
federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, and, if so,
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(A) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(B) No increment referred to in subsection (A) shall exceed nine (9) months.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/507
(C) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for
compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city manager or his/her designee including, as
a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the
steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall
more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the city manager or his/her designee.
(10) Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production.
(11) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
(12) Number of employees, hours of operation of plant, and proposed or actual hours of operation of
pretreatment system.
(13) Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
(b) The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-143)
Sec. 13.04.064 Modification of permit; effect of new pretreatment standards
Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution
permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by section 13.04.062, the user shall apply for a
wastewater contribution within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national
categorical pretreatment standard. In additional, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to
the city manager or his/her designee within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (a)(8) and (9) of section 13.04.063.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-144)
Sec. 13.04.065 Permit conditions
Wastewater contribution permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a
community sewer;
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests, and reporting schedule;
(6) Compliance schedules;
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports [pursuant to] sections 13.04.073
and 13.04.074;
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified
by the city, and affording the city access thereto;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/507
(9) Requirements for notification to the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any
substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;
(10) Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per section 13.04.067;
(11) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-145)
Sec. 13.04.066 Transfer of permit
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation
without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit. (2000 Code, sec. 25-146)
Sec. 13.04.067 Revocation of permit
Any user who violates the following conditions of this division, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of division 3 of this article:
(1) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge in a
timely manner;
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-147)
Sec. 13.04.068 Preliminary treatment facilities–When required
(a) Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve
compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal
pretreatment regulations.
(1) Preliminary pretreatment facilities may be required when the admission into the public sewers of any
waters or wastes:
(A) Has a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l;
(B) Contains more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l of suspended solids;
(C) Contains any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in this article; or
(D) Has an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average daily sewage flow of the
city.
[Such facilities] shall be subject to review and approval by the city manager or his/her designee.
(2) Where necessary in the opinion of the city manager or his/her designee, the owner shall provide, at his
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
(A) Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to two hundred fifty (250) mg/l and the suspended
solids to two hundred fifty (250) mg/l;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/507
(B) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in
this article; or
(C) Control the quantities and rate of discharge of such waters or wastes.
(b) Plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's
initiation of the changes.
(c) The city shall annually publish, as required by and in accordance with the EPA, in the Plainview Daily Herald, a
list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the
twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s)
during the same twelve (12) months.
(d) All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the federal
and state agencies and control authority upon request.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-148)
Sec. 13.04.069 Same–Maintenance
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any water or wastes as provided for in section 13.04.068, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation. (2000 Code, sec. 25-149)
Sec. 13.04.070 Same–Grease, oil and sand interceptors
(a) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city manager or his/her designee,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager or his/her designee, and
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(b) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily
removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
(c) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, and kept in
continuously effective operation at all times.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-150)
Sec. 13.04.071 Same–Hydrocarbon removal units
(a) Persons intending to discharge effluents from hydrocarbon removal units into the wastewater disposal system shall
notify the city manager or his/her designee thirty (30) days prior to discharge into the city's sanitary sewer system.
(b) Persons intending to use devices for the removal of hydrocarbons shall file an application for a wastewater
contribution permit with the city manager or his/her designee thirty (30) days prior to permit application.
(c) Persons operating hydrocarbon removal units will be required to send monthly sample results to the city manager
or his/her designee, and the results must meet all requirements of this article in addition to the following criteria:
(1) Benzene less than one (1) mg/l;
(2) Toluene less than one (1) mg/l;
(3) Xylene less than one (1) mg/l;
(4) Ethelbenzene less than one (1) mg/l;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/507
(d) All hydrocarbon removal units will be required to have a separator to help control free products from entering the
sanitary sewer.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-151; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.04.072 Removal, transport and disposal of waste from septic tanks, grease traps, etc.
(a) No septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet, or any similar receptacle for waste storage shall be emptied at the city
water reclamation plant or any other designated emptying site or its contents removed except by a person holding an
annual transport permit from the state agency, as well as an annual disposal permit from the city manager or his/her
designee.
(b) The permittee shall take all reasonable measures to prevent the development or existence of a nuisance or of any
condition hazardous to health which can arise from his operations, and shall comply with the following:
(1) Material taken from a septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet, or any similar receptacle for waste storage
shall be disposed of only in a manner and place approved by the state agency. Approval shall be obtained at
the time of issuance of the state permit, and no change in the approval procedure shall be made by the
permittee without prior approval of the state agency.
(2) Every vehicle and all auxiliary equipment used for the transportation or handling of the contents of any
septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet or similar waste storage receptacle shall be liquid-tight, gastight, and
soundproof, so that no foul material may spill or escape therefrom. Tanks on septic vehicles shall have a
minimum capacity of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons.
(3) No vehicle or auxiliary equipment used for carrying, transporting or handling the contents of septic
tanks, cesspools, chemical toilets or any similar waste storage receptacle shall be allowed to stand or remain
within fifty feet (50') of any occupied premises.
(4) Vehicles and equipment shall be kept in a clean condition and shall not be opened longer than is
necessary when in use.
(5) Each vehicle used under this regulation shall have the permittee's state agency permit number, name,
phone number, and transporter number, as well as the registration stickers, visibly inscribed on the side door
panels and the rear face in numerals not less than three (3) inches high.
(6) Mixing of incompatible wastes within the same container is prohibited. Transporters shall not use the
same container or pumping equipment to collect or transport incompatible waste without first emptying and
cleaning the container and equipment of all previously handled wastes. For purposes of this subsection,
incompatible waste means wastes which have different processing, storage, or disposal requirements.
However, transporters may mix wastes with different characteristics provided the facility to which the waste
is being transported is authorized to store, process, or dispose of such waste mixture.
(c) Persons who collect and/or transport waste subject to control under this section shall initiate and maintain a record
of each individual collection and deposit. Such record shall be in the form of a manifest trip ticket or other similar
documentation required by the state agency and approved by the city manager or his/her designee. The transporter shall
provide the person who generates the waste a copy of the waste control record or other document showing receipt of
waste and shall provide the facility operator a copy of all control records of wastes deposited. The transporter shall retain
a copy of all records showing the collection and disposition of waste. Such copies shall be retained for five (5) years and
made available to the city manager or his/her designee upon request. The waste control record shall include:
(1) Owner, address, telephone number and state agency registration of the transporter;
(2) Name, address, and telephone number of the person who generated the waste, and date collected;
(3) Type and amount of waste collected or transported;
(4) Name of the responsible person (driver) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste;
(5) Date and place where the waste was deposited;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/507
(6) Identification (permit application or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility
where the waste was deposited;
(7) Name and signature of the facility representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of
waste received; and
(8) Volume of the septic tank/grease or grit trap.
(d) Transporters shall deposit waste at a facility designated by or acceptable to the generator of said wastes and the
city where the operator of the facility agrees to receive the wastes.
(1) Only true septage will be accepted at the city water reclamation plant. Grease and grit trap wastes shall
not be accepted and should be disposed of per state regulations.
(2) In the event of a discharge of waste during collection or transportation, the collector or transporter must
take appropriate action to protect human health and the environment, e.g., notify local law enforcement and
the state agency as to size, nature, and location of the discharge area; clean up any waste discharge that
occurs during transportation; or take such action as may be required or approved by federal, state or local
officials having jurisdiction so that the waste discharge no longer presents a public health or environmental
problem. Transporters are responsible for reporting spills in accordance with requirements of the state oil and
hazardous substance spill contingency plan or subsequent regulations.
(e) Transporters shall deposit wastes at the city water reclamation plant or other designated site only during the hours
posted at the gate.
(f) Prior to dumping, each tank truck transporter shall stop at the gate, notify the facility operator, and allow inspection
and sampling of the contents.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-152)
(g) Samples of tank contents will be obtained and analyzed. Analysis will be performed and any results outside the
acceptable analysis limits will be rejected and the state agency will be notified of results. Tank truck companies will be
surcharged for BOD and TSS as follows:
Base charge for BOD is 250 mg/l and .25 cents per pound above 250 mg/l.
Base charge for TSS is 250 mg/l and .20 cents per pound above 250 mg/l.
(h) Each tank truck load of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons or less will be assessed a minimum dump fee of thirtyfive
dollars ($35.00). Tank truck loads in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) gallons will be assessed a fee of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) plus ten cents ($0.10) per one hundred (100) gallons over the seven hundred fifty (750) minimum.
(Ordinance 15-3625 adopted 9/17/15)
(i) Annual disposal permits are obtainable from the city manager or his/her designee at 901 Broadway, at a cost of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per vehicle.
(j) Existing permits shall be renewed July 1st of each year beginning July 1, 1993. In the event a septic waste
transporter applies for a new permit or an additional permit after July 1st, the permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be
prorated in order to include only the months of waste disposal. The permittee shall renew all permits on July 1st of each
year thereafter.
(k) The following transport permits are obtainable at city hall, 901 Broadway, at a cost of:
(1) On-site sewage disposal system: $61.00.
(2) Commercial septic tank emptying: $61.00.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-152)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/507
Sec. 13.04.073 Compliance date report
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the wastewater disposal system, any user
subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city manager or his/her designee a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by
pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for those process units in the user's
facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.
This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified
professional pretreatment engineer. (2000 Code, sec. 25-153)
Sec. 13.04.074 Periodic compliance reports
(a) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in case of
a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the wastewater disposal system, shall submit to the city
manager or his/her designee, during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the city manager or his/her designee, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record
of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow. At the discretion of the city
manager or his/her designee and in consideration of such factors as local high or low rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc.,
the city manager or his/her designee may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
(b) The city manager or his/her designee may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and the
nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the city manager or his/her designee, of pollutants
contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as
prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the city manager or his/her designee pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR part
136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the city manager or his/her designee. Where
40 CFR part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any
other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the city manager or his/her designee.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-154)
Sec. 13.04.075 Monitoring facilities
(a) The city shall require monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building
sewer and/or internal drainage systems, to be provided and operated at the user's own expense. The monitoring facility
should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street, alley or sidewalk area and located so
that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(b) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a
safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
(c) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction
shall be completed within ninety (90) days following official notice by the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-155)
Sec. 13.04.076 Inspection and sampling
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/507
The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being complied with and
requirements are met. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or
its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, or records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, state and federal agencies shall
have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into the user's premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with the
user's security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state and federal
agencies shall be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. (2000
Code, sec. 25-156)
Sec. 13.04.077 Confidential information
Unless a contrary ruling under the Texas Open Records Act is issued by the state attorney general or a court, information
and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by
the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies
for uses related to this article, state agency permits, state disposal system permits and/or the pretreatment program;
provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. (2000 Code, sec. 25-157)
Sec. 13.04.078 Fees and charges
The city may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4) Fees for permit applications;
(5) Fees for filing appeals;
(6) Fees for consistent removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment
standards;
(7) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-158)
Secs. 13.04.079–13.04.100 Reserved
Division 3. Enforcement
Sec. 13.04.101 Harmful contributions
(a) The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, causes
interference with the wastewater disposal system, or contributes to cause the city to violate any condition of its state
and/or federal discharge permits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/507
(b) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit
shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall
reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15)
days of the date of the occurrence.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-171)
Sec. 13.04.102 Administrative enforcement
Enforcement to address noncompliance:
(1) Issuance of a “warning notice” to a company for significant noncompliance.
(2) Issuance of a “violation notice” after thirty (30) days or more if compliance is not reestablished.
(3) Issuance of a “final violation notice,” followed by a compliance meeting after another thirty (30) days
(or longer time) if compliance is not attained. The enforcement compliance meeting is held with the industrial
company to explore the reasons for noncompliance.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-172)
Sec. 13.04.103 Show cause hearing
(a) The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the sewer system to show
cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken, and the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation.
(b) The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any
board or commission or officer or employee of the wastewater reclamation department to:
(1) Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
(2) Take the evidence;
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations, to the city council for action thereon.
(c) At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically.
The transcript so recorded will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment
of the usual charges therefor.
(d) After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further city council orders and directives as are necessary
and appropriate may be issued to deal with specific damages.
(2000 Code, sec. 25-173)
Sec. 13.04.104 Legal action
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/507
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to
the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in an appropriate court of the county. In addition to the
penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder. (2000 Code, sec. 25-174)
Sec. 13.04.105 Penalty
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with
any provision of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (2000 Code, sec. 25-
175)
Sec. 13.04.106 Falsifying information
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or a wastewater contribution permit, or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (2000 Code, sec. 25-176)
ARTICLE 13.05 WATER CONSERVATION/DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 13.05.001 Adopted
The city council hereby approves and adopts as the city water use management plan, the following water conservation
and drought contingency plans as set forth below. The city commits to implementing this program according to the
procedures set forth in the adopted plans.
Sec. 13.05.002 Purpose
(a) The purpose of the water use management plan is to promote the wise and responsible use of water, to enhance the
sustainability of long-term water supplies, and to minimize the adverse impacts of water supply emergencies by
providing and supporting public information and education programs that encourage customers to voluntarily pursue
water conservation and protection measures in both residential and business activities; by developing, maintaining and
enforcing water management policies and ordinances; by implementing structural programs that result in quantifiable
water conservation results; and by implementing a drought/emergency, contingency plan when necessary to ensure
adequate water supplies for public health and safety.
(b) The city's service area is located within the Llano Estacado Regional Water Planning Area of the Texas Water
Development Board, and the city will provide a copy of the city's water use management plan to the Llano Estacado
Regional Water Planning Group to assure consistency with the regional water plan.
(c) The city will implement a detailed plan for each of the four steps in the drought contingency measures, including
water use strategies. The target of these strategies will be to maintain daily water demand at or below 50 percent of the
available water production capability. In the event of severe drought or major infrastructure failures, certain water uses
may be restricted by the city manager or his/her designee as outlined in this plan.
Sec. 13.05.003 Definitions
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water
gardens.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/507
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or
waste of water, improve efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is
conserved and made available for future or alternative use.
Customer. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, and any other legal entity utilizing water provided by
the city.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing,
heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution, except as provided under the
definition of nonessential water use.
Drought. An extended period of time of below normal precipitation (rainfall, snow, etc.)
Landscape irrigation use. Water use for irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately
owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians.
Nonessential water use. Nonessential water use consists of washing house windows, sidings, eaves, and roof with hose,
and without the use of a bucket; washing driveways, streets, curbs and gutters; washing vehicles without a cutoff valve
and a bucket; unattended sprinkling of landscape shrubs and grass; draining and filling swimming pools; and flushing
water system.
Sec. 13.05.004 Water conservation plan
The water conservation plan, as adopted by the city, consists of the following:
(1) Continuing public education and information programs. The city will inform the city users of various
recommended methods for implementing a reduction in water consumption. The city will provide talks and
programs to schools and civic organizations along with distributing materials which are available from the
Texas Water Development Board and other agencies in accordance with the city's administrative policy on
water conservation plan continuing education and information programs.
(2) Plumbing codes. The state law requires that cities and utilities with a population of 5,000 or more adopt
a standard plumbing code or a water saving plumbing code for new construction and for replacement of
plumbing fixtures in existing structures. The city has adopted the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing
Code as adopted by the International Code Council.
(3) Water conservation retrofit program. Title V of the Health and Safety Code, chapter 372 requires that
businesses stock and sell only plumbing fixtures which conform to water saving performance standards. This
will ensure that plumbing fixtures installed during new construction and remodeling will be of the
conservation oriented type. The city will advise customers regarding retrofit devices (such as low-flow
shower heads, toilet dams, faucet aerators, etc.) that reduce water use by replacing or modifying existing
fixtures.
(4) Conservation oriented water rate structure. The city has adopted an ascending block rate structure,
which will further discourage the wasteful use of large quantities of water. The city is now relating sewer
charges to water consumption, with a 14,000 gallon ceiling on single-family residential.
(5) Universal metering and meter repair and replacement. All connections to the water supply system in the
city are metered. The city is testing and replacing meters on an ongoing basis, concentrating on the largest
meters first. Meter readers classify the apparent conditions of all city meters, and repairs are initiated in areas
with poor classification. Universal metering will continue after adoption of this plan.
(A) The city's production meters are located at the water treatment plant and on all city-owned
groundwater wells. The city uses these meters to report its groundwater production.
(B) Service meters larger than two inches (2") will be tested every two years. Service meters two
inches (2") and smaller will be tested at least once every ten years. The city has installed a service meter
to measure water used for backwash at the water treatment plant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/507
(6) Water conserving landscaping. Educational material will include information relating to low water use
landscaping. The city reviews and approves subdivision plans. At the time building permits are acquired,
developers will be provided with literature pertaining to low water demand landscaping items. Nurseries and
local businesses will also be provided with this literature.
(7) Leak detection and repair. The city's system uses a 12-month moving total of water treated and pumped
versus water sold in order to assess more accurately the amount of unaccounted for water losses in the
system. The average unaccounted for water has ranged from 11% to 15% in previous years. Leaks that go
unreported for extended periods of time or large pipe failures that make for difficult estimates of total water
loss can skew these numbers from year-to-year. The city will continue to refine our methods of calculating
water loss due to these issues to better understand our actual unaccounted for water loss.
(A) The city has almost immediate response to reports of water leaks, which minimizes water waste.
The city is conducting audits to identify connections which bypass city meters and correct those which
are found.
(B) The city will continue to monitor monthly consumption. Classification of meter condition
provides a reliable and effective leak detection program. The city is also aware that assistance in leak
detecting surveys can be obtained from the Texas Water Development Board staff.
(8) Specific quantified 5- and 10-year targets.
(A) The city's average daily water usage is approximately 135 gpcd. Notwithstanding changes in the
city's water usage, citizens and businesses can reduce water usage by implementing water conservation
practices. The city's water conservation goals are to:
(i) Reduce annual per capita water usage to 132 gallons per person per day (or by 2.5 percent)
by the year 2024.
(ii) Reduce annual per capita water use to 128 gallons person per day (or by 5 percent) by the
year 2029.
(B) This should be accomplished through education and information programs, a conservation retrofit
program, conservation oriented water rate structure and metering as well as a meter repair and
replacement program.
(9) Recycling and reuse. The city will investigate reuse and recycling programs where legally possible and
economically feasible. Water reclamation at the wastewater treatment plant is being done by the city. Current
uses for reclaimed water include plant wash-down water and on-site irrigation. The city is studying additional
uses such as off-site irrigation.
(10) Pro-rata water allocation. In the event that the city is in a severe water shortage, as specified in
threshold conditions of the drought contingency plan, the city manager is hereby authorized to initiate
allocation of water supplies on a pro-rata basis in accordance with Texas Water Code, section 11.039.
(11) Implementation and enforcement. The city, through its staff, will implement the water conservation
plan in accordance with the city council's adoption of the plan, plumbing codes, and revisions thereof as set
out in this plan. The city also maintains the authority to inspect any and all connections by Seth Ward Water
Supply Corporation customers to the water distribution system located past the delivery point of the
corporation's water system.
(12) Contract with other political subdivisions. Any political subdivision and/or wholesale customer
applying for new or renewed water contracts from the city must have: (A) an approved water conservation
and drought contingency plan in effect; or (B) must officially adopt applicable provisions of the city's water
conservation and drought contingency plan. In addition, every wholesale water contract entered into or
renewed after adoption of the plan, including contract extensions, must agree that in case of a water shortage
resulting from drought, the water to be distributed shall be divided in accordance with Texas Water Code,
section 11.039.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/507
Sec. 13.05.005 Drought contingency and emergency plan
The drought contingency plan, as adopted by the city, is as follows:
(1) Threshold conditions. There are four classifications of drought conditions or “trigger conditions” for
determining the degree of urgency for initiation of a drought contingency plan. The “triggering criteria”
below are based on an evaluation of the historical water system capacities and customer use patterns as well
as a consideration of the impact of drought, emergencies, and high use upon capacities and patterns. These
four classifications/conditions are as follows:
(A) Mild water shortage.
(i) The average daily water consumption reaches approximately 50% of the available water
production capacity, and has been that high for a period of three days; and
(ii) Weather conditions indicate that high use is likely to continue.
(B) Moderate water shortage.
(i) The average daily water consumption reaches approximately 70% of the rated available
water production capacity for a three-day period;
(ii) Weather conditions indicate mild water shortage will exist for five days or more; or
(iii) A mechanical failure of pumping equipment which will require more than 24 hours to
repair occurs when a mild water shortage is in progress.
(C) Severe water shortage.
(i) Average daily water consumption reaches approximately 90% of available water production
capacity for a period of three days;
(ii) Average daily water consumption will not enable storage levels to be maintained;
(iii) System demand exceeds available high service pump capacity; or
(iv) A mechanical failure of pumping equipment which will require more than 12 hours to
repair occurs when a moderate drought is in progress.
(D) Emergency condition.
(i) The Canadian River Municipal Water Authority (CRMWA) system fails, and the water
cannot be delivered to the city;
(ii) The water system is contaminated either accidentally or intentionally; or
(iii) The water system fails from acts of God (tornadoes, hurricanes, etc.) or man.
An emergency condition is treated like a severe water shortage drought.
(2) Water shortage contingency measures. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water
supply and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in subsection (1) above, shall determine that
mild, moderate, or severe water shortage conditions exist or that an emergency condition exists and shall
implement the following plan. The city shall notify the executive director of the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ) as soon as possible to notify the director that mandatory provisions of this
plan have been implemented.
(A) Step I. Curtailment shall be initiated upon existence of mild water shortage conditions and will
include the following actions:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/507
(i) Develop information center and designate information person.
(ii) Advise public of condition and publicize availability of information from the information
center.
(iii) Encourage voluntary reduction of water use.
(iv) Contact commercial and industrial users and explain necessity for initiation of strict
conservation methods.
(v) Implement system oversight and make adjustments as required to meet changing conditions.
(vi) Target: Raise public awareness of the situation and maintain daily water demand at or
below 50 percent of available water production capacity.
(B) Step II. Curtailment shall be initiated by the city manager on identifying moderate water shortage
conditions. The listed actions are compulsory on users and are intended to prohibit nonessential water
use.
(i) Outdoor residential use of water will be permitted on alternate days. Even-numbered houses
will use water for outdoor residential uses on even days of the month and odd-numbered houses
on odd days of the month. Outdoor residential uses consist of washing vehicles, boats, trailers,
landscape sprinkler systems and irrigation, recreational use of sprinklers, outside showers (in
parks) and water slides.
(ii) The city manager, or his/her designee, will monitor system function and establish hours for
outside water use, depending upon system performance.
(iii) The information center and publicity elements shall keep the public advised of curtailment
status.
(iv) Commercial and industrial users will be visited to ensure that conservation measures have
been initiated.
(v) Target: Reduce and maintain daily water demand at or below 70 percent of available water
production capacity.
(C) Step III. Curtailment shall be initiated upon existence of a severe water shortage as determined by
the city manager. The city manager will prohibit the use of water for:
(i) Vehicle washing, window washing, outside watering (lawn, shrubs, faucet dripping, garden,
etc.).
(ii) Public water uses which are not essential for health, safety and sanitary purposes. These
nonessential uses include: street washing, watering of parks, fire hydrant flow testing, filling
swimming pools, watering athletic fields and courses, and dust control sprinkling.
(iii) Commercial uses not listed will be controlled to the extent dictated by the city manager.
(iv) Target: Reduce and maintain daily water demand at or below 90 percent of available water
production capacity, or in any emergency condition of system outages due to equipment failure,
temporarily discontinue water system operating.
(D) Step IV. Curtailment shall be initiated upon the existence of an emergency condition as
determined by the city manager. The listed actions are compulsory on users:
(i) All aesthetic and nonessential water use, including landscape irrigation use, is prohibited,
except where necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. No new landscape
material may be installed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/507
(ii) All city operations will adhere to the water use restrictions.
(iii) The city may reduce water system pressure to conserve water.
(3) Businesses requiring water as a basic function of their operation, such as nurseries, commercial
carwash, laundromats, high pressure water cleaning, etc., will obtain written permission from the city
manager for intended water use.
(4) The system priority for water service shall be made based on the following priority list.
(A) Hospitals.
(B) Residential.
(C) Schools.
(D) Industrial.
(E) Commercial.
(F) Recreational.
(5) Alternative water sources.
(A) The city has two water sources: (i) water pumped by wells from the Ogallala Aquifer; and (ii)
water delivered to the city's water treatment plant by CRMWA. The wells are located in different areas
of the city and are powered by different electrical sources. A portion of the wells should be operational
at any given time. The treatment plant can be completely operational without power provided by the
electric company as long as water is supplied by CRMWA.
(B) With these two water sources, it is highly unlikely that both sources would be out at the same
time. If that should happen, water would be trucked into the city from other sources and in accordance
with state guidelines.
(6) Information and education.
(A) The public will be made aware of water conservation and drought conditions by information and
data transferred through the city's program. During periods of water shortage curtailment, step I
conditions will establish an information center, an information person, and utilize the most effective
methods developed for information dissemination on a daily basis.
(B) Close observation of the first year information program should develop the most effective ways
to communicate with customers. Posting notices, newspaper articles, radio coverage and direct mail to
customers will be used during the first year activities.
(7) Initiation procedures. Initiation procedures for water shortage response are described in this plan. Each
condition will be met with corresponding action by the city manager or his/her designee. The city will affect
curtailment, give notice, publicize and follow-up with implementation of curtailment.
(8) Termination notification. Termination of each water shortage condition will begin when conditions
have improved to the extent that an upgraded condition can be declared by the city manager. This process
will be employed until full service can be provided. System priority will be considered in returning to
upgraded condition. Termination will be initiated by the city manager by giving notice, etc., as was given to
enact water shortage curtailment.
(9) Variances. The city manager, may, in writing, grant a temporary variance for existing water uses
otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person
requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/507
(A) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water
supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect.
(B) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water
use.
(10) Exemptions. Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article shall file a petition
for variance with the city within 5 days after the plan or a particular water shortage response stage has been
invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, and shall include the following:
(A) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(B) Purpose of water use.
(C) Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
(D) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or
what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article.
(E) Description of the relief requested.
(F) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(G) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to
meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date.
(H) Other pertinent information.
(11) Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified
by the city manager:
(A) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(B) Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed
to meet specified requirements. No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of
this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance.
(12) Modification, deletion and amendment. The city manager can add, delete, and amend rules,
regulations and implementation as needed/desired, and shall advise the city council of such amendments at its
regular or called meeting.
(13) Means of implementation. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to implement the
applicable provisions of this plan. The city manager will oversee the execution and implementation of all
elements of the plan to ensure that adequate records are kept for program verification.
Sec. 13.05.006 Penalty
Any violation of this article by any person shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each day of noncompliance. In
addition to the penalty described above, the city may:
(1) Disconnect or discontinue water services to individuals or businesses found in violation of this article;
and
(2) Pursue any other equitable remedies available to the city including injunctive relief.
(Ordinance 19-3691 adopted 4/23/19)
ARTICLE 13.06 SOLID WASTE*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/507
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.06.001 Penalty
The violation of any provision of this division shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed the
provisions of section 1.01.009 of this code. (2000 Code, sec. 22-8)
Sec. 13.06.002 Littering
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or
any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles or
any other form of litter or waste matter.
(b) Duties of business establishments.
(1) Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall
exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper
napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials thrown or left on said premises by its
customers, and to take reasonable measures to prevent the same from drifting or blowing to adjoining
premises.
(2) Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the
customers of such business where the articles of waste referred to above may be disposed of.
(3) Signs. Each and every business establishment shall place upon its premises, in a conspicuous place in
close proximity to the receptacles referred to above, signs which shall, in essence, convey to its customers a
request that they use such receptacles for the disposal of waste material.
(c) Duties of customers. It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to in any manner
dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials
except in receptacles provided for such purpose.
(2000 Code, secs. 22-1–22-3)
State law reference–Litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 365.
Sec. 13.06.003 Use of trash disposal containers without payment of fee
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, or miscellaneous waste into a trash
disposal container or unit when such person has not paid a user fee to the city for such use.
(b) The word “person” as used in this section shall be construed to impart the singular and plural as the case demands
and shall include individuals, partnerships, corporations, societies and associations.
(2000 Code, secs. 22-4, 22-5)
Sec. 13.06.004 Scavenging
(a) The word “scavenging” as used in this section is defined as the uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of material
at any point in the solid waste management system, but shall not mean the searching for and retrieval of articles and/or
items of value inadvertently placed in the waste stream by rate-paying customers.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge within any part of the solid waste management system of the city.
(2000 Code, secs. 22-6, 22-7)
Secs. 13.06.005–13.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Collection Regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/507
Sec. 13.06.031 Compliance
No collection of garbage, trash or rubbish shall be made unless it is prepared for collection and placed as designated by
the provisions of this division. Failure to comply with this division shall be an offense, and each day's failure to comply
with this division constitutes a separate offense. (2000 Code, sec. 22-16)
Sec. 13.06.032 Use of containers required
Every person occupying any premises within this city shall place all garbage, filth, refuse and other offensive matter and
trash in containers for collection by the city. (2000 Code, sec. 22-17)
Sec. 13.06.033 Furnishing of containers
The city shall provide containers for the accumulation and collection of garbage and refuse. It shall be the duty of every
person to deposit all garbage and refuse which accumulates on his premises in such containers for collection by the city.
(2000 Code, sec. 22-18)
Sec. 13.06.034 Authority to require additional containers
The director of public works may require, when in his opinion the same may be justified, individual containers for hand
collection by the city. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of such premises, upon notice from the director of
public works, to provide such containers as may be specified by the director for such purpose. (2000 Code, sec. 22-19)
Sec. 13.06.035 Preparation of bulky waste
Before any of the following items shall be placed in containers for collection by the city, the same shall be prepared as
specified:
(1) Tree limbs four (4) inches and smaller in diameter shall be trimmed of branches and cut to four (4) feet
or less in length.
(2) Lumber pieces shall be cut to lengths of four (4) feet or less and widths of eighteen (18) inches or less.
(3) No more than one thousand (1,000) pounds of construction rubble or debris shall be placed in a
container at any one time.
(4) Boxes and pasteboard cartons shall be flattened in order to permit more solid waste to be placed in the
container.
(2000 Code, sec. 22-20)
Sec. 13.06.036 Items not to be placed in containers
The following wastes shall not be placed in containers for collection, but shall be disposed of by the person generating
said wastes:
(1) Tree limbs larger than four (4) inches in diameter.
(2) Large items such as stoves, refrigerators, stuffed chairs and sofas, water heaters, etc., shall not be
placed in containers.
(2000 Code, sec. 22-21)
Sec. 13.06.037 Disposal of dead animals or slaughter wastes
Dead animals or slaughter wastes shall not be placed in a container or at the edge of the property for collection. Any
person having such items for disposal shall contact the animal control officer for disposal of such items. (2000 Code,
sec. 22-22)
Sec. 13.06.038 Frequency of collection
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/507
The city shall collect garbage and refuse from containers at such regular intervals as the director of public works shall
establish. (2000 Code, sec. 22-23)
Secs. 13.06.039–13.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Collection Service and Charges
Sec. 13.06.061 Penalty
Any individual, company, corporation or government violating any provision of this division, or causing same to be
violated, shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in a
sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each and every violation of the provisions of this division shall
constitute a separate offense. (2000 Code, sec. 22-36)
Sec. 13.06.062 Collection service generally
(a) Definition of refuse: Waste, rubbish, garbage, trash or any material of any kind that has been discarded, rejected,
cast aside or thrown away as worthless, except body wastes, including but not limited to feathers, coffee grounds, ashes,
tin cans, paper, boxes, glass, grass, wood, shrubs, yard cleanings, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, and similar
matter.
(b) It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any dwelling or place of business situated within the city to
exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises and that of any public rights-of-way adjacent to his
premises clean of refuse and to take reasonable measures to prevent any refuse from drifting or blowing to adjoining
premises.
(c) The refuse collection department shall provide regular collection service for the protection of public health and the
control of flies, insects and rodents according to the type and volume of refuse to be removed, economies of operations,
and capability within the department.
(d) When the alleys or streets become impassable because of inclement weather or other unusual conditions, the refuse
collection superintendent may notify residences and commercial establishments to place refuse at the nearest designated
collection point which is accessible to refuse removal vehicles.
(2000 Code, sec. 22-31)
Sec. 13.06.063 Classes of service; fees
(a) Class I. The collection and removal of refuse from houses, buildings, and premises used for residential purposes
shall be classified as class I.
(1) Residential houses are hereby classified as follows:
Monthly Rate
Class I-A One residential unit $19.46
Class I-B Two residential units with one water meter $38.92
Class I-C Three residential units with one water meter $58.38
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/507
Class I-D Apartment house or trailer park with four or
more residential units, with one mandatory three
cubic yard container
$77.84
For each additional container determined by the sanitation
superintendent to be needed
$77.84
(2) Any class I customer who desires class II service may be provided such, subject to approval of the
sanitation superintendent.
(b) Class II. The collection and removal of refuse from houses, buildings and premises used for commercial and
business purposes shall be classified as class II. Refuse collection shall be as follows:
Number of Times Emptied per Week
Container Size 1 2 3 4 5 6
3 or 4 cu. yd.
Regular rate N/A $88.96 $133.44 $177.92 $222.40 $266.88
Reduced rate for cardboard $36.55 $73.10 $109.65 $146.20 $182.75 $219.30
8 cu. yd.
Regular rate N/A $169.73 $254.67 $339.56 $424.45 $509.34
Reduced rate for cardboard $73.03 $146.06 $219.09 $292.12 $365.15 $438.18
Shared rate/light commercial: $46.27
Special service charges:
Temporary service (any size – one empty) $63.88
Each extra empty:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/507
3 or 4 cubic yard $34.41
8 cubic yard $49.78
(Ordinance 13-3600 adopted 9/24/13)
(c) Charges due monthly. These charges shall be made monthly, and the charges and fees for the collection and
disposal of refuse shall be added to and be placed upon the water bill or otherwise billed to each account. Payments of
amounts due for refuse collection and disposal service shall be made within the time set forth on the water bill and shall
be subject to the same penalty set forth thereon. If the refuse fee is not paid when it becomes due, then the city shall
refuse to furnish any water and/or refuse collection and disposal service to the residence, apartments, dormitory or
establishment for which such refuse collection fee has not been paid.
(d) Commercial rates outside city. Commercial establishments outside the city limits may be provided refuse
collection service by the city. If warranted, drive time charges may be added to the commercial rate subject to approval
of the city manager.
(Ordinance 12-3581 adopted 9/25/12)
Sec. 13.06.064 Vector control charge
The vector control charge shall be included in the monthly refuse collection and disposal charge. Vector control involves
the aerial and ground spraying of mosquitoes. (2000 Code, sec. 22-33)
Sec. 13.06.065 Consolidated billing; responsibility for payment
The charges for sewer service, refuse collection and vector control shall be made monthly and shall be added to the
water bill of each residence, apartment house and commercial establishment connected to the city's water and sewer
service. The person responsible for the payment of the water bill shall also be responsible for the payment of the charges
for sewer service, refuse collection and vector control. (2000 Code, sec. 22-34)
Sec. 13.06.066 Sanitary landfill charges; use of landfill
(a) The city shall charge and collect for the depositing and disposal of accepted municipal solid waste, as defined in
chapter 330 and chapter 335 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended, into the city's type I sanitary landfill located
east of the city on U.S. 70, by individuals, companies, corporations or governments.
(b) (1) The charges shall be collected for each vehicle or hauling unit carrying municipal solid waste into
the landfill for disposal. Collection of the charges for depositing and disposing of permitted municipal solid
waste into the landfill shall be made at the landfill gatehouse by a city landfill attendant for each delivery of
municipal solid waste as the vehicle or hauling unit exits the landfill unless prior alternative billing
arrangements have been made with the city finance department. The charges shall be:
(A) $43.00 per ton for each secured load.
(B) $64.50 per ton for each unsecured load.
(2) Residents of the city who haul their own solid waste to the landfill will be permitted to deposit and
dispose of their solid waste into the landfill without charge, provided the person making the delivery to the
landfill has with him/her, at the time of entry, identification showing that he/she resides in the city and the
customer's portion of the current or previous month's statement for water, sewer and sanitation services [and
provides such information] to the landfill gate attendant at the time of entry. Residents without such
identification and statement shall be required to pay the scheduled charge prior to exiting the landfill unless
prior alternative billing arrangements have been made with the city finance department. Only persons hauling
from their own residences shall be exempt from charges. The exemption does not apply to roofing materials
or construction/demolition wastes resulting from activities by or on behalf of a resident. All contractors, yard
maintenance persons and all others hauling municipal solid waste shall be charged and shall pay the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/507
scheduled charge upon exiting the landfill unless prior alternative billing arrangements have been made with
the city finance department.
(c) (1) The city shall charge and collect for depositing and disposal into the old landfill (Baker Pit)
located at 300 Joliet Street, by individuals, companies, corporations or governments, of accepted inert
materials as defined in chapter 330 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
(2) The charges shall be collected for each vehicle or hauling unit carrying inert materials into the landfill
for disposal. Collection of the charges for depositing and disposing of inert materials into the landfill shall be
made at the landfill gatehouse to the city landfill attendant for each delivery of inert materials as the vehicle
or hauling unit enters the landfill unless prior alternative billing arrangements have been made with the city
finance department. The charges shall be made based upon the type and size of the vehicle or hauling unit,
regardless of the amount of inert material being hauled. The charges shall be:
Per entry into the landfill:
Automobile, pickup truck (1/2 or 3/4 ton), two-wheel trailer $3.75
One-ton truck, 4-wheel trailer $5.00
Dump truck (4–6 cubic yards), truck (flat or grain bed) $10.00
Dump truck (6–12 cubic yards) $20.00
Dump truck (above 12 cubic yards) $30.00
(3) Residents of the city who haul their own inert material to the landfill will be permitted to deposit and
dispose of their inert material into the landfill without charge, provided the person making the delivery to the
landfill has with him/her, at the time of entry, identification showing that he/she resides in the city and the
customer's portion of the current or previous month's statement for water, sewer and sanitation services [and
provides such information] to the landfill gate attendant at the time of entry. Residents without such
identification and statement shall be required to pay the scheduled charge prior to entering the landfill unless
prior alternative billing arrangements have been made with the city finance department. Only persons hauling
from their own residences shall be exempt from charges. All contractors, yard maintenance persons and all
others hauling municipal solid waste shall be charged and shall pay the scheduled charge upon entering the
landfill unless prior alternative billing arrangements have been made with the city finance department.
(d) Persons hauling solid waste into the landfill shall travel and deposit their load as directed by signs and landfill
attendants. Persons not obeying the directions of such signs and attendants may be prohibited from subsequent entry and
use of the landfill facility.
(e) Whole tires brought to the landfill for disposal shall be charged at a rate of $0.11 per pound. This rate applies to all
types and sizes of whole tires. Tires which have been quartered, split, shredded or otherwise cut in accordance with state
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/507
guidelines shall be charged at a rate of $43.00 per ton.
(Ordinance 16-3641 adopted 9/27/16)
Secs. 13.06.067–13.06.090 Reserved
Division 4. Regulated Special and Solid Wastes
Sec. 13.06.091 Definition
Regulated special and solid wastes are defined as those wastes which require special handling and/or disposal in
accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. (2000 Code, sec. 22-41)
Sec. 13.06.092 Disposal of used or scrap tires
It shall be unlawful for any person to set out for collection or place within any city-owned refuse container any quantity
of used or scrap tires or portions thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport to the city sanitary landfill for
disposal, dispose of in the city sanitary landfill, or otherwise dispose of any quantity of used or scrap tires unless the tires
are first shredded, split or quartered in accordance with state guidelines. The rate for disposal of tires shall be in
accordance with section 13.06.066(e). (2000 Code, sec. 22-42)
Sec. 13.06.093 Disposal of special waste from health care related facilities
It shall be unlawful for any person to set out for collection or place within a city-owned refuse container special waste
from a health care related facility as such waste is defined by the department of state health services. It shall be unlawful
for any person to transport to the city sanitary landfill for disposal, dispose of in the city sanitary landfill, or otherwise
dispose of any special waste from a health care related facility, as such waste is defined by the department of state health
services, unless such waste has first been treated and packaged in accordance with applicable state and federal
regulations. No special waste from a health care related facility will be accepted for collection and/or disposal by the city
sanitation department or city sanitary landfill unless such waste is accompanied by a statement signed by the generator
or transporter certifying that such waste has been treated and is packaged in accordance with applicable state and federal
regulations. (2000 Code, sec. 22-43)
Sec. 13.06.094 Collection of cardboard for recycling
The city may provide to commercial customers, at the discretion of the sanitation superintendent, an extra refuse
container for the separation and collection of recyclable cardboard. Said extra container may be set and charged for at a
lesser rate than normal, but said lesser rate shall be not less than ninety percent (90%) of the customary rate for the
customer's usual service. The city may discontinue the separate cardboard collection program at any time and without
notice, at which time the service rates shall be readjusted to the customary service rates for the service provided. (2000
Code, sec. 22-44)
ARTICLE 13.07 SANITARY STANDARDS AND PROTECTION FOR PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIES
Sec. 13.07.001 Statutory authorization and findings of fact
(a) The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) is mandated to regulate and control public drinking
water systems in the state in accordance with the Texas Health and Safety Code Ann., chapter 341, subchapter C
(Vernon's 2010). In response to these obligations, TCEQ adopted Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems at
section 290.39 et seq., revised June 2012, to ensure public water systems supply safe drinking water in adequate
quantities. The city owns and operates public water facilities, including fifteen (15) ground water wells and related
facilities, providing potable water to city residents. Both TCEQ and the city want to ensure public water supplies provide
safe drinking water for city residents.
(b) This article shall be known and may be cited as the sanitary standards and protection for public water supplies
article of the city and shall apply to all public drinking water systems within the city's jurisdiction.
Sec. 13.07.002 Statement of purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/507
(a) It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare to ensure the city's public
water systems supply is safe from any contaminants by providing uniform rules for facility users and construction of
such facilities in or on real property within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the water wells the city owns and operates.
(b) This purpose is to prevent certain uses and construction of facilities in or on land surrounding the wells, which
may cause pollution to the water wells and develop into a health and safety hazard for city residents.
(c) Groundwater sources, the wells, shall not be located where a pollution danger exists from flooding or unsanitary
surroundings, such as privies, sewage, sewage treatment plants, livestock and animal pens, solid waste disposal sites or
underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission pipelines, or abandoned and improperly
sealed wells.
Sec. 13.07.003 Conflicts
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easement, covenants, or deed restriction. However,
where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever impose
the more stringent restrictions to ensure the safety of the city's public water system shall prevail.
Sec. 13.07.004 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
City. The City of Plainview.
City council. The City of Plainview's legislative body.
Improperly constructed water wells. Wells that do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a
public water supply well.
Ordinance. The authoritative law or decree establishing rules and regulations regarding sanitary and pollution control of
the area in proximity to the city's water supply wells.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government, business trust, partnership, association, or any other legal
entity.
Privy. A facility for human excreta disposal.
Public water systems supply. A source or reservoir of water distributed and used for human consumption.
Sanitary. A condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission.
Septic tank. A covered watertight tank designed for sewage treatment.
Wells. The water wells the city owns and operates, including specifically the following wells:
#4 at 1400 Baltimore
#6A at 200 Kokomo
#7A at 2100 Houston
#8 at 1600 Milwaukee
#11 at 1508 Oakland
#12 at 3600 W. 16th
#13 at 1909 Jefferson
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/507
#14 at 700 Elm
#15 at 601 S.W. 3rd
#16 at 901 S.W. 3rd
#17 at 1101 S.W. 3rd
#18 at 4110 Highland Rd
#19 at 1910 E. 5th
#20 at 1400 W. 2nd
#22 at 1105 Smyth
Violation. A breach of this article.
Sec. 13.07.005 Health and safety
To ensure the city's ground water wells and related facilities are safe for city residents, pollution hazards shall not occur,
and upon such violation, that person creating the danger shall be guilty of a criminal misdemeanor.
Sec. 13.07.006 Prohibited activities
Prohibited activities within designated real property areas surrounding the wells are as follows:
(1) Construction and/or operation of any underground petroleum and/or chemical storage tank, liquid
transmission pipeline, stock pen, feedlot, dump grounds, privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewage treatment plant,
sewage wet well, sewage pumping station, drainage ditch which contains industrial waste discharges or the
wastes from sewage treatment systems, solid waste disposal site, land on which sewage plant or septic tank
sludge is applied, land irrigated by sewage plant effluent, septic tank perforated drain field, absorption bed,
evapotranspiration bed, area irrigated by low dosage, low angle spray on-site sewage facility, military facility,
industrial facility, wood treatment facility, liquid petroleum and petrochemical production, storage, and/or
transmission facility, class 1, 2, 3, and/or 4 injection well, pesticide storage and/or mixing facility, abandoned
well, inoperative well, improperly constructed water well of any depth, and all other construction or operation
that could create an unsanitary condition is prohibited within, upon, or across all areas of land within a 150-
foot radius of the wells.
(2) Construction and/or operation of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks,
storm sewers, and cemeteries is specifically prohibited within, upon, or across any area of real property
within a 50-foot radius of the wells.
(3) Home or building construction upon any area of real property within a 150-foot radius of the wells is
permitted, provided the restrictions described in subsections (1) and (2) above are met.
(4) Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited, provided that livestock shall not be
permitted within a 50-foot radius of the wells.
Sec. 13.07.007 Right of entry
Authorized city employees, bearing appropriate credentials and identification, shall be permitted to immediately enter
any premises located within a 150-foot radius of any well to conduct any inspection or observation necessary to enforce
compliance with this article.
Sec. 13.07.008 Penalty
Each violation under this article is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine in accordance with this
Code of Ordinances at section 1.01.009(b). Each day shall constitute a separate offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/507
Sec. 13.07.009 Removal
Any person violating any provision of this article shall remove prohibited construction or potential sources of
contamination within thirty (30) days after notification of such violation.
Sec. 13.07.010 Conflict of laws
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with any state or federal law and shall be in addition to any rights
granted thereby.
(Ordinance 16-3637 adopted 9/27/16)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, JURISDICTION, APPLICABILITY*
Sec. 14.01.001 Title
The City of Plainview Zoning Ordinance shall be known as, and may be referred to as, “the Plainview Zoning
Ordinance” or “this chapter.”
Sec. 14.01.002 Authority
The Plainview Zoning Ordinance is adopted:
(1) Under the authority of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including but not limited to the
following chapters of the Texas Local Government Code (TLGC) and the Texas Water Code (TWC), as
amended:
(A) TLGC chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority;
(B) TLGC chapter 213, Municipal Comprehensive Plans;
(C) TLGC chapter 214, Municipal Regulation of Housing and Other Structures;
(D) TLGC chapter 216, Regulation of Signs by Municipalities; and
(E) TWC section 16.315, Political Subdivisions.
(2) Pursuant to the provisions of the city's home rule charter.
Sec. 14.01.003 Purposes
The purposes of this chapter and the continued presence of zoning within the city limits are to:
(1) Promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the
citizens of Plainview by assuring quality development and allowing for proper economic growth which
conforms to the city's comprehensive plan.
(2) Promote the stability of existing land uses that conform with the city's comprehensive plan and protect
these uses from unharmonious influences and harmful intrusions;
(3) Promote a harmonious, convenient, workable relationship among land uses;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/507
(4) Encourage quality development through effective planning which utilizes modern innovations of urban
design;
(5) Promote and protect the aesthetic quality of the city, by conserving and enhancing the taxable values of
land and buildings throughout the city;
(6) Protect and enhance areas of scenic, historic or cultural importance;
(7) Provide adequate light and air;
(8) Encourage proper population densities and prevent the overcrowding of structures;
(9) Provide adequate protection for community investments in water, sewer, streets, schools, parks, and
other community facilities;
(10) Promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system;
(11) Provide safety from fire and other dangers;
(12) Regulate the intensity of the use of lot areas;
(13) Establish setback lines designed for all districts;
(14) Fix standards to which buildings or structures shall conform;
(15) Prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of such districts; and
(16) Provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures.
Sec. 14.01.004 Applicability
(a) Jurisdiction.
(1) Unless otherwise noted all provisions of this chapter apply within the corporate limits of the City of
Plainview, Texas.
(2) No provision of this chapter shall apply within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city.
(b) Zoning districts. This chapter divides the city into zones or districts which restrict and regulate the location,
construction, alteration, and redevelopment of the usage of all buildings for trade, industry, residence, and other
specified uses.
(c) Comprehensive plan. All approvals made by either city staff, the planning and zoning commission, and the city
council shall be consistent with the most recent edition of the city's comprehensive plan.
Sec. 14.01.005 Enactment, effective date and repeal
(a) Enactment. The enactment of this chapter shall repeal and replace the City of Plainview Zoning Ordinance, as
adopted on July 25, 1989, by Ordinance 89-2798, replaced by Ordinance 19-3690, hereafter titled the City of Plainview
Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Effective date. The effective date of April 29, 2019 shall be the date when this chapter enters into the full force of
law.
Sec. 14.01.006 Transition standards
(a) Development approvals predating code's effective date.
(1) It is the city's intent to respect existing zoning and land development approvals. Approved development
may be carried out within the scope of the development approval, including applicable standards in effect at
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/507
the time of approval, provided that the approval was valid and has not lapsed per section 14.11.005, Inactive
and Expired Applications. This specifically includes any specific use permits which were granted prior to the
adoption of this chapter.
(2) This section does not prevent the city from:
(A) Adopting or enforcing building codes; or
(B) Prohibiting the use of building materials that have been proven to be inherently dangerous.
(b) Pending applications.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) below, each application for development approval shall be
evaluated only by the zoning regulations and adopted ordinances in effect at the time that each complete
application is submitted.
(2) Applications that are not pursued with due diligence may expire pursuant to section 14.11.005, Inactive
and Expired Applications.
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING DISTRICTS
Sec. 14.02.001 Purpose and applicability
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish zoning districts which will provide for both development and
redevelopment opportunities within the city and which correspond to the specific purpose statements set out in table
14.02.002, Zoning Districts and Purposes.
(b) Applicability. Set out in section 14.02.002, Zoning Districts Established, are the separate and unique zoning
districts that exist within the city limits. The zoning districts are shown on the official zoning map, which is established
in section 14.02.003, Official Zoning Map.
Sec. 14.02.002 Zoning districts established
Table 14.02.002. Zoning Districts and Purposes
Districts
Name Prior Districts
Consolidated/ Renamed The purpose of the district is to provide for:
Rural District
Rural/Agricultural (RA) A
The preservation and continuation of agricultural use of land where
adequate infrastructure is either not available and/or urban development
is premature or inappropriate.
Residential Districts
Suburban Residential (SR) R-1L The development and preservation of single-family detached residential
neighborhoods with a suburban low-density character.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/507
R-1
R-2
Mixed Residential (MR)
2F The development and preservation of single-family detached and
single-family attached residential neighborhoods (i.e., duplexes and
townhomes) with a suburban character. This district may provide a
“buffer” between the low-density SR district and the nonresidential
SF-A districts.
Multifamily Residential (MF)
MF-1 A variety of different housing options within a single medium density
zoning district. Such housing options include a variety of single-family
attached (i.e., duplexes and townhomes), single-family detached and
MF-2 multifamily residential uses.
Manufactured Housing (MH)
MH-1
To provide locations within the city for properly maintained
manufactured home parks.
MH-2
Nonresidential Districts
College and University (CU) U
Locations for the development of and activities associated with the
operations of an accredited college or university.
Downtown (DT) D-H Overlay
Commercial and mixed-use development within the city's original
downtown. Development within the Downtown District is urban in
character (i.e., buildings are built to the street and parking is generally
provided on-street or in public or private parking lots which may
include structured parking). Additionally, the purpose of this district is
to provide for protection and enhancement of designated areas which
have historical, architectural or cultural merit.
Mixed Use (MU) CB (except D-H Overlay)
A mix of residential, retail, service, office and general commercial uses.
This broad range of permitted uses is intended to promote revitalization
of the area surrounding downtown.
Neighborhood Commercial
(NC)
O
Limited and non-intrusive commercial uses within a 0.25 mile to 0.5
mile radius to residential neighborhoods. This provides citizens the
ability to obtain essential goods and services within both walking and
biking distance to their homes. Additionally, office uses that create
minor automobile traffic are also appropriate located in this district.
Such districts should be adjacent to collector or arterial streets and may
serve as an area of transition between residential and commercial uses.
C-1
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/507
General Commercial (GC) C-2 General commercial uses. The character of this district is intended to be
auto-urban.
C-3
Light Industrial (LI) M-1
Industrial, warehousing, and commercial uses requiring indoor and
outside storage and display.
Heavy Industrial (HI) M-2 Heavy industrial and/or manufacturing uses which will or may produce
off-site noise, odor, dust and/or other visible and sensory impacts.
Special and Overlay Districts
Airport Overlay District (AP) –
Protection against the encroachment of incompatible uses to protect
safe airport operations.
Floodplain Overlay District
(FP)
FP
The minimization of land uses which could create adverse emergency
management response issues in the advent of a major flood. The land
uses to be excluded from this overlay district include those uses that
would create a significant burden to emergency management personnel
when a significant flooding event does occur.
Planned Development (PD) PD
The unified and coordinated development of parcels or tracts of land.
Certain freedom of choice as to intended land uses shall be permitted,
provided that the essential site development regulations are complied
with and that the intended uses are not in conflict with the general
purpose and intent of either this chapter or the city's comprehensive
plan.
Sec. 14.02.003 Official zoning map
(a) Generally. An up-to-date and official copy of the City of Plainview zoning map is maintained by the administrator
and is available for inspection during regular business hours at city hall.
(b) Force and effect. The zoning map and all notations, references, and other information shown on the map are a part
of this chapter and have the same force and effect as this chapter's text.
(c) Omitted land. It is the intent of this chapter for the entire area of the city to be zoned. This includes all land and
water areas, rivers, streets, alleys, railroads, and other rights-of-way. Any area not shown on the zoning map as being
included in a specific zone shall be classified as Rural/Agricultural (RA).
(d) Annexed and undesignated property. For the purposes of ensuring that all land within the municipal limits has a
zoning designation, any land that is not assigned a zoning district on the official zoning map or any land that is annexed
into the city, without an express zoning district designated within the annexation ordinance, shall be zoned as
Rural/Agricultural (RA).
(e) Rezoning. Any amendment to the zoning classification (rezoning) on the zoning map shall include the legal
description of the land involved extending to the centerline of abutting rights-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/507
(f) Interpreting the zoning map. Where the zoning map appears to be unclear regarding the location of district
boundaries, the administrator, or at the administrator's discretion, the planning and zoning commission, shall make a
determination using the following criteria:
(1) Rights-of-way or easements. Where boundary lines appear to follow existing streets, alleys, railroad
tracks, utility lines, or similar features, the zoning boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline of
such features. Where the location of these features on the ground differ from that shown on the zoning map,
the features on the ground control.
(2) Property lines. Where the boundaries are indicated as approximately following property or other lot
lines, such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
(3) Watercourses. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, the shoreline or centerline
of drainage ways, rivers, streams, water bodies, or other watercourses shall be construed as following the
channel shoreline or centerline. In the event of a natural change in the location of such streams or other
watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel shoreline or
centerline.
(4) Unsubdivided land or no identifiable feature. Where unsubdivided land or where a zoning district
boundary follows no identifiable feature, the location of the boundary, unless the same is indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by applying, in order, the following rules:
(A) Legal description. The boundary shall be according to the legal description in the ordinance
establishing the district boundaries.
(B) Text dimensions. The boundary shall be located by reference to dimensions shown in the text on
the zoning map.
(C) Map scale. The boundary shall be located using the map scale appearing on the zoning map.
(5) Floodplain boundaries. When not otherwise determined, the boundaries of flood zones shall follow
contour or elevation lines at the elevation above sea level indicated on the official flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM) or flood insurance rate map (FIRM). Elevations between stream cross-sections on the FHBM or
FIRM shall be determined by proportional interpolation.
(6) Vacation or abandonment. Where a public street, alley, or parcel of land is officially vacated or
abandoned, the regulations applicable to the abutting property apply equally to the vacated or abandoned
street, alley, or parcel of land.
Sec. 14.02.004 Airport (AP) Overlay District
See City of Plainview Code of Ordinances, article 1.14, Airports.
Sec. 14.02.005 Floodplain (FP) Overlay District
(a) Purpose and intent. It has been determined that within the City of Plainview corporate limits there exist flood
hazard areas which are subject to periodic inundation and which can result in loss of life and property and in general
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(b) Establishment of overlay district. To minimize the potential adverse effects of flooding and associated problems, a
Floodplain (FP) Overlay District is established which delineates the floodway encroachment lines which are still subject
to inundation by the regulatory 100-year flood. This district is superimposed on the City of Plainview official zoning
map and its provisions apply to all lands, water areas and watercourses within the City of Plainview.
(c) Designation of floodplain district boundaries. The floodplain overlay district boundary is determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Administration's flood hazard boundary map. Where interpretation is required as to the
exact location of the boundaries of said districts then reference to the current FEMA flood hazard boundary map or other
updated surveys and studies, using controlling floodwater surface and land elevation data therefrom, plus interpretation
and review by the administrator, shall be made for more exact determination.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/507
(d) Relationship to articles on wet weather lakes and flood prevention. Nothing in this chapter shall supersede the
requirements found within article 3.12, Wet Weather Lake Areas, and article 3.13, Flood Prevention.
Sec. 14.02.006 Planned Development (PD) District regulations
(a) Purposes. In order that the public health, safety, integrity, and general welfare may be furthered to meet shifting
market demands, the Planned Development (PD) zone is established to provide project variety and diversity through the
modification of standards within this chapter, so that maximum long-range neighborhood and community benefits can be
gained for the following purposes:
(1) To encourage a pattern of development that enhances the landscape in a manner which could not
otherwise be accomplished using a different zone, such that placement and construction of buildings, paths,
and roads tend to enhance the natural assets, and unique landforms which are already present on-site;
(2) To encourage innovations in residential, commercial, recreational, and industrial development so that
the demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings; and
(3) To provide for necessary commercial, recreational, and educational facilities conveniently located in
proximity to residential uses.
(b) Applicability.
(1) Threshold. No PD zone shall be created unless it is demonstrated that the zone materially advances the
purposes set out in subsection (a) above.
(2) Higher quality development required. Any development approved through the use of the PD zone shall
be of a higher quality than would otherwise be achieved through the application of this chapter. PD zones
shall not be used to avoid the intent of requirements of this chapter which provides for community benefit
that more than offsets the impacts of the development allowed with a PD.
(c) Historic standards and overlay districts. All planned developments must in conformance with the requirements of
the historic standards and overlay districts where they are located. This is to include, but not limited to:
(1) Section 14.02.004, Airport (AP) Overlay District;
(2) Section 14.02.005, Floodplain (FP) Overlay District;
(3) Section 14.05.005 [Section 14.05.007], Historic Standards for the Downtown District.
(d) Use regulations. A building or premises in this zoning district may be used for any use allowed in any district
contained in this chapter, except:
(1) Those uses specifically prohibited by this chapter, including but not limited to the three overlay districts
cited in subsection (c) of this section; and
(2) Any use that is shown to not conform with the purpose and intent of the city's comprehensive plan.
(e) Height, lot, and yard requirements. The height, lot, and yard requirements shall conform to those requirements of
the appropriate subsections of this chapter for the appropriate intended use, except that modifications in these regulations
may be granted if it shall be found that such modifications will not adversely affect nearby properties and provides a
higher standard of built environment than what is presently permitted.
(f) Area requirements.
(1) The entire tract to be zoned (PD) may be considered as one building lot, or separate areas intended for
separate land uses may be considered as separate building lots. Area requirements shall conform to those
regulations for the appropriate intended use, except that for each 75 dwelling units, one acre of land shall be
designated and appropriately developed as recreational or open space.
(2) A minimum land area of 10 acres shall be required before an application for a PD will be approved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/507
(g) Parking regulations. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific
uses set forth in article 14.06, Parking and Loading.
(h) Subdivision regulations. All requirements of chapter 10, Subdivision Regulations, shall be complied with, except
for height, lot, yard, and area requirements should it found that the proposed development provides a higher standard of
built environment.
(i) Lighting. No provisions of section 14.06.003, Lighting, are to be waived via a PD application.
(j) Noise. No provisions of article 8.04, Noise, are to be waived via a PD application.
(k) Common areas.
(1) Joint ownership. Any and all developments which create joint ownership of property shall be developed
through the PD process of this section.
(2) Legal instrument. A legal instrument detailing the legal and maintenance responsibilities of the
property owners' association shall be developed pursuant to section 10.03.003, Property Owner Associations,
which will be strictly adhered to by the city, the developer, and owners of the property.
(l) Procedural process. See section 14.13.006, Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning).
ARTICLE 14.03 LAND USES
Sec. 14.03.001 Generally
The tables in this article describe which land uses are prohibited, permitted, limited, special, and temporary within the
zoning districts identified in table 14.02.002, Zoning Districts and Purposes.
Sec. 14.03.002 Legend
(a) Using the tables. The tables in this section list the applicable land uses in rows, organized by general land use
category. The zoning districts are arranged in columns. Where rows and columns intersect, a letter indicates if the use is
permitted, limited, special, temporary, or prohibited in the district, as set out below.
(b) Symbols. All the tables in this section use the following symbols:
(1) “P” means that the land use is a permitted use. The use is permitted as of right subject to:
(A) The standards identified in article 14.05, Lot, Density and Design Standards; and
(B) The procedures set out in article 14.12, Administrative Approvals: Permits and Procedures.
(2) “L” means that the land use is a limited use, which is permitted and may be administratively approved
by the administrator, subject to:
(A) The applicable limited use standards provided in section 14.04.002, Limited Use Standards;
(B) The standards identified in article 14.05, Lot, Density and Design Standards; and
(C) The procedures set out in article 14.12, Administrative Approvals: Permits and Procedures.
(3) “S” means that the use is allowed only as a special use, which may be approved only after a public
hearing and consideration by the planning and zoning commission and a subsequent public hearing and
determination by the city council, and are subject to:
(A) The standards identified in section 14.04.003, Special Use Standards;
(B) The standards identified in article 14.05, Lot, Density and Design Standards; and
(C) The procedures set out in article 14.13, Public Meeting Approvals: Permits and Procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/507
(4) “T” means that the use is allowed only for a fixed duration of time as a temporary use, which is
permitted and may be administratively approved by the administrator, subject to:
(A) The standards identified in section 14.04.004, Temporary Use Standards; and
(B) The procedures set out in article 14.12, Administrative Approvals: Permits and Procedures.
(5) “B” means that the use is unaffected by the presence of the Floodplain Overlay District (see section
14.02.005, Floodplain Overlay District). The permissibility of the use is determined by its base zoning
district designation.
(6) “–” means that the use is a prohibited use in the specified zoning district. Uses listed as prohibited
within an overlay district are prohibited regardless of their base zoning district designation.
Sec. 14.03.003 Residential uses and commercial uses of the home
Table 14.03.003. Residential Uses by Zoning District
P = Permitted; L = Limited; – = Prohibited; B = Base
Limited Use Standards - Section 14.04.002
Land Use Zoning Districts
Rural Residential Nonresidential/Mixed Use Overlay/Special
Single-Family Residential 3 RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Single-family detached dwelling P P P P – – P – – – – –
1
B
Duplex (2 du) – – P P – P P – – – – – B 2
Townhouse (3 to 10 du) – – P P – P P – – – – – B
Multiple-Family Residential RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Apartment (> 3 du) – – – L – L L L – – – –
1
–
2
Dormitory – – – L – L L – – – – – –
Manufactured home park – – – – L – – – – – – – –
Retirement housing – – – L – – L – L L – – –
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/507
Residential Accessory RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Accessory building L L L L – L L – – – – –
1
B
2
Attached accessory dwelling unit L – L L – – L – L – – – B
Detached accessory dwelling unit L – L – – – L – – – – – B
Downtown loft – – – – – – – L – – – – B
Commercial Uses of the Home RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Bed and breakfast L – L L – – L – – – – –
1
–
2
Home occupation L L L L L – – – – – – – B
Registered family home (child
care)
L L L L – – – – – – – – –
Notes:
1 See article 1.14, Airport Overlay District [Airports]. This overlay district affects the height of structures within a close proximity to the airport.
2 See Planned Development section for use and standards.
3 Group homes: Group homes are permitted within all three subtypes of single-family residential: single-family dwelling, duplex, and townhouse
as required per federal law.
Sec. 14.03.004 Nonresidential uses
Table 14.03.004. Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District
P = Permitted; L = Limited; S = Special; T = Temporary; – = Prohibited; B = Base
Limited Use Standards - Section 14.04.002
Special Use Standards - Section 14.04.003
Temporary Use Standards - Section 14.04.004
Land Use Zoning Districts
Rural Residential Nonresidential/Mixed Use Overlay/Special
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/507
Agricultural Uses and
Agricultural Support Services
RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Animal husbandry L – – – – – – – – – – L
1
B
2
Community garden – P P P P P P P P – – – B
Farm, ranch, or orchard P – – – – – – – – – – – B
Farming, landscaping, and
horticultural sales and services
L – – – – – P P – P P – B
Greenhouse/nursery L – – – – – L – – L L – B
Automobile and Related Service
Uses
RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Automobile and vehicle wash – – – – – P – – – L L –
1
B
2
Automobile structured parking
(primary use)
– – – – – S L L – L L L B
Automobile parking lot (primary
use)
– – – – – P P P – P P P B
Automobile/vehicle parts and/or
accessories
– – – – – – L – – L L – B
Automobile/vehicle sales and
rental
– – – – – – L – – L L – B
Automobile/vehicle repair and auto
body
– – – – – – – – – L L – B
Automobile/vehicle service – – – – – S L – – L L – B
Truck parking lot (primary use) – – – – – – – – – P P – B
Civic, Institutional, and Health RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/507
Care Uses
Adult day care center – – – – – – P – P P – –
1
–
2
Cemetery/funeral services – – – – – – P – – P – – B
Correctional institution – – – – – – – – – S – – –
Child-care, day care center – – – – – P L – L L – – –
Educational services L L L L L L L L L L P – –
Hospital/rehabilitative care – – – – – P – – – P – – –
Library, museum, or gallery – – – – – P P P P P – – –
Medical and diagnostic laboratories – – – – – P P P P P P P –
Medical office/clinic – – – – – P P P P P – – –
Place of public assembly, indoor – L L L – P L L P P – – –
Governmental service (police, fire,
emergency medical services)
P – – – – P P P P P P P –
Commercial Uses RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Bank, credit union, and financial
services
– – – – – – P P P P P –
1
–
2
Building materials and hardware
store
– – – – – – P L – P P P B
Dance hall/nightclub – – – – – – – L – L – – B
Gasoline station – – – – – – L – L L L – –
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/507
Grocery (food sales) – – – – – P L L L P – – –
Heavy machinery sales and rentals – – – – – – – – – P P – B
Home furnishing store – – – – – – L L L P P – B
Kennel P – – – – – – – – S L – –
Manufactured home sales – – – – – – – – – L L – –
Motel/hotel – – – – – S L L – P – – –
Office, general – – – – – – L P L P – – B
Pawn shop – – – – – – – – – S – – B
Personal services – – – – – – L L L P P – B
Recreational vehicle parks and
campgrounds
L – – – – – – – – – – – B
Repair service – – – – – – – – – L L – B
Restaurant – – – – – L L P L P – – B
Retail sales – – – – – L L P L P L – B
Self-storage, mini-warehouse – – – – – – – – – – P P B
Sexually oriented businesses 3 – – – – – – – – – – S – B
Studio or shop (arts, crafts, or
recording)
– – – – – P L L L P – – B
Veterinary clinic and/or service,
small animal
– – – – – – S – – P P – –
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/507
Veterinary clinic, large animal – – – – – – – – – – L – –
Industrial and Manufacturing
Uses
RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Bakery, wholesale – – – – – – – – – P P P
1
B
2
Batch plant, permanent – – – – – – – – – – – S –
Contractor's shop and/or service
yard
– – – – – – – – – – L L –
Industrial and manufacturing
product sales and supply
– – – – – – – – – – L L B
Junkyard/salvage yard – – – – – – – – – – – S –
Manufacturing, heavy (includes
handling of explosive and/or foul
materials)
– – – – – – – – – – – L –
Manufacturing, light (includes
product assembly and processing)
– – – – – – – – – – L L B
Publishing services – – – – – – P – – P P P B
Resource extraction – – – – – – – – – – – L B
Warehousing and storage – – – – – – – – – – L L B
Recreation and Entertainment
Uses
RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Commercial amusement, indoor – – – – – P P P P P – – 1 B 2
Commercial amusement, outdoor L – – – – L L – – L L – B
Outdoor shooting/archery range S – – – – – – – – – – – B
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/507
Park and recreation facility P P P P P P P P P P P – B
Transportation, Utility, and
Communication Uses
RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Cargo terminal P – – – – – – – – – P P
1
–
2
Landfill S – – – – – – – – – – S –
Passenger terminal – – – – – P P P – P P – –
Power generation, transmission,
and distribution (includes large
solar collectors and windmills)
L – – – – – – – – – L L B
Water and sewage treatment P – – – – – – – – – – P B
Water storage L L L L L L L L L L L L B
Wireless telecommunications tower – – – – – L – – – L L L B
Accessory Uses RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Alcohol sales (off-site
consumption) 4 – – – – – – – – – L L –
1
B
2
Alcohol sales (on-site
consumption) 4 – – – – – – – L – L L – B
Automated teller machine (ATM),
non-freestanding
– – – – – P P P P P P – B
Donation bin/recycling collection,
drop-off
– – – – – P P P P P P – B
Drive-in or drive-through facility – – – – – – – – L L L – B
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/507
Garden center – – – – – – – – – L – – B
Helipad – – – – – – – – – L – – B
Solar collectors (small accessory
structures)
L L L L L L L L L L L L B
Utility line P P P P P P P P P P P P B
Utility transfer station P P P P P P P P P P P P B
Vending kiosk – – – – – L L L L L L – B
Temporary Uses RA SR MR MF MH CU MU DT NC GC LI HI AP1 FP PD2
Asphalt/concrete batching plant
(temporary)
T T T T T T T T T T T T
1
B
2
Construction buildings and
structures (temporary)
T T T T T T T T T T T T B
Construction dumpsters
(temporary)
T T T T T T T T T T T T B
Construction yard (temporary) – – – – – – – – – – T T –
Model homes and on-site real
estate offices
T T T T T – – – – – – – B
Special event T T T T T T T T T T T T B
Notes:
1 See article 1.14, Airports. This overlay district affects the height of structures within a close proximity to the airport.
2 See Planned Development section for use and standards.
3 All sexually oriented businesses are required to comply with article 4.08, Sexually Oriented Businesses, of the city's Code of Ordinances.
4 All alcohol sales including on-site and off-site are required to comply with article 4.03, Alcoholic Beverages, of the city's Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 14.03.005 New and unspecified uses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/507
(a) Authorization of proposed use.
(1) Administrator discretion. If a proposed use is not specified in either table 14.03.003, Residential Uses
by Zoning District, or table 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District, the administrator shall make a
determination as to whether the use is either a subcategory or functionally similar to a specifically identified
use.
(2) Referral to planning and zoning commission. Should the administrator feel that it is necessary, he or
she may refer the determination of whether a use is a subcategory or functionally similar to a specified use to
the planning and zoning commission.
(b) If not authorized then prohibited. If the administrator determines that a proposed use is not a subcategory of or
functionally similar to a listed use in either table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by Zoning District, or table 14.03.007
[table 14.03.004], Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District, then the use is a prohibited use.
(c) Decision criteria. The following decision criteria shall be evaluated by the administrator, or at the administrator's
discretion, the planning and zoning commission, to decide whether a proposed use is a subcategory of, or is functionally
comparable to, a use specifically identified in either table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by Zoning District, or table
14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District:
(1) Parking demand;
(2) Average daily and peak hour trip generation (cars and trucks);
(3) Impervious surface;
(4) Regulated air or water emissions;
(5) Noise;
(6) Lighting;
(7) Dust;
(8) Odors;
(9) Solid waste generation;
(10) Potentially hazardous conditions, such as projectiles leaving the site;
(11) Use and storage of hazardous materials;
(12) Character of buildings and structures;
(13) Nature and impacts of operation; and
(14) Hours of operation.
(d) Industrialized housing. In accordance with chapter 1202 of the Texas Local Government Code (TLGC)
[Occupations Code], industrialized (modular) housing and buildings are permitted within each land use type provided
that all building materials are in strict compliance with article 3.03, Buildings, of the city's Code of Ordinances.
ARTICLE 14.04 LIMITED, SPECIAL, AND TEMPORARY USE STANDARDS
Sec. 14.04.001 Purpose and applicability
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote compatibility among land uses in the city by establishing specific
standards for the establishment of limited, special, and temporary uses which are indicated in the use tables in article
14.03, Land Uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/507
(b) Applicability.
(1) Generally. Uses shown as limited (L), special (S), or temporary (T) can be approved only if they meet
the standards of this article and other applicable standards and requirements of this chapter.
(2) Timing of compliance. The standards of this article apply at the time a limited, special, or temporary
use is requested to be established in an existing or new structure, or when an existing limited or special use is
proposed to be expanded by more than 10 percent of the existing square footage currently devoted to the use.
This section applies to an expansion of use whether it is to or within an existing building, in an outdoor area
devoted to the use, or a combination of thereof.
(3) Uses not listed. If there are limited and special uses specified in article 14.03, Land Uses, that are not
included in this section, all applicable standards of this chapter and all conditions of approval that may be
determined by the planning and zoning commission and the city council shall apply.
(4) Procedures.
(A) For limited uses and temporary uses, the administrator shall use the criteria set out in section
14.04.002, Limited Use Standards, and section 14.04.004, Temporary Use Standards, to determine
whether to approve a land use requested by the applicant.
(B) For special uses, the procedures set out in section 14.13.003 [section 14.13.004], Special Use
Permit, shall apply.
(5) Other applicable standards. The standards of this section are applied in addition to the other applicable
standards of this code, specifically including: article 14.05, Lot, Density, and Design Standards; article 14.06,
Parking and Loading; article 14.07, Landscaping and Buffering; and article 14.08, Signs.
Sec. 14.04.002 Limited use standards
(a) Generally. The standards of this section apply to all temporary [limited] uses set out in section 14.03.003,
Residential Uses and Commercial Uses of the Home, and section 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses.
(b) Residential uses and commercial uses of the home. The limited use standards below correspond to the uses
identified as limited per table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by Zoning District. Unless otherwise specifically stated an
applicant must meet all of the limited use standards within each land use category in order to receive approval by the
administrator.
(1) Accessory building. Shall not be built until the foundation of the primary building has been laid and
framing of the primary building is substantially complete.
(2) Apartment.
(A) Courtyards.
(i) Where an apartment building is erected so as to create a courtyard, the faces of all opposite
walls shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet apart.
(ii) No balcony or canopy shall extend into a courtyard area for a distance greater than five feet.
(B) Height regulations. Apartment buildings built within:
(i) 60 feet of an SR zoning district may not be more than two stories in height.
(ii) 100 feet of an SR zoning district may not be more than three stories in height.
(C) Required bufferyard. Apartments shall be separated from nonresidential uses by a Type B
bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/507
(3) Attached accessory dwelling unit. Shall be no larger than 25 percent of the size of the principal
dwelling.
(4) Bed and breakfast. Occupancy of the unit shall not exceed eight guests at any given time.
(5) Child-care, registered family home.
(A) Provides care for not more than:
(i) 12 children at any given time (includes children related to the caretaker); and
(ii) Six children under the age of under of 14 (excluding children related to the caretaker);
(B) The operator for the use meets all the certification, licensing, and/or monitoring requirements of
the State of Texas;
(C) The operator meets all of the applicable home occupation requirements;
(D) Signage will be limited to a single non-illuminated placard or nameplate with a maximum size of
two square feet that must be affixed securely and flat; and
(E) The home is a minimum of 600 feet from another child-care registered home.
(6) Detached accessory dwelling unit. Shall be no larger than 25 percent of the size of the principal
dwelling.
(7) Dormitory. Apartment. [sic]
(A) Courtyards.
(i) Where an apartment building is erected so as to create a courtyard, the faces of all opposite
walls shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet apart.
(ii) No balcony or canopy shall extend into a courtyard area for a distance greater than five feet.
(B) Height regulations. Apartment buildings built within:
(i) 60 feet of an SR zoning district may not be more than two stories in height.
(ii) 100 feet of an SR zoning district may not be more than three stories in height.
(C) Required bufferyard. Apartments shall be separated from nonresidential uses by a Type B
bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications).
(8) Downtown loft.
(A) The first floor of the unit shall be used solely for commercial purposes;
(B) The second floor and any additional floors shall be used solely for residential purposes; and
(C) Required parking for the dwelling units shall be provided via an alley, parking structure, or
parking court.
(9) Home occupation.
(A) No person other than members of a family who reside in the single-family residential dwelling
shall be engaged in a home occupation.
(B) The use shall remain subordinate to the principal use of the single-family residential dwelling as a
family residence and the area utilized for home occupation shall never exceed 25% of the total of the
floor area or 400 square feet (whichever is less) shall be devoted to the home occupation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/507
(i) This measurement excludes the floor area of an attached or detached garage and/or accessory
dwelling unit.
(ii) This measurement includes any accessory buildings or structures used as part of the home
occupation.
(C) To prevent increased traffic congestion in residential areas, no advertising of the home occupation
is to be conducted by means of any commercial communication media, or by the use of any other
device such as a sign or other visible indication thereof displayed inside or outside the single-family
residential dwelling.
(D) The residential dwelling shall maintain its residential character and shall not be altered or
remodeled in order to create any type of exterior commercial appeal.
(E) No exterior storage of material, equipment and/or supplies used in conjunction with the home
occupation shall be placed, permitted or allowed on the premises occupied by the single-family
residential dwelling.
(F) There shall be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare beyond the property
lines.
(G) The home occupation shall be wholly within the residential dwelling and no accessory building
shall be used.
(H) No stock, goods, wares or merchandise shall be sold to on-site customers on the premises.
(I) Unless otherwise required by law, no entrance is specifically dedicated for the home occupation.
(J) Prohibited home occupations:
(i) Private schools for children in first grade or above;
(ii) Child-care facilities that exceed the required number of enrolled children to be eligible for
approval as a child-care, registered family home.
(10) Manufactured home park. The use must be compliant with the U.S. Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) code and built on a permanent foundation. Mobile homes are prohibited within manufactured home
parks.
(11) Retirement housing.
(A) If the capacity of the use is more than 15 residents, primary access to the site shall be from
collector or arterial streets;
(B) The operator for the use meets all certification, licensing, and/or monitoring requirements of the
state; and
(C) The use is separated from single-family detached dwelling units by a Type B bufferyard per
section 14.07.004, Bufferyards.
(c) Nonresidential uses. The limited use standards below correspond to the uses identified as limited per table
14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District.
(1) Alcohol sales (off-site consumption). All requirements of article 4.03, Alcoholic Beverages, of the city's
Code of Ordinances have been met.
(2) Alcohol sales (on-site consumption). All requirements of article 4.03, Alcoholic Beverages, of the city's
Code of Ordinances have been met.
(3) Animal husbandry.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/507
(A) If the capacity of the use is more than 15 residents, primary access to the site shall be from
collector or arterial streets;
(B) All activities will take place entirely within an enclosed building; and
(C) The use is not allowed on property that is located within 300 feet of any residential district or use,
as measured along a straight line from the closest lot lines.
(4) Automobile and vehicle wash. Car washes shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any front, side
or back yard adjacent to a residential district.
(5) Automobile structured parking (primary use). A minimum of one car length shall be provided between
an exit control gate and the inside edge of a sidewalk to minimize conflicts between exiting cars and
pedestrians.
(6) Automobile/vehicle parts and/or accessories. No inoperable vehicles or materials are stored on-site,
unless within an enclosed building, or otherwise totally screened from view.
(7) Automobile/vehicle sales and rental.
(A) All outdoor display areas for rental or sales of vehicles shall:
(i) Be located on an improved hard surface;
(ii) Be located in areas that are outside of the minimum required parking spaces for the use;
(iii) Be located outside of the right-of-way; and
(iv) Include no more than one elevated display which raises the vehicle no more than three feet
off the ground.
(B) No inoperable vehicles or materials are stored on-site, unless within an enclosed building, or
otherwise totally screened from view.
(8) Automobile/vehicle repair and auto body. No inoperable vehicles or materials are stored on-site, unless
within an enclosed building, or otherwise totally screened from view.
(9) Automobile/vehicle service. No inoperable vehicles or materials are stored on-site, unless within an
enclosed building, or otherwise totally screened from view.
(10) Building materials and hardware. Outdoor display areas:
(A) Shall not be larger than 30 percent of the footprint of the principal building;
(B) Must be enclosed by a structure that screens the merchandise; and
(C) Shall not be located on a location that is also counted to meet the minimum parking requirements.
(11) Child-care, day care center.
(A) No portion of a day care center site may be located within 300 feet of gasoline pumps or
underground gasoline storage tanks, or any other storage area for explosive or highly combustible
materials.
(B) The facility shall have at least one building entrance dedicated solely for its use.
(C) All outdoor activities shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any residentially zoned
property or separated by a Type B bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications).
(12) Commercial amusement, indoor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/507
(A) The minimum area of the parcel proposed for development is one acre.
(B) If the use is located within 400 feet from a residentially zoned property then the use shall be
prohibited from operating between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. [sic]
(13) Commercial amusement, outdoor.
(A) The minimum area of the parcel proposed for development is one acre.
(B) Amphitheater stages and drive-in screens shall face away from the nearest residential uses.
(C) If the use is located within 400 feet from a residentially zoned property then the use shall be
prohibited from operating between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. [sic]
(14) Contractor's shop and/or service yard.
(A) The use shall be enclosed by a Type A bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard
Classifications) that includes a fence to provide security;
(B) Liquids, gels, and pastes (e.g., paints, sealers, etc.) shall be stored only in enclosed buildings; and
(C) The disposal or storage of inoperable machines or wastes is prohibited.
(15) Dance hall/nightclub.
(A) No entrance faces a residential district or use unless it is at least 100 feet from a property line.
(B) Lighting is shielded so as to prevent the direct glare of beams onto any adjacent residential
district or use.
(16) Drive-in or drive-through facility.
(A) The facility shall not be located within the front yard.
(B) Ordering stations facing abutting residentially zoned or used property shall be buffered with a
Type B bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications).
(C) A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet by 20 feet with direct forward
access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any
other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area.
(D) Each service window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five
stacking spaces.
(17) Educational services.
(A) For all zoning districts labeled as limited use. Outdoor instruction for truck and automobile
driving is prohibited.
(B) For all rural and residential districts (RA, SR, MR, MF, MH). Instruction is limited to facilities
for minors; not adults (i.e., nursery through high school).
(18) Farming, landscaping, and horticultural sales and services. All sales must be products created and/or
produced on-site. Off-site shipments of products are expressly prohibited.
(19) Garden center (accessory use). Outdoor display areas:
(A) Shall not be larger than 30 percent of the footprint of the principal building;
(B) Must be enclosed by a structure that screens the merchandise; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/507
(C) Shall not be located on a location that is also counted to meet the minimum parking requirements.
(20) Gasoline station.
(A) Lighting is shielded so as to prevent the direct glare of beams onto any abutting residential
district or use;
(B) The use is separated from all residential districts and uses by a Type B bufferyard (see table
14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications); and
(C) A truck routing plan shows that the ingress and egress to the site does not use a minor residential
street.
(21) Greenhouse/nursery.
(A) Outdoor display areas are enclosed with a fence or wall that is in compliance with section
14.05.006, Standards for Accessory Buildings and Structures.
(B) Bags of mulch, sand, pebbles, rock, or other non-vegetative ground covers will not be stacked to
a height in excess of six feet.
(C) Bulk sales of mulch, sand, pebbles, rock, or other non-vegetative ground covers will not be stored
or sold on-site.
(D) The display of goods, materials, and merchandise will not be located in a parking lot or reduce
the minimum required parking or loading for the use.
(22) Grocery (food sales). The use may not be housed in a building that is larger than 15,000 square feet.
(23) Helipad (hospital/public safety).
(A) No helipad shall be located within 1,000 feet of any church, school, library, public park,
residential zoning district, or any lot, tract or parcel upon which a residence or dwelling is located.
(B) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may approve a proposed helipad situated less
than 1,000 feet from the above delineated property if the council first finds as a matter of fact that all of
the following criteria have been met:
(i) Structures or natural terrain features between the proposed helipad and any such property
within the 1,000 foot requirement lessen the noise impact of the use to a level lower than that
which would be experienced if the helipad were located 1,000 feet from all such property with no
structures or terrain intervening;
(ii) The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has approved approach and departure paths for
the proposed helipad which requires all departures to be made at an angle of more than 90 degrees
from any boundary of any such property which is less than 1,000 feet from the proposed helipad;
and
(iii) That no substantial adverse impact exists on residences or businesses within the 1,000 foot
requirement.
(24) Home furnishing store. Outdoor merchandise display areas are prohibited.
(25) Industrial and manufacturing product sales and supply.
(A) All activities shall take place entirely within an enclosed building.
(B) Loading bays shall be located behind the principal building unless it is demonstrated that:
(i) Front-facing bays would have less impact on the function of the surrounding land uses; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/507
(ii) The front property line is buffered with a Type A bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A),
Bufferyard Classifications).
(26) Kennel. Outdoor animal living facilities and cages are prohibited.
(27) Manufacturing, heavy.
(A) All activities shall take place entirely within an enclosed building.
(B) The use shall be separated from the following uses by at least 500 feet:
(i) Any residential zoning district or use;
(ii) Places of public assembly, indoor;
(iii) Child-care, registered family homes;
(iv) Child-care, day care center;
(v) Hospital/rehabilitative care;
(vi) Library, museum, or gallery; and
(vii) Medical and diagnostic laboratories.
(28) Manufacturing, light. All activities shall take place entirely within an enclosed building.
(29) Manufactured home sales. All outdoor display areas for sales of manufactured homes shall:
(A) Be located on an improved hard surface;
(B) Be located in areas that are outside of the minimum required parking spaces for the use;
(C) Be located outside of the right-of-way; and
(D) Include no more than one elevated display which raises the manufactured home no more than
three feet off the ground.
(30) Motel/hotel.
(A) Entrance to all guest rooms must be from the interior of the building.
(B) Any surface parking shall be located behind the building.
(C) Any parking structure shall be located behind the building or below the use.
(D) The facility shall have a minimum of 1,200 square feet of meeting space.
(31) Office, general. The use may not be housed in a building that is larger than 5,000 square feet.
(32) Personal services. The use may not be housed in a building that is larger than 15,000 square feet.
(33) Place of public assembly, indoor.
(A) For new uses:
(i) The use has a minimum site area that is three times the minimum lot size of the respective
district.
(ii) The parcel proposed for development is located along an arterial or collector street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/507
(iii) Parking shall be provided on-site without requiring parking on contiguous or
noncontiguous parcels.
(B) For the expansion of existing uses:
(i) The expansion will allow the use to take access from an arterial or collector street.
(ii) The owner of the property also owned the abutting lot onto which the expansion is
proposed.
(C) For the conversion of existing structures: New construction is prohibited, however the conversion
of existing buildings which have existing parking facilities present is permitted.
(34) Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds.
(A) The use shall occur on a site of at least five acres;
(B) Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved, covered with solid material, or
protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust;
(C) The park owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the ground cover or other vegetation
when used; and
(D) With the exception of points of ingress and egress, the use shall be surrounded by a Type C
bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications).
(35) Repair service. All activities will take place entirely within an enclosed building.
(36) Resource extraction.
(A) The use shall not be found to be within a cone of influence around a wellhead;
(B) The use shall be separated from the following uses by at least 1,000 feet:
(i) Any residential zoning district or use;
(ii) Places of public assembly, indoor;
(iii) Child-care, registered family homes;
(iv) Child-care, day care center;
(v) Hospital/rehabilitative care;
(vi) Library, museum, or gallery; and
(vii) Medical and diagnostic laboratories;
(C) With the exception of points of ingress and egress, the use shall be surrounded by a Type C
bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications); and
(D) The use shall be shown to not cause a substantial risk of polluting ground or surface waters due
to residual or waste materials from extraction.
(37) Restaurant. The use may not be housed in a building that is larger than 15,000 square feet.
(38) Retail sales. The use may not be housed in a building that is larger than 15,000 square feet.
(39) Solar collectors (small accessory structures). The use must only capture energy for the buildings on
the same lot that it is located on. Commercial production of energy is expressly prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/507
(40) Studio or shop (arts, crafts, or recordings). The use may not be housed in a building that is larger than
5,000 square feet.
(41) Veterinary clinic and/or service, small animal.
(A) No boarding facility or dog runs shall be located within 100 feet from any lot line or within 300
feet of any type of educational service or child-care facility (day care or registered family home).
(B) Outdoor dog runs and animal exercise areas will be screened by a Type C bufferyard (see table
14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications) around the facilities or at the property lines so as to prevent
distracting or exciting the animals.
(C) With the exception of subsection (B) above, the use is conducted within a fully enclosed building
which is designed with noise-resistant materials. Plans and specifications for noise reduction materials
shall be approved by the city through the site plan approval process.
(42) Veterinary clinic, large animal.
(A) No boarding facility shall be located within 100 feet from any lot line or within 300 feet of any
type of educational service or child-care facility (day care or registered family home).
(B) The use is conducted within a fully enclosed building, which is designed with noise-resistant
materials. Plans and specifications for noise reduction materials shall be approved by the city through
the site plan approval process.
(43) Warehousing and storage.
(A) The use is not allowed on property that is located within 300 feet of any residential district or use.
(B) The use shall have access to an expressway, arterial or collector street. (See chapter 10,
Subdivision Regulations, appendix A, Thoroughfare Map.)
(C) Loading bays shall be located behind the principal building unless it is demonstrated that:
(i) Front-facing bays would have less impact on the function of the surrounding land uses; and
(ii) The front property line is buffered with a Type A bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A),
Bufferyard Classifications).
(D) A truck routing plan shows that the ingress and egress to the site does not use a minor residential
street.
(E) All activities will take place entirely within an enclosed building.
(F) The use does not involve hazardous materials or wastes.
(44) Water storage. All newly installed water storage facilities must be municipally owned.
(45) Wireless telecommunications tower.
(A) No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the city unless the tower is capable of
supporting another person's operating telecommunications facilities comparable in weight, size, and
surface area to the telecommunications facilities installed by the applicant on the tower within six
months of the completion of the tower construction.
(B) All towers up to 100 feet in height shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the underlying
setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. Towers in excess of 100 feet in height shall be set
back one additional foot per each foot of tower height in excess of 100 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/507
(C) Towers shall be separated from all residential structures and residentially zoned lands by a
minimum of 200 feet or 200 percent of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
(D) All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and, at
minimum, in conformance with the current adopted edition of the International Building Code (IBC),
and any other standards outlined in this chapter. All towers in operation shall be fixed to land.
(E) Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances
compatibility with adjacent land uses, as approved by the administrator.
(F) All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support structures, or
telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the
zoning district where the tower, antenna support structure, or telecommunications facilities are located.
The city may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in the city code in order to enhance
compatibility with adjacent land uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of any fencing.
(G) To secure the obligation set forth in this section the applicant (and/or owner) shall post a bond in
an amount which shall be determined by the city council based on the anticipated cost of removal of the
tower.
(H) All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments other than those required for communication
operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) shall be prohibited.
Sec. 14.04.003 Special use standards
(a) Generally. The standards of this section apply to all special uses set out in section 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses.
(b) Permit required. A special use permit is required for:
(1) All land uses identified as a special use (S) in either table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by Zoning
District, and table 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District; or
(2) A land use that is being proposed to be transferred from a legally nonconforming use to be legally
conforming per section 14.09.007, Mitigation of Nonconforming Uses.
(c) Standards. In review of special use permit applications pursuant to either table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by
Zoning District, or table 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses by Zoning District, the administrator, the planning and zoning
commission, and the city council shall utilize the following standards:
(1) The proposed special use will operate or be designed in a manner that does not diminish the use or
functionality of surrounding properties;
(2) Provisions for hours of operation, parking and loading areas, driveways, lighting, signs, landscaping,
buffering, and other site improvements have been provided;
(3) Adequate public services (such as: streets, off-street parking, pedestrian facilities, water, sewer, gas,
electricity, police and fire protection) must be available without the reduction of services to any existing uses;
(4) The proposed use will incorporate design features to sufficiently protect adjacent uses including but not
limited to: service areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, safety provisions, accessways to and from the
site, buffering, fencing and site building placement; and
(5) The proposed use is compatible with adjacent existing uses. Compatibility shall be expressed in terms
of appearance, architectural scale and features, site design and scope, landscaping, as well as the control of
adverse environmental impacts, including noise and lighting, or other undesirable conditions.
(d) Additional standards for sexually oriented businesses. In addition to complying with all provisions within this
section, all land uses that qualify as a sexually oriented business must fully comply with article 4.08, Sexually Oriented
Businesses, of the city's Code of Ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/507
(e) Conditional approval. The city council may require additional conditions above the standards listed in subsection
(c) to reasonably mitigate any adverse impacts upon surrounding properties in the zoning district of the property for
which the special use is requested.
Sec. 14.04.004 Temporary use standards
(a) Permit required. A temporary use permit is required per section 14.12.007 for the approval of a temporary use.
(b) Standards. The standards set out in table 14.04.004, Temporary Use Standards, apply to all temporary uses set out
in section 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses.
Table 14.04.004. Temporary Use Standards
Use Location Hours
Operational
Requirements
Duration
Asphalt/concrete batching
plant (temporary)
Not less than 500 feet from
any residential property.
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
if within 1,000 feet of
residential property; or
6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. in all other
locations.
The facility shall be used
only for a project within
the city limits.
Established by approval to
coincide with the use of the
facility for a specified
construction project. Shall be
removed immediately upon
project completion.
Construction buildings
(temporary)
On lot or parcel proposed for
development set back at least
10 feet from all lot lines.
Not limited, however,
the building may not
be used as a residence.
May be used by
construction
superintendent,
construction workers,
contractors, and other
personnel on a
construction team or as a
security office.
Shall be removed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the last building
as detailed on the site plan.
Construction dumpsters
(temporary)
On lot or parcel using
dumpster, set back at least 10
feet from the lot line, and
placed on an improved hard
surface. In nonresidential and
mixed-use districts,
dumpsters shall be located
behind buildings (where
possible) and shall not
obstruct required parking lot
requirements.
Not limited. Refuse shall be contained
within the dumpster, and
shall be secured to
prevent it from being
removed from the
dumpster by wind or
wildlife.
If used for construction or
renovation, may remain in place
for one week after project
completion. If used for another
purpose, 10 days.
Construction yard
(temporary)
Only on a property zoned
Light Industrial (LI) or
Heavy Industrial (HI)
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
The facility shall be used
only for a construction
site within the city limits.
Established to coincide with the
use of the facility for a
specified construction project
Model homes and on-site
real estate offices
On lot or parcel proposed for
development.
Not limited. Sales limited to units
located on the lot or
parcel proposed for
On-site real estate offices shall
be removed upon completion of
model home or suitable
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/507
development; sales
offices within model
homes shall meet
applicable building code
criteria.
permanent floor area on-site;
shall be removed by issuance of
last certificate of occupancy for
development.
Public special events The size of the site shall be
large enough to
accommodate the expected
attendance in a manner that is
safe for the site,
neighborhood, street, or other
infrastructure
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
A review of electric and
lighting facilities for
electrical code
compliance and
compliance with the
standards for lighting
prior to issuing a
temporary use permit for
the special event.
Shall not be held on a lot or
parcel more than four times per
calendar year, and shall be
limited to no more than five
consecutive days, not including
set-up and tear-down.
ARTICLE 14.05 LOT, DENSITY, DESIGN AND HISTORIC STANDARDS
Sec. 14.05.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish the standards for the character, scale, density, and historic properties that are
allowed within each zoning
district as set out in section 14.02.002, Zoning Districts Established.
Sec. 14.05.002 Standards for rural and residential development
(a) Generally. The minimum lot area, minimum area [per] dwelling unit, minimum lot width, maximum ground
coverage, maximum building height, and minimum setbacks for each residential district are as set out in table 14.05.002,
Rural and Residential Development Standards.
(b) Application. These standards apply to all primary buildings and structures located within the RA, SR, MR, MF,
and MH zoning districts.
(c) Interpretation of table. The table columns shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Minimum area per dwelling unit (DU) sets out the minimum lot size per dwelling unit. 
(2) Maximum ground coverage sets out the maximum amount of land area that may be built upon per lot.
This is calculated as a total of the primary structure and any accessory buildings or structures proposed for a
lot.
Table 14.05.002. Rural and Residential Development Standards
Zoning
District
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot Area
per DU
Minimum Lot
Width
Maximum
Ground
Coverage
Maximum
Building
Height 3
Front
Interior
Side
Street
Side
Rear
RA 1 acre 1 acre 100 ft. 10% 45 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/507
SR 6,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 55% 35 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft.
MR 6,000 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft. 50 ft. 60% 35 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 25 ft.
MF 10,000 sq. ft. 1,500 sq. ft. 100 ft. 65% 45 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
MH 4 10 acres 4,500 sq. ft. 45 ft. 50% 35 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
Notes:
1 Should an applicant not meet the setback requirements of this table, it is possible that an alternative standard could be met. See section
14.05.004(b), Alternative Setback Compliance: Setback Averaging.
2 Some accessory buildings and structures are exempt from the setback requirements of this table. See section 14.05.006, Standards for
Accessory Buildings and Structures.
3 Maximum building height exceptions are found in section 14.05.005, Height and Area Exceptions.
4 Additional requirements for manufactured housing are found in subsection (d).
(d) Additional Manufactured Housing (MH) District standards.
(1) No manufactured home unit shall be located less than a minimum of 20 feet between a neighboring
unit.
(2) The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be 480 square feet.
(3) Whenever street names are to be given to public streets or private drives in a manufactured home
development, such street names shall be approved with approval of a site development plan.
(4) A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
(e) Permitted encroachments.
(1) Eaves may extend no more than two feet into a required yard, except that eaves may encroach up to
three feet into a required yard when such yard is 10 feet or more in width or depth.
(2) Solar energy collectors and heat storage units may extend two feet into any side or rear yard.
(3) Air conditioning condensers may extend four feet into any side or rear yard.
(4) Open, uncovered porches or terraces that are no higher than the floor level of the first floor above grade
on the side of the building to which they are attached may extend no closer than five feet to the rear property
line, or three feet to a side property line, provided there is compliance with all building, fire, and life safety
code requirements.
Sec. 14.05.003 Standards for nonresidential and mixed use development
(a) Generally. The minimum lot area, minimum street frontage, minimum landscape ratio, maximum building height,
maximum building stories, and minimum setbacks for each nonresidential and mixed use district are as set out in table
14.05.003, Nonresidential and Mixed Use Development Standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/507
(b) Application. These standards apply to all primary buildings and structures located within the CU, MU, DT, NC,
GC, LI, and HI zoning districts.
(c) Interpretation of table. The table columns shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Minimum street frontage sets out the minimum lot width as measured from the street that a building
faces onto.
(2) Maximum ground coverage sets out the maximum amount of land area that may be built upon per lot.
This is calculated as a total of the primary structure and any accessory buildings and structures proposed for a
lot.
Table 14.05.003. Nonresidential and Mixed Use Development Standards
Zoning
District
Lot and Building Standards Minimum Setbacks 1, 2
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum
Street Frontage
Maximum
Ground
Coverage
Maximum
Building
Height 3
Front
Interior
Side
Street
Side
Rear
Residential
District
Boundary
CU 3,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 65% 55 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft.
MU 3,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 75% 65 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft.
DT 3,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 100% 80 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft.
NC 4 6,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 80% 45 ft. 25 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft.
GC 6,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 85% 80 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
LI 10,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 90% 80 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
HI 10,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 90% 80 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft.
Notes:
1 Additional setback requirements are found in section 14.05.004(b), Alternative Setback Compliance: Setback Averaging.
2 Some accessory buildings and structures are exempt from the minimum setback requirements as shown here. Regulations for these setbacks
may be found at section 14.05.006, Standards for Accessory Buildings and Structures.
3 Maximum building height exceptions are found in section 14.05.005, Height and Area Exceptions.
4 Maximum building size in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) District: All buildings and structures in the NC district shall be either:
a. The size of the existing building footprint on a specific lot; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/507
b. A maximum of 15,000 square feet.
Sec. 14.05.004 Special setback and lot standards
(a) Two or more zoning districts on a single lot. Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements, including the
setback requirements, of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage.
(b) Alternative setback compliance: setback averaging. If the primary buildings along the frontage of any street
segment located between two intersecting streets in any residential zoning district has an average setback which is lesser
in dimension than the minimum front setback established for the zoning district in which the street frontage is located
then an average setback of all buildings fronting upon such street may be used as the front setback requirement.
Sec. 14.05.005 Height and area exceptions
(a) Maximum height exceptions for primary structures. Utility poles and towers, publicly owned sports lighting, and
publicly owned water storage tanks are exempt from height restrictions.
(b) Maximum height exceptions for attachments.
(1) 65 feet requirement. The attachments listed below may exceed the prescribed height limits up to a
maximum height of 65 feet provided that [they] will be functionally used for the proposed principal building.
(A) Steeple, bell tower, chimney, or other decorative architectural elements;
(B) Flagpole or monument; or
(C) Any accessory structure necessary for business operations and zoned within the Heavy Industrial
(HI) District.
(2) 35 feet requirement. Solar arrays, collectors, condensers, heat storage units, or necessary mechanical
equipment for home functionality may exceed the prescribed height limit up to a maximum of 35 feet
provided that they will be functionally used for the proposed principal building.
(c) Projections into yard. Open and unenclosed building projections such as outside stairways and fire escapes,
balconies, terraces or porches, awnings, eave and roof extensions, and ornamental features may project into the required
yards for a distance not to exceed three feet. In no case shall such projections be located closer than three feet from any
lot line.
Sec. 14.05.006 Standards for accessory buildings and structures
(a) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings detached from, or attached to the main building by an enclosed or
unenclosed structure, may be permitted within the allowable building area of any lot defined by the required front, side
and rear building lines under the following conditions:
(1) No accessory buildings shall be permitted in a front yard.
(2) Accessory buildings may be permitted in a rear yard or side yard, provided:
(A) The main building or structure is separated from any and all accessory buildings or structures by
a distance of not less than ten feet;
(B) The height of the building shall be no greater than 12 feet;
(C) The side yard setback is not less than three feet; and
(D) The use meets all anchoring requirements of the International Building Code (IBC).
(3) No accessory building shall be allowed to aerially encroach in an alleyway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/507
(4) In no case shall the total floor area of all accessory buildings or portions thereof within the required
rear yard exceed 30 percent of the area of the required rear yard.
(5) Where an accessory building is adjacent to a side street, the minimum side yard setback from said street
shall be ten feet.
(b) Carports.
(1) Generally. Carports shall meet all applicable setback requirements as provided in section 14.05.002,
Standards for Rural and Residential Development; section 14.05.003 [section 14.05.006], Standards for
Accessory Buildings and Structures; and section 14.05.004, Special Setback and Lot Standards, unless a
special exception is permitted per the approval requirements of subsection (b)(2) below and the procedures
set forth in section 14.13.007, Special Exception Carport Approval.
(2) Special exception approval requirements. Carports, detached or attached to a primary building, shall be
permitted as a special exception per section 14.13.007, Special Exception Carport Approval, provided that:
(A) A site development plan is submitted in accordance with section 14.12.006, Site Development
Plans;
(B) [Reserved]
(C) The structure must be located on the side yard of the property unless it is functionally
impracticable to build in this location;
(D) The structure does not exceed the lesser of:
(i) 20 feet in length by 20 feet in width; or
(ii) 20 percent of the required front yard;
(E) The structure is open on all sides with the exception of one side that may be attached to a
principal building;
(F) The structure shall be no lower than seven feet as measured from the floor or bottom, to the
lowest edge of the carport eave;
(G) The structure or any components thereof (roof, eaves, and support members) must:
(i) Be set back at least three feet from a side property line; and
(ii) Not block or overhang or intrude into any public easement, including but not limited to
sidewalks;
(H) The area beneath the carport must be paved with an impermeable surface such as asphalt or
concrete prior to or contemporaneous to the construction of the carport or structure;
(I) The structure is built and designed for the sole purpose of vehicle parking and protection and not
for any other purpose including but not limited to outside storage;
(J) The minimum setback of any carport shall be 20 feet from the right-of-way. In no case shall the
carport be located closer than five feet from the property line;
(K) The structure must be built in such a manner that water does not drain onto any adjacent
property; and
(L) The structure must be consistent in both character and form with the other buildings and
structures that exist on both the same side of the street and the opposite side of the street between two
intersecting streets.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/507
(M) All porte-cocheres must be part of the original primary building and meet the existing setbacks
for the lot without exception.
(c) Fence and wall regulations.
(1) Obstruction prohibited.
(A) No fence, screen, wall, or other visual barrier shall be so located or placed that it obstructs the
vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching within 30 feet of any street intersection.
(B) Where an alley intersects with a street, no fence or plant taller than 30 inches may be placed
within a sight visibility triangle defined by measuring fifteen feet to a point along the property lines and
joining said points to form the hypotenuse of the triangle.
(2) Wall finish. All required screening walls shall be equally finished on both sides of the wall.
(3) Rural and residential district maximums. In any rural or residential district (RA, SR, MR, MF, MH) or
along the common boundary between any residential and nonresidential district where a wall, fence, or
screening separation is erected, the following standards for height, location, and design shall be observed:
(A) Rear yard and side yard. No fence or wall located to the rear or side lot line shall exceed eight
feet in height above the grade of the adjacent property.
(B) Front yard.
(i) Generally. The maximum height of a fence or wall shall not exceed three feet.
(ii) Exception. Fences in the Manufactured Home (MH) District shall not exceed four feet in
height.
(C) Corner lot. Where a corner lot is platted with two front yards, and a house is constructed facing
one of the front yards, the second front yard shall also be deemed to be a front yard.
(4) Nonresidential and multifamily uses.
(A) Contiguous to residential. Where the side or rear yard of a multifamily use or a nonresidential use
is contiguous to a parcel of property zoned either SR or MR, a solid screening wall or fence of not less
than six nor more than eight feet in height shall be erected on or near the property line separating these
districts.
(B) Adjacent to public street. When the rear or service side of a nonresidential use is adjacent to a
public street, screening of at least six feet and no more than eight feet in height shall be erected.
Sec. 14.05.007 Historic standards for Downtown District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure, insofar, as possible, that any development, redevelopment, or
substantial improvement of property within this district is in harmony with its architectural and historic character.
(b) Applicability.
(1) All properties within the Downtown (DT) zoning district shall comply with the standards within this
section.
(2) The regulations of this section are solely limited to the exterior of all buildings within the DT zoning
district.
(c) Certificate of appropriateness.
(1) Exterior architectural features. No person or entity shall construct, reconstruct, alter, change, restore,
remove or demolish any exterior architectural feature of a building within the Downtown (DT) zoning
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/507
district, unless application is submitted to the planning and zoning commission for a certificate of
appropriateness and such a certificate is granted.
(2) Ordinary repair or maintenance. Ordinary repair or maintenance which does not involve changes in
architectural and historical value, style or general design is exempt from requiring a certificate of
appropriateness.
(3) Procedures. See section 14.13.001, Certificate of Appropriateness.
(d) Certificate of demolition or removal.
(1) Application. An application to the planning and zoning commission is required for all properties within
the DT zoning district to demolish or remove an existing building within the boundaries of the district.
(2) Procedures. See section 14.13.002, Certificate of Demolition or Removal.
(e) Rehabilitation of historic buildings.
(1) Certificate of appropriateness applications. When making a decision concerning applications for
certificates of appropriateness within the DT zoning district for new construction, alteration, repair, or
restoration, the planning and zoning commission shall use:
(A) The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, found within the Code of Federal
Regulations at 36 CFR 67.7 and as displayed in subsection (e)(2) below; and
(B) The specific design standards for exterior rehabilitation, set out in subsection (e)(3).
(2) Standards for rehabilitation (as codified at 36 CFR 67.7).
(A) A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal
change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
(B) The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic
materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
(C) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that
create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural
elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
(D) Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their
own right shall be retained and preserved.
(E) Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that
characterize a historic property shall be preserved.
(F) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of
deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design,
color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features
shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
(G) Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials
shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible.
(H) Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such
resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
(I) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials
that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/507
compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the
property and its environment.
(J) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that,
if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment
would be unimpaired.
(3) Specific design standards for exterior rehabilitation. The following standards elaborate on and set out a
means for implementing the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.
(A) Foundations.
(i) The size and shape of original door and window openings in the foundation shall be
maintained.
(ii) Any repair or new construction shall match, to the greatest extent practicable, the original
materials in size, color, texture, composition, and joint profile.
(iii) Masonry or concrete foundations shall not be painted or covered with cement plaster or
stucco.
(B) Masonry.
(i) Any repair, restoration, or new construction shall match, to the greatest extent practicable,
the color of the original masonry and mortar.
(ii) Historic masonry shall not be painted.
(iii) Masonry features that are essential to the historic character of a building and are
structurally sound shall not be removed or significantly changed.
(C) Architectural metals. Architectural metal features that are in a condition that may be restored
shall be retained and preserved, to the greatest extent practicable.
(D) Doorways and windows.
(i) The repair or replacement of deteriorated doorways or windows shall match, to the greatest
extent practicable, the size, materials, and appearance of the original doorways and windows.
(ii) Original doorway and window openings shall not be removed or sealed off.
(E) Storefronts.
(i) Non-historic materials (e.g., plaster, stucco, siding, etc.) shall not be used to cover or conceal
the original historic materials.
(ii) Storefronts shall be designed using a palette of piers, columns, pilasters, and/or trim to
frame display windows.
(iii) Facades at street level shall have large window openings that comprise no less than 50
percent of the first floor wall area.
(iv) Doors and entryways shall be designed as an integral part of the storefront system.
(F) Signs.
(i) The types, sizes, and locations of signs shall conform to the standards set out in article 14.08,
Signs.
(ii) Signs shall not obscure any architectural features on historic buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/507
(iii) There shall be no off-site signage.
(G) Awnings. All awnings shall:
(i) Extend no more than seven feet from the building facade;
(ii) Be attached and integral to the principal structure;
(iii) Not obstruct any window (transom windows may be located under awnings and canopies);
(iv) Have columns, beams, and/or brackets of adequate size to give both structural support and
visible means for support;
(v) Be constructed of durable, protective, and water-repellant materials (e.g., cloth, fabric,
canvas, glass, steel, standing seam metal, architectural metal, and/or perforated metal (not
corrugated));
(vi) Not be constructed of vinyl or fiberglass;
(vii) Not be backlit or internally illuminated;
(viii) Only be illuminated by:
a. Recessed fixtures incorporating a lens cover that is either recessed or flush with the
bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy; or
b. Indirect lighting where light is beamed upward and then reflected down from the
underside of the canopy. Indirect lighting fixtures shall be shielded such that direct
illumination is focused exclusively on the underside of the canopy;
(ix) Not be longer than a single storefront;
(x) Be compatible with the overall color scheme of the facade from which it projects;
(xi) Not encroach to within two feet of a curb line; and
(xii) Have a minimum clearance of eight feet from finished grade to the bottom of the awning.
(H) Fire exits. Fire exits shall not be installed on a front building facade.
(f) Standards for new construction and building additions.
(1) Building additions. Additions shall:
(A) Be subordinate to the historic principal building relative to its size and scale.
(B) Only be located on the side or rear elevations.
(C) Be wholly compatible with, yet distinguishable from, the historic building in terms of the
building materials, color(s), and the mass and proportion of windows and doors.
(2) Massing and scale.
(A) Building height. Buildings shall not exceed 115 percent or be less than 85 percent of the average
height of the buildings on the two nearest developed lots or buildings on either side of the subject lot or
building. A greater variation will require review and an affirmative recommendation by the planning
and zoning commission and approval by the city council.
(B) Roof lines. Roof lines of each vertical bay shall be individually distinguishable with variations of
height of no less than two feet. Roofs shall relate to the articulations of the building facades. For flat
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/507
roofs with a horizontal eave, fascia, or parapet, the roof line shall be changed so that no unmodulated
segment of roof exceeds 25 feet in horizontal dimension. The minimum vertical dimension of the
roofline modulations shall be the greater of two feet or 10 percent of the wall height (measured from
finish grade to the top of the wall), whichever is greater.
(3) Colors. Colors shall be reviewed for their historic context for which the following may be considered:
(A) Facade colors shall be non-reflective and subtle. The use of primary, high intensity, fluorescent,
or metallic colors is prohibited (other than for the sign face).
(B) Metallic (except copper and silver metallic-colored roofs) and colors are prohibited on any facade
or roof.
(C) Any activity that involves changing color or refreshing color shall be pre-approved by the
planning and zoning commission.
(4) Materials.
(A) Permitted decorative materials include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i) Brick, including thin brick;
(ii) Stone, including cast stone, limestone, granite, or other native or naturally occurring stone;
(iii) Portland cement stucco; and
(iv) Architectural (textured) concrete masonry units, including split face, weathered face,
sandblasted face, and ground face blocks.
(B) Prohibited materials on front or street-side elevations include: cultured stone, fake brick, rough
textured wood siding, wooden shingles on mansard roofs, gravel aggregate materials, exterior insulation
finishing system (EIFS), plywood sheathing, plastic, fiberglass, and stucco.
(C) Windows on the ground floor shall be comprised of clear, non-reflective glass.
(5) Architecture.
(A) Form. The general form of structures in Downtown is to be simple, three-dimensional forms
characteristic of the appearance and scale of early 1900's main streets that orient to and participate in
the activities of the street. (See figure 14.05.006, Historical Building Features. [not printed herein])
(B) Detailing.
(i) Buildings shall contain architectural details that promote design, but are not limited to the
following:
a. Flourishes (building tops);
b. Pier and spandrel;
c. Recessed panels and projected bands or string courses;
d. Recessed windows and projecting planes;
e. Expressive sculptural forms;
f. Ornamentation; and
g. Towers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/507
(ii) Large panels or a deep cornice expression at the top of the storefront may serve as an area
for signage and awnings.
(C) Corporate identity. Logo buildings and logo building elements, except signage, are prohibited in
this district.
ARTICLE 14.06 PARKING AND LOADING
Sec. 14.06.001 Purpose and applicability
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to ensure that:
(1) Adequate off-street parking is provided by this chapter;
(2) Sufficient parking is provided in nonresidential areas that are near residential neighborhoods, so that
the character and quality of life in the residential neighborhoods are protected from overflow parking;
(3) Adequate loading areas are provided that do not interfere with the function of other vehicular use areas;
(4) Access to sites is managed to maintain the desired function and safety of the adjacent street(s); and
(5) Vehicular use areas and sites are designed and lighted to promote public safety without creating undue
light pollution and off-site glare.
(b) Applicability.
(1) All new development shall provide the quantity of parking spaces required by section 14.06.005,
Required Off-Street Parking, and comply with all other provisions of this article.
(2) Redevelopment, significant improvements, and expansions of existing development and changes in the
use(s) of existing buildings that require additional parking shall provide parking to the extent of the new
demand created by the improvement, expansion, or change in use(s).
(3) Changes in the use(s) of existing buildings that result in fewer required parking spaces shall not be
required to provide additional parking spaces.
(4) Timing of compliance. No change of use permit, building permit, occupational license, or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless and until off-street parking and loading is provided in accordance with this
chapter.
Sec. 14.06.002 Surfacing and striping
(a) Surfacing.
(1) Generally. Parking lots shall be paved with an all-weather surface that provides effective drainage and
protection against potholes, erosion, and dust in accordance with the city's Street and Parking Design
Technical Standards.
(2) Maintenance. All paved parking locations shall be maintained to ensure that, should a pothole or
erosion occur, it will be repaired.
(3) Exemption to paving requirement. Permitted establishments that meet the definition of heavy
machinery sales and rentals and are classified as such per section 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses, are
partially exempt from the required paving requirement of this section under the following conditions:
(A) Pavement is required for all locations where customer parking is required per the parking
requirement of one space per 250 sf. PFA (see table 14.06.005, Required Off-Street Parking by Land
Use; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/507
(B) Gravel or a pervious payment as described in subsection (a)(4) is used as cover for all display
locations of vehicles or equipment provided that such vehicle and/or equipment meets the definition of
a “covered farm vehicle” as defined in part 390 of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations.
(4) Pervious pavement. All development with paved parking shall be encouraged, but not required, to use
pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems. From the standpoint of complying with subsection (a)(1),
above, pervious pavement shall be considered “paved” if it complies with the following:
(A) The pervious pavement or pervious pavement system shall be designed and certified by a
registered engineer or landscape architect to carry a wheel load of 4,000 pounds.
(B) In nonresidential and mixed-use developments, pervious pavement or pervious pavement
systems, except pervious asphalt or pervious concrete, shall not be used for access and circulation
drives, driveways, parking aisles, disabled parking spaces, or loading spaces.
(C) Pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems that utilize turf grass shall be limited to
overflow parking which is not typically used on a daily or regular basis.
(D) The use of pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems shall not count as landscaping.
(E) The use of pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems shall be prohibited in areas on a lot
used for the dispensing of gasoline or other engine fuels or where hazardous liquids may be absorbed
into the soil.
(F) The use of pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems shall be adequately maintained so
that the specified level of perviousness continues over time.
(b) Striping.
(1) Clearly identified. Except for single-family uses and for the display locations of establishments that are
defined and classified as heavy machinery sales and rental, parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly
identified by any methods approved as part of the city's Street and Parking Design Technical Standards.
(2) Maintenance. Nonpermanent type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure
continuous clear identification of the space.
Sec. 14.06.003 Lighting
(a) Fixture type.
(1) Light fixtures shall be: (see figure 14.06.003, Types of Light Fixtures)
(A) “Cut-off” fixtures that limit lighting that is visible or measurable at the property line;
(B) Of constant intensity;
(C) Reflected or shielded so as not to:
(i) Be of excessive brightness;
(ii) Cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or drivers;
(iii) Create any public or private nuisance; or
(iv) Unreasonably interfere with an abutting property owner's right to enjoy their property.
(2) “No cut-off” fixtures used only for decorative purposes, provided:
(A) They have light fixtures that produce no more than 1,500 lumens (approximately equal to a 100
watt incandescent bulb);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/507
(B) They have a maximum height of 15 feet; and
(C) They use energy-efficient bulbs, such as compact fluorescent (CF) and light-emitting diode
(LED).
Figure 14.06.003. Types of Light Fixtures
(b) Maximum freestanding fixture height. No freestanding light fixture shall be greater than 25 feet in height.
(c) Prohibited lighting.
(1) General regulations. No outdoor lighting may be used in any manner that is likely to:
(A) Interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares; or
(B) Reflect or shine on neighboring properties in such a manner as to be a nuisance.
(2) Specific prohibitions. The following are prohibited:
(A) Any fixed light not designed for roadway illumination that produces incident or reflected light
that could impair the operator of a motor vehicle;
(B) The installation, use, or maintenance of beacons or searchlights; and
(C) Exposed strip lighting or neon tubing used to illuminate building facades or outline buildings or
windows or flickering or flashing lights installed in a like fashion, except for temporary decorative
seasonal lighting.
Sec. 14.06.004 Parking lot and parking space dimensions
Parking spaces shall have the following dimensions:
(1) Generally. Nine feet in width by 20 feet standard stall depth, which equals 180 total square feet.
(2) 90-degree parking spaces that abut a curb or the edge of pavement (allowing an overhang). Nine feet in
width by 18 feet reduced stall depth provided:
(A) There is a six-foot-wide sidewalk; or
(B) A minimum eight-foot landscape area (see figure 14.06.004, Parking Space Dimensions).
(3) Parallel parking spaces. Eight feet width by 20 feet standard stall depth.
(4) Space for entering and exiting. Parking spaces shall be provided with sufficient space for entering and
exiting without backing onto a public street. Parking spaces on the perimeter of the parking lot and abutting a
property line shall have a wheel stop two feet from the end of the parking space.
Figure 14.06.004. Parking Space Dimensions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/507
Sec. 14.06.005 Required off-street parking by land use
(a) Generally. The minimum off-street parking regulations shall be provided for the land uses specified in table
14.06.005, Required Off-Street Parking by Land Use.
(b) Calculation of spaces. The number of required parking spaces is calculated according to the formulas set out in this
section. The variables used for parking calculations are as follows:
(1) Sum of specific uses. In computing the parking requirements for any development the total parking
requirements shall be the sum of the specific parking space requirements, per table 14.06.005, Required Off-
Street Parking, for each use included in the development except as provided in section 14.06.008, Allowances
for Off-Street, Off-Site Parking, and section 14.06.009, Shared Parking.
(2) Rounding. If the final calculation of the number of required parking spaces includes a fractional space,
the number of required parking spaces is rounded up to the nearest whole number, regardless of the fraction.
(3) Per square foot (sf.) of parking floor area (PFA). The phrase “per sf. of PFA” means that the number of
parking spaces is calculated based on the number of “parking-related” square feet of floor area per the use.
The “PFA” is 85 percent of the gross floor area, plus the area of any parts of the parcel proposed for
development that are delineated and used in a manner that is comparable in function and intensity to the use
of the inside of the building (e.g., outdoor dining areas).
(4) Per dwelling unit (DU). The phrase “per DU” means that the number of parking spaces is calculated
based on the number of dwelling units.
(5) Per bedroom (BR). The phrase “per BR” means the number of parking spaces is calculated based on
the number of bedrooms.
(6) Per bed. The phrase “per bed” means that the number of parking spaces is based on the total number of
beds in any given facility. Per bed calculations are normally applied to uses that offer residential care or
overnight accommodations with shared rooms.
(7) Per employee. The phrase “per employee” means that the number of parking spaces is based on the
number of employees during the shift in which the maximum number of employees is present.
(8) Uses involving fleets or vehicle inventory. Uses that involve fleets of vehicles (e.g., police stations, fire
stations, etc.) and uses that involve vehicle inventories (e.g., passenger vehicle sales or rental) shall provide
parking for the fleet or inventory. Such parking shall not count toward the requirements of table 14.06.005,
Required Off-Street Parking by Land Use.
(9) New and unspecified uses. Where a determination of the minimum parking and/or loading
requirements cannot be readily ascertained for new or unspecified uses or where uncertainty exists, the
minimum off-street parking and/or loading requirements shall be established by the same process as provided
for classifying new and unspecified uses. See section 14.03.005, New and Unspecified Uses.
Table 14.06.005. Required Off-Street Parking by Land Use
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/507
RESIDENTIAL
Single-Family Detached Residential Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit (DU)
Duplex (2 du) 2 spaces per DU
Townhouse (3 to 10 du) 2 spaces per DU
Industrialized housing 2 spaces per DU
Multiple-Family Residential 1 Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Apartment (> 3 du) 2 spaces for efficiency unit or 1 bedroom (BR); 3 spaces per DU for 2 BR; 4
spaces per DU for 3 BR plus [sic]
Dormitory 1 space per DU
Manufactured home park 2 spaces per DU
Retirement housing 1 space per 3 beds
Residential Accessory Required Additional Off-Street Parking Spaces
Attached accessory dwelling unit 1 space per BR
Detached accessory dwelling unit 1 space per BR
Downtown loft 1 space per BR
Commercial Uses of the Home Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Bed and breakfast 1 space per BR designated for the use
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/507
Home occupations No additional parking required
Registered family home (child care) 2 spaces per DU + additional space for drop-off/pick-up
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Agricultural Uses and Support Services Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Animal husbandry 1 space per 5,000 sf. of the use
Community garden 1 space per 5,000 sf. of the use
Farm, ranch, or orchard 1 space per 5,000 sf. of the use
Farming, landscaping and horticultural sales and
services
1 space per 5,000 sf. of the use
Greenhouse/nursery 1 space per 5,000 sf. of the use
Automobile and Related Service Uses Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Automobile and vehicle wash 1 space per 2 bays for self-service vehicle washes (not including the bays); 1
space per unattended automated wash; 5 spaces per attended, automated wash
with detail or hand-finishing services
Automobile/vehicle parts and/or accessories 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Automobile/vehicle sales 1 space per 1,000 sf. PFA of showroom + 1 space per 20,000 sf. of inventory
storage
Automobile/vehicle rental 5 spaces, plus spaces for rental car inventory
Automobile/vehicle repair and auto body 4 spaces per service bay
Automobile/vehicle service 3 spaces per service bay
Civic, Institutional, and Health Care Uses Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/507
Adult day care center 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Cemetery/funeral services 1 space per 200 sf. PFA + 2 spaces per acre
Correctional institution 1 space per 500 sf. PFA
Child-care, day care center 1 space per employee + 1 space per 5 students + 5 spaces for short-term
loading and unloading
Educational services 1 space per 65 sq. ft. of classroom space + 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of office
space
Hospital/rehabilitative care 1 space per bed
Library, museum, or gallery 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Medical and diagnostic laboratories 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Medical office/clinic 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Place of assembly, indoor 1 space per 100 sf. PFA
Governmental service (police, fire, emergency
medical services)
1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Commercial Uses Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Bank, credit union, and financial services 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Building materials and hardware 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Dance hall/nightclub 1 space per 75 sf. PFA
Gasoline station 1 space per 4 pump stations or Level 3 charging stations, plus 3 spaces per
service bay, plus 1 space per 200 sf. PFA for an attached convenience store
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/507
Grocery (food sales) 1 space per 200 sf. PFA
Heavy machinery sales and rentals 1 space per 250 sf. PFA
Home furnishing store 1 space per 250 sf. PFA
Kennel 1 space per 400 sf. PFA
Manufactured home sales 1 space per 500 sf. PFA + 1 space per 10,000 sf. outdoor storage area
Motel 1 space per guest room + 1 space per 300 sf. of meeting rooms, ballrooms, and
administrative offices + 1 space per 100 sf. PFA of integrated restaurants and
bars that are open to the public (if applicable)
Office, general 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Pawn shop 1 space per 200 sf. PFA
Personal services 1 space per 200 sf. PFA
Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds 1 space per campsite
Repair service 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Restaurant 1 space per 75 sf. PFA
Retail sales 1 space per 200 sf. PFA
Self-storage, mini-warehouse 1 space per 25 storage units + 1 space per 300 sf. of office space
Sexually oriented business 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Studio or shop (arts, crafts, or recording) 1 space per 200 sf. PFA
Veterinary clinic and/or service, small animal 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/507
Veterinary clinic, large animal 1 space per 300 sf. PFA
Industrial and Manufacturing Uses Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Bakery, wholesale 1 space per 300 sf. of office area + 1 space per 1,000 sf. of warehouse
Batch plant, permanent 1 space per 300 sf. of PFA
Industrial and Manufacturing Uses Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Contractor's shop and/or service yard 1 space per 500 sf. of storage yard
Industrial and manufacturing product sales and
supply
1 space per 300 sf. of PFA
Junkyard/salvage yard 1 space per 10,000 sf. of storage yard
Laundries, commercial 1 space per 300 sf. of PFA
Manufacturing, heavy (includes handling of
explosive and/or foul materials)
1 space per 500 sf. of PFA
Manufacturing, light (includes product assembly
and processing)
1 space per 400 sf. of PFA
Publishing services 1 space per 300 sf. of PFA
Resource extraction 1 space per employee on the largest shift
Warehousing and storage 1 space per 300 sf. of office area + 1 space per 1,000 sf. of warehouse
Recreation and Entertainment Uses Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Commercial amusement, indoor 1 space per 4 seats; or if no seats: 1 space per 150 sf. PFA
Commercial amusement, outdoor 1 space per 4 seats; or if no seats: 1 space per 150 sf. PFA
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/507
Outdoor shooting/archery range 1 space per station + 1 space per employee
Park and recreation facility or center 5 spaces per acre
Transportation, Utility, and Communication Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Cargo terminal 1 space per 400 sf. of PFA
Landfill 1 space per employee on largest shift
Passenger terminal 1 space per 400 sf. of PFA
Power generation, transmission, and distribution
(includes large solar collectors and windmills)
1 space per employee on largest shift
Water and sewage treatment 1 space per employee on largest shift
Water storage 1 space per employee on largest shift
Wireless telecommunications tower 1 space per tower
Notes:
1 The off-street parking spaces designated for each apartment (multiple-family) dwelling unit shall be located within 100 feet of the dwelling unit
served by such spaces.
Sec. 14.06.006 Additional parking requirements in residential districts
(a) Parking lots adjacent to residential. Wherever a parking lot is located across the street from or adjacent to a
residentially zoned property (SR, MR, MF, or MH), and is designed so that headlight beams will shine into residences
(whether or not such residences have been built at the time the parking lot is constructed), a Type B bufferyard (see table
14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications) shall be erected and maintained so as to provide a headlight screen for the
residential district.
(b) Prohibition on large vehicles parking two or more days. In all residential districts (SR, MR, MF, or MH), no heavy
load vehicle, truck trailer, truck tractor, mobile home, motor home, camper, trailer, boat, machinery, farm equipment or
machinery or any other similar equipment or machinery shall be parked or left standing for more than two days out of
any consecutive seven-day period within the front yard between the front building line and the front property line or
within the side yard of a corner lot between the side building line and the side property line on the side of the lot abutting
a street or public right-of-way.
Sec. 14.06.007 Parking for persons with disabilities
(a) Number of spaces permitted. As required by the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), a certain number of
required disabled parking spaces are required as part of new development and redevelopment. The disabled parking
spaces shall be incorporated into, rather than in addition to, the overall number of parking spaces required via table
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/507
14.06.005, Required Off-Street Parking by Land Use. The minimum number of required disabled parking spaces is set
out in table 14.06.007(A), Parking for Persons with Disabilities.
Table 14.06.007(A). Parking for Persons with Disabilities
Number of Required
Parking Spaces
Number of Standard
Automobile Spaces
Number of Disabled Spaces that
Must be Van Accessible
1 to 25 1 1
26 to 50 2 1
51 to 75 3 1
76 to 100 4 1
101 to 150 5 1
151 to 200 6 1
201 to 300 7 1
301 to 400 8 1
401 to 500 9 2
501 to 1,000 2 percent of total 1 out of 8 disabled parking spaces,
rounded up
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
1 out of 8 disabled parking spaces,
rounded up
(b) Parking space size specifications. Figure 14.06.007(B), ADA Parking Space Specifications, details the specific size
requirements for both standard automobile and van accessible ADA accessible parking spaces.
Figure 14.06.007(B). ADA Parking Space Specifications
Standard Automobile Parking Spot
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/507
Van Accessible Parking Spot
Sec. 14.06.008 Allowances for off-street, off-site parking
(a) All zoning districts. Off-site, off-street parking spaces may be permitted with site plan approval in any district
subject to all of the following requirements:
(1) That a permanent and irrevocable easement of the parking facilities in favor of the premises to be
benefited shall be dedicated and recorded as a condition of such use;
(2) That the nearest point of the premises utilized for such parking spaces shall be not more than 300 feet
in a straight line from the nearest point of the premises to be benefited; and
(3) No such parking space may be located on the same lot as a residential dwelling.
(b) DT and MU zoning districts. Within the Downtown (DT) and Mixed Use (MU) zoning districts remote parking
including structured parking may be provided on another parcel and qualify for off-street parking, subject to:
(1) The distance from the parcel proposed for development to the remote parking lot shall not exceed 600
feet;
(2) Access to the parcel proposed for development shall be on property that is reasonably accessible to the
parcel proposed for development; and
(3) The limited use standards for automobile structured parking (primary use) per subsection (d)(3) [(c)(5)]
of section 14.04.002, Limited Use Standards.
Sec. 14.06.009 Shared parking
With approval of a site plan per section 14.12.006, Site Development Plans, off-street parking facilities for different
buildings, structures, or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided and used collectively or jointly in any zoning district in
which separate off-street parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Legal document required. A legally sufficient written agreement assuring the perpetual joint usage of
said common parking for the combination of uses or buildings is properly drawn and executed by the parties
concerned, approved as to form and execution by the city attorney, and filed with and made part of the
application for a building permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/507
(2) Percentage reduction. A reduction in parking requirements is permitted up to 60 percent for land uses
that have opposite peak usage timeframes.
(A) Any combination of land uses selected one from Group A and one from Group B is permitted.
(i) Group A.
a. Commercial amusement, indoor;
b. Commercial amusement, outdoor;
c. Park and recreation facility or center;
d. Dance hall/nightclub;
e. Place of public assembly, indoor.
(ii) Group B.
a. Adult day care center;
b. Child-care, day care center;
c. Bank, credit union, and financial services;
d. Office, general.
(B) Additional land use combinations will only be permitted by specific evidence that proves that the
peak usage of the parking facility will not have any overlapping timeframes.
Sec. 14.06.010 Structured parking
See table 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses, and section 14.04.002, Limited Use Standards.
Sec. 14.06.011 Site access
(a) Ingress and egress. Adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking spaces shall be provided by driveways
or maneuvering areas with direct access to a public street or to a private right-of-way easement. A private right-of-way
easement shall be legally binding in form and substance and shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of
Hale County, and a certified copy of the same, with evidence of recording thereon, shall be filed with the administrator.
(b) Required driveway design. One-way driveways shall be at least 12 feet wide when the angle of parking is 45
degrees and 17 feet, six inches when the angle of parking is 60 degrees.
Sec. 14.06.012 Off-street loading
(a) Number of loading spaces. All nonresidential uses having at least 10,000 square feet of gross floor area shall
provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within the building or
on the lot adjacent to a private service drive. Where such loading space is located adjacent to a residential district, the
space shall be enclosed on three sides. Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the table below and any
regulations in subsection (b) may change the general regulation.
Table 14.06.012. Required Loading Spaces for Nonresidential Uses With at Least 10,000 Square Feet
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Minimum Required Spaces 1
0 to 10,000 None
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/507
10,000 to 50,000 1
50,000 to 100,000 2
100,000 to 200,000 3
Each additional 100,000 1 additional
1 The specific land uses identified in subsection (b)(5) shall require one additional loading space for
each classification of square feet of gross floor area.
(b) Loading requirements for special areas and uses. The requirements below vary from the general requirements set
forth in table 14.06.012, Required Loading Spaces for Nonresidential Uses With at Least 10,000 Square Feet. These
requirements are applicable regardless of the total amount of square footage of floor area.
(1) Private drives for elementary schools, kindergartens, and child-care, day care center. Elementary
schools, kindergartens, day care centers (child-care), and similar child training and care establishments shall
provide loading and unloading space on a private drive, off-street to accommodate one motor vehicle for each
10 students or children cared for by the establishment.
(2) Loading docks adjacent to residential. Loading docks for any establishment which customarily receives
goods between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and is adjacent to a residential use or zoning district shall
be designed and constructed so as to fully enclose the loading operation, in order to reduce the effects of the
noise of the operation on adjacent residences.
(3) Screening adjacent to residential. Where adjacent to residential uses or districts, off-street loading areas
shall be screened with a Type B bufferyard (see table 14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications) from view of
the residential use or district.
(4) Downtown (DT) District. Uses in the DT district are not required to provide loading spaces on-site.
Loading is allowed from alleys or over-the-curb along street rights-of-way at times and locations approved by
the administrator.
(5) Loading space always required for land use. The following land uses require at least one additional
loading space per each square feet of gross floor area classification as set out in table 14.06.012, Off-Street
Loading:
(A) Cemetery/funeral services.
(B) Dormitory.
(C) Multiple-family development.
(D) Motel.
(E) Industrial and manufacturing uses.
Sec. 14.06.013 Reduction of parking and loading requirements
(a) Approval of parking or loading reduction. The administrator may approve a reduction in the number of required
parking spaces or loading spaces per this article if the applicant demonstrates that such a reduction is appropriate and
warranted based on specific parking demand forecasts for the proposed use, provided that:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/507
(1) Such forecasts are made by a qualified, certified traffic engineer, and are based upon a peak parking
analysis of at least five comparable uses; and
(2) The comparability of the uses shall be documented in detail, which includes their location, gross floor
area, street access, use types and restrictions, hours of operation, peak parking demand periods, and all other
factors that were considered by the traffic engineer that could affect parking demand.
(b) Review of reduction request. The city may retain a qualified, certified traffic engineer, at the applicant's and/or
owner's expense, to review the parking demand forecast and provide recommendations to the city.
(c) Approval of reduction request. The administrator may approve a reduction in parking only if the requirements of
this section are met.
ARTICLE 14.07 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING
Sec. 14.07.001 Purpose and applicability
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Establish landscaping standards that preserve and enhance the character of the city;
(2) Improve the compatibility between different adjoining uses; and
(3) Conserve water by promoting the use of native and drought-resistant trees and shrubs.
(b) Applicability.
(1) The requirements of this article apply to all land in the city. All site development plans, plats, and land
development proposals are subject to the minimum regulations and policies of this article.
(2) Exception. The requirements of this article are not applicable for modifications to nonresidential
buildings where a building expansion or redevelopment does not exceed the gross floor area of the existing
building by more than 10 percent or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less.
Sec. 14.07.002 General requirements
(a) Irrigation.
(1) General requirement. All landscaping must be irrigated or located within 100 feet of a private water
outlet to which a hose may be connected.
(2) Waivers of general requirement. The administrator shall have the authority to waive or delay
implementation of the requirements of subsection (a)(1):
(A) When public improvements (e.g., water, sanitary sewer, drainage, street facilities) have been
authorized and scheduled which would affect landscaping on a lot or tract; or
(B) For a temporary use which will be in operation for period of one year or less.
(b) Public right-of-ways.
(1) Generally. It shall be unlawful to set out, construct, maintain or permit to be maintained any shrub or
plant (excluding trees), sign or structure, or any other obstruction having a height of greater than three feet, as
measured from the top of the curb of the adjacent street, in the public right-of-way.
(2) Exemption. Subsection (b)(1) shall not apply to any government-owned traffic-control sign or signal,
street sign, or mailbox provided that the structure does not:
(A) Interfere with the free passage of vehicles on the street;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/507
(B) Interfere with pedestrian access on a sidewalk;
(C) Obscure the view of motor vehicle driver; or
(D) Otherwise create a traffic hazard.
(3) Trees in the public right-of-way. All trees with a trunk diameter greater than two inches measured three
feet above ground level that are within any of the parkway area shall be trimmed so that no foliage is less
than six feet above the top of the curb of the adjacent street. No evergreen or coniferous species of tree shall
be allowed in the public right-of-way.
(c) Street tree planting and spacing. Street trees planted to fulfill the requirements of this article shall be:
(1) Planted no closer 10 feet from the curb, curb lines, sidewalks, fire hydrants, underground utilities,
overhead transmission lines, or other utilities; and
(2) Planted no closer than 20 feet from any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection of
curb or pavement lines.
(d) Prohibited plant species. Plant species that require extensive irrigation, are invasive, or are not drought tolerant are
prohibited.
(e) Recommended plant list. See the City of Plainview Recommended Planting List.
Sec. 14.07.003 Development landscaping
(a) Landscaping required.
(1) General requirements.
(A) New nonresidential uses and apartment developments shall be required to have 10% of the
development site landscaped.
(B) Landscaping, including all calculations used as the basis for the plan, shall be approved as part of
section 14.12.006, Site Development Plans.
(2) Exception to general requirement. The 10 percent landscaping requirement set forth in subsection (a)(1)
(A) may be reduced by up to 5 percent with site plan approval setting forth a plan for xeriscape landscape
treatments, preservation of existing vegetation, and Water-Wise irrigation systems for at least two-thirds of
total area of the development.
(3) Recommended plantings. The city highly recommends that all landscaping that is planted as part of a
new development shall be from the recommended plant list per section 14.07.002(e), Recommended Plant
List; however, the city requires that no plants shall require extensive irrigation, are invasive, or are not
drought tolerant as per section 14.07.002(d), Prohibited Plant Species.
(b) Landscaping location requirements.
(1) At least 50 percent of all required landscaping shall be located between the front of a primary building
and the street right-of-way.
(2) Landscaping shall be comprised of a mixture of native trees, shrubs, and succulent plants, using
methods that promote water conservation and plant sustainability.
(3) Landscaping may be clustered or placed in smaller islands, provided that the landscaping is sustainable
when located in parking lots and near streets.
(4) The administrator may approve a deviation from the 50 percent criteria in order to:
(A) Preserve existing vegetation on another side of the site;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/507
(B) Provide additional buffering in a critical location where it may be required, such as along a rear
property line; or
(C) Create an amenity area in another portion of the site.
(c) Downtown District. The 50 percent requirement of subsection (b)(1), above, shall not apply to the Downtown
District (DT) due to the “build to” setback requirement. In the Downtown District, landscaping may be dispersed across
the entire site.
(d) Landscaping calculation guidelines.
(1) Clustering of vegetation.
(A) The 50 percent landscaping requirement of subsection (b)(1), above, does not preclude the
clustering of vegetation or the even distribution of landscaping. Landscaping should be placed within
areas that will ensure the longevity of the landscaping and efficient irrigation that promotes water
conservation;
(B) Where practical, it is the preference of the city to maintain existing trees and other vegetation;
(C) Bufferyard landscaping located between the front building facade and a street shall be counted
toward fulfilling the bufferyard and 50 percent landscaping requirements;
(2) Location of vegetation. Landscaping will be strategically located, and vegetation preserved, in locations
that simultaneously satisfy the requirements of multiple landscaping requirements; and
(3) Site development plans. Any landscape plan submitted via section 14.12.006, Site Development Plans,
must contain calculations and planting schedules that demonstrate how each landscaping requirement has
been satisfied and the amount of existing vegetation credits that are proposed. Existing areas to be preserved
shall be adequately denoted and described on the landscape plan, with details provided about the preservation
of these areas during construction.
(e) Landscape design criteria.
(1) All plant material must meet specifications of the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) for No.
1 grade.
(2) All plants shall be sized as set out in table 14.07.003, Minimum Planting Size Requirements, with the
exception of plants required in order to satisfy the bufferyard requirements set out in section 14.07.004,
Bufferyards.
(A) When opaque screening or a bufferyard is required to be a specific height, the size of landscaping
shall be sufficient to satisfy that requirement at the time of planting.
(B) Required plant height necessary to satisfy the applicable bufferyard requirements may be reduced
by the height of an earthen berm, if landscaping is installed on the berm or above the natural grade.
(3) Where larger sized plants are required to satisfy bufferyard requirements, the minimum required plant
size shall comply with the more stringent requirement.
Table 14.07.003. Minimum Planting Size Requirements
Plant Type Minimum Size
Standard deciduous trees 1-1/2" caliper
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/507
Small ornamental and flowering trees 1-1/2" caliper
Evergreen trees 4 feet
Shrubs/ground covers Adequate size to be consistent with design intent
Sec. 14.07.004 Bufferyards
(a) Generally. The bufferyards required by this chapter are based on the amount of screening they provide, which are
classified from less screening (Type A) to more screening (Type D), depending on the types and intensity the adjacent
land uses and/or zoning district.
(b) Bufferyard types.
(1) There are four types of bufferyards, each of which vary in the width of the bufferyard and the numbers
and types of plants that are required per 100 linear feet, or portion thereof.
(2) The minimum planting requirements for each type and composition of bufferyard are set out in table
14.07.004(A), Bufferyard Classifications.
(c) Classification of bufferyards. Bufferyards may be classified as:
(1) Structural bufferyards. Structural bufferyards are those that include a fence or wall to achieve the
required level of screening or preferred for privacy or security; and
(2) Natural bufferyards. Natural bufferyards are those that include an earthen berm, a geologic grade
change, an arroyo, or a higher density of plant materials to achieve the required level of screening.
Table 14.07.004(A). Bufferyard Classifications
Required Plantings per 100 Linear Feet (Structural/Natural)
Type Width Large Trees Evergreen
Trees Small Trees Shrubs Height of Berm,
Wall or Fence 1,2
Type A 5 ft. 1/2 1/2 1/3 10/15 –
Type B 10 ft. 2/3 2/3 2/6 20/30 –
Type C 25 ft. 3/6 3/6 3/9 30/40 6 ft.
Type D 35 ft. 4/8 4/8 4/12 40/55 8 ft.
Table notes:
1 An earthen berm, wall, or fence is not required for natural bufferyard.
2 Special use permit approval may require additional bufferyard requirements as a condition of approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/507
(d) Bufferyards in specific locations.
(1) Between districts. Structural bufferyards are the preferred composition along a district boundary that is
not a street, or where there is a specific privacy or security need that requires a wall or fence.
(2) Between mixed housing types and uses. Structural or natural bufferyards may be used between mixed
housing types and mixed uses within a development.
(3) Adjacent to land zoned Single-Family Residential (R-1). Natural bufferyards are preferred where
practical to reinforce the rural or suburban character of the district.
(4) Along resource features and recreation uses. Natural bufferyards are desired along natural areas and
floodplains to provide open space and enhance water quality and public safety.
(e) Exemptions. A parcel proposed for development, redevelopment, or substantial improvement may be exempt from
the requirement to provide a bufferyard under the following conditions:
(1) When there is an elevation difference between two adjacent properties that is six feet or greater; or
(2) When the parcel proposed for development, redevelopment, or substantial improvement is separated
from the adjacent property by a natural or man-made area that meets or exceeds the level of screening
required by the applicable bufferyard.
(f) Credits for existing landscaping improvements.
(1) Generally. Existing trees, fences, and landscape or retaining walls that meet, in part but not in whole,
the bufferyard requirements set out herein, may be counted toward a bufferyard requirement, provided that
the trees and landscaping are in good health or the fences or walls are structurally sound.
(2) Existing landscaping credit. Credit shall be given for existing trees and landscaping within bufferyards
and perimeter yards.
(g) Zoning district boundary bufferyard standards.
(1) Generally. Set out in table 14.07.004(B), Zoning District Boundary Bufferyard Standards, is the
classification of bufferyards that are required between zoning districts that are not separated by a public street
right-of-way.
(2) Interpretation of the table.
(A) The table is a matrix in which all zoning districts are grouped into categories of similar land use
intensities.
(B) The rows indicate the zoning of the parcel proposed for development and the columns indicate
the zoning of the adjacent property or properties.
(C) Where “–” is found, no bufferyard is required.
Table 14.07.004(B). Zoning District Boundary Bufferyard Standards
Zoning of Parcel
Proposed for
Development
Zoning of Adjoining District
RA, SR
MR, MF,
MH
CU, DT, MU,
NC GC, LI HI
RA, SR – – – – –
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/507
MR, MF, MH A – – – –
CU, DT, MU, NC B B – – –
GC, LI C C B – –
HI D C C – –
(3) Relationship to other bufferyard requirements. If bufferyards are required by another section of this
chapter along property boundaries that are also district boundaries, then the greater bufferyard requirement
shall prevail.
(h) Bufferyard fencing and screening.
(1) Orientation. Where a fence is used to provide a buffer, the finished side of all fences shall face outward
toward any adjacent rights-of-way or the property that is being buffered. All support posts and stringers shall
face inward toward the property upon which the fence is located, or the development being screened.
(2) Construction materials. Any screening wall or fence qualifying as a bufferyard shall be constructed of
wood, masonry or reinforced concrete which does not contain openings constituting more than 40 square
inches in each one square foot of wall or fence surface, and the surface of such wall or fence shall constitute a
visual barrier. All wall or fence openings shall be equipped with gates equal in height and screening
characteristics to the wall or fence.
Sec. 14.07.005 Maintenance
(a) Generally. All plant material shall be maintained at all times in a living and growing condition. Any landscaping
material that dies shall be replaced with healthy material.
(b) Trimming. Any tree or other form of landscaping overhanging a public alley, street, or highway shall:
(1) Be trimmed by the owner, agent or occupant of the property on which the landscaping is planted so that
there is a clear height of 18 feet above the surface of the street, alley or highway and eight feet above the
sidewalk surface, that is unobstructed;
(2) If a tree or any other landscaping in any way causes a hindrance to the general public, or in any way
endangers the security or usefulness of any public street, right-of-way, highway, alley, utility, or sidewalk, it
may be declared to be a public nuisance; and
(3) If the owner of such tree or landscaping does not correct or remove such nuisance within 30 days of
written notification, the city shall cause the nuisance to be corrected in accordance with the requirements set
out in article 14.14, Enforcement and Remedies.
(c) See also section 14.02.006, Planned Development (PD) District Regulations, and section 10.03.003, Property
Owner Associations.
ARTICLE 14.08 SIGNS*
Sec. 14.08.001 Purpose and applicability
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/507
(1) Set out reasonable regulations for the design, location, installation, operation, repair, and maintenance
of signs;
(2) Provide for reasonable regulation while also safeguarding the constitutionally protected right of free
speech;
(3) Create content neutral sign regulations which balance the legitimate needs of individuals, entities, and
organizations to convey messages with the legitimate objectives of the city to promote public safety, enhance
community character and enhance private property values;
(4) Create reasonable regulations as permitted by federal law on signage that could be viewed as obscene
in order to protect the community, especially minors, from explicit messages which are harmful;
(5) Prevent and reduce sign clutter which can have the negative consequences to the city which include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(A) Undue visual distractions which may create a public safety hazard for motorists, bicyclists, and
pedestrians;
(B) Degrading the aesthetic character of the city and therefore making the city less attractive for
residents, visitors, commerce, and private investment; and
(C) Physical obstructions within the public right-of-way which create public safety hazards;
(6) Provide timely, fair, and consistent permitting and enforcement of signage throughout the city.
(b) Applicability.
(1) Generally.
(A) All construction, relocation, enlargement, alteration, and modification of signs within the city
shall conform to the requirements of this article.
(B) This article applies only to signs that are integrated into, attached to, installed upon, or set upon
the ground, a structure, landscaping, or a building.
(2) Exemptions. The following signs are exempt from the regulations of this article:
(A) Signage affixed to or painted on vehicles;
(B) Signage carried by people;
(C) Signage posted by the city on property owned, leased, or licensed by the city;
(D) Signage posted by governmental entities that are not subject to city jurisdiction, located on
property owned, leased, or licensed by the governmental entity; and
(E) Signage regulated by law or regulation in furtherance of the performance of a public duty or
function (e.g., temporary or permanent traffic controls and street signs); or to give legal notice (e.g.,
notices of pending action pursuant to city ordinances).
Sec. 14.08.002 Permit required; exceptions
(a) Permit required. A sign permit is required prior to the erection, installation, or substantial modification of any sign
that is not an excepted sign as defined in subsection (b), below. Sign permits are issued by the administrator, per section
14.12.005, for signs that comply with all of the applicable standards of this article.
(b) Exceptions. The following signs must be installed, maintained, displayed, and removed according to the
requirements of this article, but do not require a sign permit prior to installation or display:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/507
(1) Bulletin boards attached to building walls, provided that the sign area is 12 square feet or less, and
there is not more than one bulletin board per principal public entrance to the building.
(2) Signs that are required in order to comply with building codes or other laws or regulations (e.g.,
address numbers).
(3) Signs that are six square feet or less in sign area, and if detached, four feet or less in height, provided
that such signs do not require any building permits for electrical or structural systems.
(4) Applied wall signs.
(5) Temporary signs that are subject to the requirements of section 14.08.008(b), Permits.
Sec. 14.08.003 Prohibited signage
(a) Content based categories of signage.
(1) Generally. Except as provided in this section, no sign shall be approved or disapproved based on the
content or message it displays.
(2) Prohibition on certain types of unprotected speech. The following content is prohibited without
reference to the content or viewpoint of the individual speaker:
(A) Text or graphics of an indecent or immoral nature that is harmful to minors under state or federal
law;
(B) Text or graphics that advertise unlawful activity;
(C) Text or graphics that are obscene, fighting words, defamation, incitement to imminent lawless
action, or true threats; or
(D) Text or graphics that present a clear and present danger due to their potential confusion with
traffic-control signs; or signs that provide false information related to public safety (for example, signs
that use the words “Stop,” “Yield,” “Caution,” or “Danger,” or comparable words, phrases, symbols, or
characters that are presented in a manner as to imply a safety hazard or governmental regulation that
does not exist).
(b) Maintenance required.
(1) Generally. Sign and sign structures of all types (permanent and temporary) shall be maintained in a
safe, representable [presentable], and good structural condition at all times, including replacement of
defective parts (except when a weathered or natural surface is intended), repainting, cleaning, and other acts
required for the maintenance of such sign.
(2) Immediate threat of collapse. If the administrator finds that a sign regulated by this article is an
immediate threat of collapse due to its physical condition to persons or property, the administrator shall cause
it to be removed immediately and without notice.
(3) Unsafe signs. Signs determined to be unsafe or insecure due to a physical condition shall be removed
within five calendar days after written notification is provided to the owner or occupant of the building or
property. Removal of an unsafe sign by the administrator shall be at the expense of the owner of the sign
and/or the owner of the property on which the sign is located.
(4) Code compliance. All signs shall be constructed and installed in accordance with applicable provisions
of this chapter, as well as all other chapters of this Code of Ordinances.
(5) Materials. The materials of the sign face shall be maintained in a condition that is not broken, cracked,
chipped, torn, discolored, or excessively weathered whereby the sign is unsightly or difficult to read.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/507
(6) Paint and finishes. Paint and other finishes shall be maintained in good condition to prevent peeling,
corrosion, or rust.
(7) Ground area. The ground area around any freestanding (detached) sign shall be kept free and clean of
weeds, trash, and other debris.
(c) Prohibited sign types. The following sign structures and designs are prohibited:
(1) Substandard signs as determined by section 14.08.010, Removal of Substandard Signage.
(2) Animated or moving signs, including any moving, swinging, rotating, flashing, blinking, scintillating,
fluctuating, or otherwise animated light or appendage, except as specifically permitted in section 14.08.005,
Electronic Message Centers and Manual Changeable Copy Centers; and
(3) Portable signs, except as specifically permitted in section 14.08.008, Temporary Signs.
(4) All off-site advertising is prohibited except for:
(A) Temporary signage that is permitted pursuant to section 14.08.008, Temporary Signs; and
(B) Signage that is permitted pursuant to section 14.09.006, Nonconforming Signs and Billboards.
(d) Prohibited design elements. The following shall not be incorporated as an element of any sign or sign structure:
(1) Flags, banners, or comparable elements designed to move in the wind, except flags attached to
flagpoles.
(2) Flashing lights, except as part of holiday displays, or electronic signs per section 14.08.005, Electronic
Message Centers (EMC) and Changeable Copy Centers (CCC).
(3) Motor vehicles, unless:
(A) The vehicles are operational and either new (e.g., automobile dealer inventory) or regularly used
as motor vehicles, with current registration and tags;
(B) The display of signage on the motor vehicle does not interfere with the immediate operation of
the motor vehicle (e.g., signs that are held in place by an open hood or trunk are not allowed; signs that
cover windows (blocking reasonable visibility) are not allowed; and signs that would fall off of the
vehicle while the vehicle is in motion are not allowed); and
(C) The motor vehicle is legally parked in a designated off-street parking space.
(4) Semi-trailers, shipping containers, or portable storage units, unless:
(A) The trailers, containers, or portable storage units are:
(i) Structurally sound and capable of being transported;
(ii) Used for their primary purpose (e.g., storage, pick-up, or delivery); and
(iii) If subject to registration, have current registration and tags; and
(B) Text or graphics of an indecent or immoral nature that is harmful to minors under state or federal
law; [sic]
(C) The display of signage is incidental to the primary purpose; and
(D) The semi-trailer, shipping container, or portable storage unit is parked or placed in a designated
loading area or on a construction site at which it is being used for its primary purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/507
(5) Spinning or moving parts.
(6) Unshielded bare light bulbs that are larger than C9 format or brighter than 50 lumens per bulb, except
that neither neon tubing nor LED bulbs that compose an electronic message center display shall be
considered a “bare light bulb” for the purposes of this standard (note that illumination of signs in any manner
is subject to section 14.08.004, Sign Illumination, and electronic message centers are subject to section
14.08.005, Electronic Message Centers and Manual Changeable Copy Centers).
(7) Materials with a high degree of specular reflectivity, such as polished metal or mirrors, installed in a
manner that creates substantial glare from headlights, streetlights, or sunlight. This prohibition does not
include retro-reflective materials that comply with MUTCD criteria.
(e) Prohibited obstructions. In no event shall a sign obstruct:
(1) Building ingress or egress, including doors, egress windows, and fire escapes.
(2) Sidewalks, driveways, and alleys.
(3) Equipment, structures, or architectural elements that are related to public safety, building operations, or
utility service (e.g., standpipes, fire hydrants, vents, and meters).
(4) Visibility to any traffic-control device or street sign from traffic lanes to which the traffic-control
device or street sign is directed.
(5) A driver's ability to safely see all vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(f) Prohibited mounts. In no event shall a sign mount, bracket, or obstruct:
(1) Building ingress or egress, including doors, egress windows, and fire escapes.
(2) Sidewalks, driveways, and alleys.
(3) Equipment, structures, or architectural elements that are related to public safety, building operations, or
utility service (e.g., standpipes, fire hydrants, vents, and meters).
(4) Visibility to any traffic-control device or street sign from traffic lanes to which the traffic-control
device or street sign is directed.
(g) Prohibited locations. In addition to applicable setback requirements and other restrictions of this article, no sign
shall be located in or over public rights-of-way (which, in addition to streets, may include other sidewalks, parkways,
retaining walls, utility poles, traffic-control devices, medians, and center islands that are within public rights-of-way),
except:
(1) Projecting signs within the Downtown (DT) zoning district;
(2) Temporary or permanent signs posted by or under the authority of the city or governmental entity with
jurisdiction over the right-of-way;
(3) Temporary signs posted in connection with authorized work within the right-of-way, as authorized or
required by the city or governmental entity with jurisdiction over the right-of-way;
(4) Signs painted on or affixed to transit shelters and bus benches as authorized by the provider of the
shelter or bench, but not extending beyond the physical structure of the shelter or bench; or
(5) Signs that are the subject of a revocable license agreement with the city, installed and maintained in
accordance with the terms of that agreement.
(6) In locations that have less horizontal or vertical clearance from authorized communication or energized
electrical power lines than the minimum clearance required by the laws of the State of Texas and the
regulations duly promulgated by agencies thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/507
Sec. 14.08.004 Sign illumination
(a) Generally. Illumination of signs using internal or external light sources is allowed only for permanent signage; in a
nonresidential or mixed use zoning district (CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, or HI); and subject to the provisions and
limitations of this section.
(b) Wiring and electrical components. Junction boxes, conduits, switches, sensors, transformers, wires, and other
electrical or electronic components used to illuminate signs shall be hidden from view and shall comply with article
3.04, Electricity.
(c) Off-site illuminance. No off-site light trespass allowed. If the installation of the best available technology to
minimize light trespass is not completely successful, then the illuminance levels on horizontal or vertical planes resulting
from on-site light sources shall not exceed 0.2 footcandles at the property line.
(d) On-site illuminance.
(1) Parking lots and other spaces shall be illuminated as unobtrusively as possible while meeting the
functional needs of circulation and safety. All pole-mounted lights located on or near the parking lot
perimeter shall have full cut-off fixtures installed or shall be designed to prevent light trespass onto adjoining
property. The average level of illumination within parking lots shall not exceed 2.0 footcandles.
(2) The average level of illumination for entrance drives for parking lots shall be 1.5 footcandles.
(3) The average level of illumination for building facades and service areas shall be 2.0 footcandles.
(4) The average level of illumination for front merchandise sales and display areas shall be 3.0 footcandles,
while all other display areas shall be 2.0 footcandles.
(5) Foreground spaces, such as building entrances and outside seating areas, shall utilize lighting that
defines the space without glare and not to exceed 5.0 footcandles.
(6) Pedestrian-level, bollard lighting not exceeding three feet in height, ground-mounted lighting, or other
low, glare-control fixtures mounted on landscape walls shall be used to light pedestrian sidewalks and
walkways. Pedestrian areas shall be illuminated to a maximum of 1.0 footcandle. Pedestrian lighting required
by this section shall meet all lighting standards contained elsewhere in this article.
(7) Service stations and other fueling facilities shall not exceed a maximum of 5.0 footcandles in the area
immediately surrounding the fueling islands. The parking lots shall be illuminated as set out in subsection (d)
(1), above. Drop-lens fixtures are prohibited, whether mounted under canopies or on poles. All light fixtures
shall be recessed into overhead canopies.
(8) Sales lots where merchandise (including automobiles) are displayed at night shall not exceed a
maximum of 5.0 footcandles.
Sec. 14.08.005 Electronic message centers (EMC) and changeable copy centers (CCC)
(a) Generally. Electronic message centers (EMC) and changeable copy centers (CCC) signs must be:
(1) Permanent signage that conforms to the requirements of this article; and
(2) Must meet all applicable Texas Department of Transportation standards.
(b) Location.
(1) EMCs are not allowed in residential zoning districts.
(2) EMCs are not allowed closer than 50 feet to residential zoning districts, existing single-family
dwellings or duplex dwellings if the EMC display faces the residential property.
(c) Number of EMCs and CCCs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/507
(1) Not more than one sign per property shall contain an EMC or CCC.
(2) Ground signs or projecting signs that have two sign faces may include one EMC or manual changeable
copy center per sign face. However, EMCs and CCCs shall not be installed upon the same sign structure.
(d) Enclosure required. EMCs and CCCs that are a component of ground signs, wall signs, or projecting signs shall be
enclosed on all sides with a finish of brick, stone, stucco, finished metal, or other durable material that is used for that
portion of surface of the sign face that is not an EMC or CCC, and the EMC or CCC appear to be either recessed into the
frame or flush with it. The enclosure shall extend not less than 4 inches outward from the EMC display or CCC
component on all sides.
(e) Design.
(1) Generally. EMCs or CCCs on ground signs, cabinet wall signs, or projecting signs shall be designed as
an integral part of the sign. See figure 14.08.005(A), Electronic Message Center Design Requirements, and
figure 14.08.005(B), Changeable Copy Center Design Requirements.
(2) Size and proportions.
(A) An EMC or CCC that is incorporated into a ground sign shall not occupy more than 50 percent of
the sign area of the sign into which it is incorporated.
(B) An EMC or CCC that is incorporated into a projecting sign or wall sign shall not exceed the 50
percent of the sign area of the sign into which it is integrated.
(C) An EMC that is displayed through a building window is exempt from this subsection (e) and
subsection (f)(1), but its sign area shall not exceed six square feet.
Figure 14.08.005(A). Electronic Message Center Design Requirements
Figure 14.08.005(B). Changeable Copy Center Design Requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/507
Note: EMCs and manual changeable copy signs may be internally illuminated if they use opaque inserts with translucent
letters, numbers, or symbols, as displayed by “A” above. These signs shall not be internally illuminated if they use clear
or translucent inserts with opaque or translucent letters, numbers, or symbols, as displayed by “B” above.
(3) Maximum pixel pitch for EMCs. The pixel pitch of an EMC shall not be greater than 19 mm.
(4) Brightness.
(A) EMCs shall be equipped with ambient light sensors and programmed to automatically dim when
ambient light levels drop.
(B) The maximum brightness of an EMC or internally illuminated CCC shall be calibrated with the
on-site and off-site illumination requirements of section 14.08.004, Sign Illumination.
(f) EMC operation. EMCs shall be programmed, maintained, and/or operated as follows:
(1) EMCs shall display only static images (messages and/or graphics without motion, flashing, animation,
or frame effects).
(2) Images shall be displayed for a period of not less than eight seconds.
(3) If the EMC is damaged or malfunctions such that image data is not properly displayed the EMC shall
automatically turn off.
(g) Sign permits. A sign permit is required for an EMC or a CCC. See section 14.12.005, Sign Permits.
Sec. 14.08.006 Off-site advertising and billboard regulations
(a) Generally. Off-site advertising is prohibited within the municipal limits of the city with the exception of billboards
that are located only in the specific locations as designated in subsection (b).
(b) Designated billboard locations.
(1) Interstate billboards. Billboards along the I-27 Interstate Corridor are permitted if the proposed
billboard:
(A) Is to be located on a property directly fronting I-27;
(B) Conforms to 23 U.S. Code section 131, Control of Outdoor Advertising, and all Federal Highway
Administration standards;
(C) Has a maximum height of 70 feet;
(D) Is to be located at least 1,500 feet from an existing billboard; and
(E) Is granted a permit per section 14.12.001, Billboard Permit.
(2) State highway billboards. Billboards are permitted along state highway corridors if the billboard:
(A) Is to be located on a property directly fronting a state highway;
(B) Conforms to title 43, chapter 21, division 1 [title 43, part 1, chapter 21], of the Texas
Administrative Code and all Texas Department of Transportation requirements.
(C) Has a maximum height of 35 feet;
(D) Is to be located at least 1,500 feet from an existing billboard;
(E) Is to be located in the CU, GC, LI, or HI zoning district; and
(F) Is granted a permit per section 14.12.001, Billboard Permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/507
(3) Existing billboards. Existing billboards are permitted to operate as a nonconforming billboard if they
continue to be in conformance with section 14.09.006, Nonconforming Signs and Billboards.
Sec. 14.08.007 Permanent sign standards
Permanent signs are subject to the standards set out in this section and the procedures of section 14.13.004 [section
14.12.005], Sign Permits.
Table 14.08.007. Permanent Sign Standards
Wall Signs
Zoning District
Sign Type and Standard Rural and Residential Districts
(RA, SR, MR, MF, MH)
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts
(CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, HI)
Wall Signs 1
Maximum number 1 per building facade One sign for each side a building faces a
public street
Maximum sign area 2 2 square feet Two square feet per lineal foot of street
frontage; should the property in question
have less than 25 feet of linear street footage
then the maximum sign area shall be 50
square feet.
Sign permit required Yes Yes
Projecting Signs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/507
Zoning District
Sign Type and Standard Rural and Residential Districts
(RA, SR, MR, MF, MH)
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts
(CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, HI)
Projecting Signs
Maximum number
Prohibited sign type
1 per principal public entrance
Maximum sign area 6 square feet
Minimum sign clearance 8 feet above grade
Maximum distance from building
facade
6 feet
Sign permit required Yes
Pole Sign
Zoning District
Sign Type and Standard Rural and Residential Districts
(RA, SR, MR, MF, MH)
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts
(CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, HI)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/507
Pole Sign
Maximum number
Prohibited sign type
1 per building 3
Maximum height 36 feet 4
Maximum width 18 feet
Sign permit required Yes
Monument Sign
Zoning District
Sign Type and Standard Rural and Residential Districts
(RA, SR, MR, MF, MH)
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts
(CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, HI)
Monument Sign 5
Maximum number
Prohibited sign type 6
1 per building 3
Maximum height 10 feet
Maximum width 24 feet
Sign permit required Yes
Notes:
1 Other than as designated in note #2 below, wall signs are only permitted in the rural and residential zoning districts in conjunction with a land
use designated as a commercial use of the home per table 14.03.003, Residential Uses by Zoning District.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/507
2 As it pertains to maximum sign area regulations for wall signs, properties in the MF zoning district shall follow the regulations as set forth in
the nonresidential and mixed use districts.
3 A lot may either have a pole sign or a monument sign but not both.
4 Pole signs which are oriented towards I-27 traffic and are on properties adjacent to the I-27 right-of-way are permitted a maximum height of 70
feet.
5 Properties in the MF zoning district shall follow the regulations as set forth in the nonresidential and mixed use districts as it pertains to the
installation of monument signs.
6 One monument sign, meeting the size requirements of the nonresidential and mixed use district regulations and that is placed along an entrance
roadway into a legal, recorded, multi-lot, multi-sectioned, or master-planned subdivision shall be permitted within the SR district.
Sec. 14.08.008 Temporary sign standards
(a) Location. A temporary sign shall not be located on a public right-of-way.
(b) Permits. Temporary signs do not require a permit.
(c) Standards.
(1) The administrator has the authority to remove any temporary signage that does not meet any and all of
the requirements of this article.
(2) Temporary signs are divided into three different types of signage: banner, flag, and stake signs, each of
which has specific requirements per table 14.08.008, Temporary Sign Standards.
(3) Additional banner sign standards.
(A) Banner signs must be affixed, mounted, and/or secured to a building.
(B) Banner signs may not be affixed to any other permanent or temporary structure, motor vehicle or
fixture.
(d) Procedures. See section 14.12.005, Sign Permits.
Table 14.08.008. Temporary Sign Standards
Banner Sign
Sign Type and Standard Zoning District
Rural and Residential Districts (RA, SR,
MR, MF, MH)
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts
(CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, HI)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/507
Banner Sign
Maximum number 1 double-faced, or 2 single-faced, signs per
auto access to a development
1 per 600 linear feet (lf) of street frontage
Maximum sign area 60 sf. 1 sf. per lf. of street frontage, not to exceed
150 sf.
Maximum sign height 6 ft. 18 ft.
Display periods 30 days, with not less than 30 days between
display periods and more than two times
annually
30 days, with not less than 30 days between
display periods
Flag Sign
Sign Type and Standard Zoning District
Rural and Residential Districts (RA, SR,
MR, MF, MH)
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts
(CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, HI)
Flag Sign
Maximum allowed
Prohibited sign type
One every ten yards; maximum of 5
Maximum height 12 ft.
Display periods 30 days, with not less than 30 days between
display periods
Stake Sign
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/507
Sign Type and Standard Zoning District
Rural and Residential Districts (RA, SR,
MR, MF, MH)
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts
(CU, DT, MU, NC, GC, LI, HI)
Stake Sign
Maximum allowed Not applicable One every ten yards; maximum of 5
Display periods Not applicable 30 days, with not less than 30 days between
display periods
Maximum sign area 6 sf. 9 sf.
Maximum height 4 ft. 4 ft.
Sec. 14.08.009 Master sign program
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a master sign program is to allow for a unified presentation of signage throughout parcels
proposed for development, as well as flexibility to provide for unique environments.
(b) Applicability. The master sign program alternative is applicable to a single-tenant development that exceeds
25,000 square feet of gross floor area or a multi-tenant development that exceeds 10,000 square feet of gross floor area
in the following zoning districts:
(1) College and University (CU);
(2) General Commercial (GC);
(3) Light Industrial (LI); or
(4) Heavy Industrial (HI).
(c) Approval criteria. The administrator may approve a master sign program for a multi-tenant or mixed use
development if as proposed it will result in a substantially improved, comprehensive, and unified proposal, as provided
in subsections a through h below [subsections 14.12.005(c)(2)(A) through (H)], compared to what is allowed through
strict compliance with all other provisions of this article. The administrator shall review all sign types (e.g., attached,
freestanding, or temporary, etc.) for the parcel or parcels proposed for development, to determine the degree of
compliance with this article as a supplement to, or in lieu of the sign standards otherwise applicable. Any deviations to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/507
the number, dimensions, locations, or design characteristics of attached or freestanding signs that are sought by an
applicant shall be justified in writing, and shall clearly demonstrate a standard of design and quality that exceeds those
set out in this article. Such demonstration may include any or all of the following:
(1) Construction of brick or natural stone;
(2) Consistent sizes, styles, and colors across the development;
(3) Use of landscaping around the sign base;
(4) Use of channel lettering;
(5) Greater spacing between signs along street frontages;
(6) Fewer total number of signs; and/or
(7) Signs of reduced heights and areas.
(d) Standards for all master sign programs. Standards and permissions of master sign programs are as follows:
(1) Generally. Subject to compliance with a master sign program that is approved according to the
flexibility criteria set out in this article, signs that are proposed as part of a master sign program may deviate
from the standards of this chapter in terms of the:
(A) Types and numbers of signs allowed;
(B) Maximum sign area; and
(C) Materials and illumination standards (including electronic message centers).
(2) Prohibited signs and sign elements. Prohibited signs and sign elements are not eligible for inclusion in a
master sign program unless specifically indicated in this chapter.
(3) Architectural theme. All signs shall be architecturally integrated into or complementary to the design of
the buildings and character of the site, and shall use similar and coordinated design features, materials, and
colors. The master sign program shall establish an integrated architectural vocabulary and cohesive theme for
the parcel(s) proposed for development.
(e) Conditions of approval. The administrator may impose reasonable conditions on the master sign program relating
to the design, materials, locations, placements or orientations, and sign specifications that are not related to the content
of the signs or the viewpoints of the sign users, in order to ensure continuing compliance with the standards of this
article.
(f) Submittal requirements. See section 14.12.005(d) [section 14.12.005(c)], Master Sign Program Application
Requirements.
Sec. 14.08.010 Removal of substandard signage
(a) Generally. Any and all signs determined to be substandard within the municipal limits of the city shall be removed.
(b) Determination of a substandard sign. A sign is determined by the city to be substandard when in the opinion of the
administrator the sign fails to meet any of the following requirements:
(1) The structure supporting the sign is damaged or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented, or
torn;
(2) The sign face is visibly torn, cracked or splintered;
(3) The sign or its elements are not in compliance with the requirements of the current electrical code
and/or the building code of the city;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/507
(4) The sign or its supporting structure is twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it was
originally erected (such as may result from being blown or the failure of a structural support);
(5) Any portion of a sign's message or wording cannot be clearly read by a person with normal eyesight
under normal viewing conditions;
(6) There is visible rust or any other visible deterioration of the sign that creates an unsightly image for the
viewer; or
(7) The sign is missing any component or portion of a component that existed when it was originally
permitted by the city.
Sec. 14.08.011 Nonconforming signs and billboards
See section 14.09.006, Nonconforming Signs and Billboards.
Sec. 14.08.012 Murals
(a) Generally. Any and all paintings on a wall, regardless of whether or not the intent is to advertise or not, shall be
considered a mural. Murals require a sign permit, however the city has limited review in permitting.
(b) Approval criteria. Approving or denying a proposed sign permit considered to be a mural shall be limited to
ensuring that the proposed mural is not an obscenity.
(c) Submittal requirements. See section 14.12.005, Sign Permits.
ARTICLE 14.09 NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 14.09.001 Purpose and applicability
(a) Purpose. Because there are locations within the city where development has existed for generations, the application
of new regulations to existing development will create situations in which existing lot dimensions, land uses, building,
structures, and signs do not strictly comply with the new ordinance, even though they complied with the regulations at
the time they were permitted and constructed. The fact that these nonconformities were at one time conforming means
that they are now considered “legally nonconforming” and therefore will be permitted to continue without immediate
retrofit or removal until significant site or land use changes are proposed. This article sets out equitable rules for
whether, when, and how the regulations of this chapter apply to existing development.
(b) Applicability. This article applies to uses, buildings, structures, lots, and signs that were lawfully constructed or
established, but do not conform to the requirements of this chapter or chapter 10, Subdivision Regulations.
Sec. 14.09.002 General regulations
(a) No enlargement of nonconformity. There shall be no enlargement or extension of any type of nonconformity. This
shall apply to all nonconforming uses, buildings, structures, lots, and signs.
(b) Repair, maintenance, and restoration. Any and all necessary repairs and maintenance work on any building or
structure which is nonconforming or building or structure housing a nonconforming use is permitted provided that the
repairs and construction work completed on said building comply with article 3.03, Buildings, of the city code.
(c) Abandonment of premises. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is
abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the current regulations of the district
and this chapter.
Sec. 14.09.003 Nonconforming uses
(a) No movement on lot. A nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot
occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption of this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/507
(b) Cessation of use. If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 60 days, any
subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located.
(c) Transfer of ownership. Change in ownership does not affect the new owner's ability to continue a nonconforming
use provided that he or she is in compliance with this article.
Sec. 14.09.004 Nonconforming buildings and structures
(a) Generally. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption of this chapter that could not be built
under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the
structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) Increase in nonconformity prohibited. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which
increases its nonconformity.
(2) Movement of structure. Should any on-site structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
(3) Minimum floor area. A residential dwelling unit having a lesser floor area at the time of the passage of
this chapter than the minimum floor area required for the district in which it is located shall not be construed
to be nonconforming.
(b) Effect of fire or natural destruction.
(1) Complete destruction. A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or
total destruction by fire or other causes.
(2) Partial destruction.
(A) Less than 50 percent destruction. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not
exceeding 50 percent of its value, the administrator shall issue a permit for reconstruction if a permit is
requested by the landowner.
(B) Greater than 50 percent destruction. If the destruction of the nonconforming building or structure
is greater than 50 percent of its value, it shall be removed and any replacement shall be a conforming
structure.
Sec. 14.09.005 Nonconforming lots
(a) Generally. A lot shall be deemed to be nonconforming if the lot does not meet any lot requirement that is not
zoning district specific (see table 14.05.002, Rural and Residential Development Standards, and table 14.05.003,
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Standards).
(b) Lots not in compliance with zoning specific regulations. A legal lot that does not meet the minimum district
requirements of either section 14.05.002, Standards for Residential Development, or section 14.05.003, Standards for
Nonresidential and Mixed Use Development, with respect to minimum lot area or minimum lot width may have a
primary structure built upon it if:
(1) The use is permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is located;
(2) The lot has sufficient frontage on a public street to provide access that is appropriate for the proposed
use; and
(3) The proposed development will comply with all other applicable development standards of this chapter.
Sec. 14.09.006 Nonconforming signs and billboards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/507
(a) Generally. Any permanent sign or billboard that does not conform to the provisions of article 14.08, Signs, is a
“legally nonconforming” sign or billboard, provided that the sign or billboard was:
(1) Authorized by a sign permit prior to the effective date of this chapter;
(2) Not subject to an applicable law, when it was installed; or
(3) Installed prior to the sign being annexed into the city.
(b) Standards.
(1) Sign damage. A nonconforming sign or billboard damaged by fire, wind, age, obsolescence, or other
cause in excess of 50 percent of its replacement cost shall be considered to have been destroyed and may not
be restored except in conformance with article 14.08, Signs.
(2) Removal of signs and billboards other than for reasons of repair or maintenance.
(A) Generally. If a nonconforming sign is removed for any reason other than routine repair or
maintenance, it shall, thereafter, conform to article 14.08, Signs.
(B) One-time exemption. A billboard may be replaced or upgraded one time subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter without being required to come into full compliance with this chapter.
Prior to completion of the upgrade an applicant must file and receive approval for the one-time upgrade
via section 14.12.005, Sign Permits.
(3) Danger to public safety. Nonconforming signs or nonconforming billboards that are a danger to public
safety due to damage or wear shall be removed replaced in accordance with article 14.08, Signs.
(c) Temporary signs. Signs [that] are temporary in nature and not in compliance with section 14.08.008, Temporary
Signs, shall be removed.
Sec. 14.09.007 Mitigation of nonconforming uses
(a) Generally. Many nonconforming uses have existed for a period of time, and some may have only recently become
nonconforming. In some instances, a nonconforming use is an integral part of the neighborhood's character and function.
One of the purposes of zoning regulations is to protect neighborhoods. Therefore, if the community is comfortable with a
particular use, the classification “nonconformity” and restriction on investment may not be what the community desires.
Under such conditions, the use may be mitigated and made conforming to remove the stigma associated with the
designation as a “nonconformity.” The provisions of this section establish procedures for bringing nonconformities into
conformance.
(b) Procedure. An owner of a nonconforming use may apply for a special use permit which has the effect of making
the nonconforming use conforming.
(c) Criteria for approval. A nonconformity shall be approved as a conformity, if, in addition to the criteria for approval
of a special use permit (see section 14.13.004), the following is demonstrated:
(1) Minimal nonconformity. The use, as conducted and managed, has been integrated into the
neighborhood's function. Evaluation criteria include:
(A) The neighborhood residents regularly patronize or are employed at said use (for nonresidential
uses).
(B) Management practices eliminate nuisances such as noise, light, waste materials, congested onstreet
parking, or similar conflicts. A history of complaints is justification for denying a special use
permit request unless the conditions of the permit will eliminate the nuisances.
(C) The use has been maintained in good condition or its classification as a nonconformity represents
a disincentive for such maintenance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/507
(2) Conditional approval. Conditions may be imposed relative to the expansion of bufferyards,
landscaping, or other site design provisions, or other limitations necessary to ensure that, as a conforming
use, the use will not become a nuisance. Such conditions may relate to the lot, buildings, structures, or the
operation of the use.
(d) Public notice. See special use permit requirements under section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
(e) Post-approval letter. Should the application be granted conforming status, the applicant shall be provided with a
letter in writing confirming the board's decision.
ARTICLE 14.10 ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES
Sec. 14.10.001 Administrator
(a) Right of inspection. The administrator is empowered to enter any building, structure, or premises in the city upon
which a development or land use is located, as follows:
(1) Entry shall be for the purpose of inspection to ensure compliance;
(2) Inspection shall be performed during business hours, unless an emergency exists; and
(3) Inspection shall be made only after:
(A) Contact and permission is granted by the owner or tenant; or
(B) An order from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Recommendations. The administrator shall make a report and recommendations with regard to all applications
requiring approval from the zoning ordinance.
(c) Decisions. The administrator shall:
(1) Establish deadlines for how far in advance an initial application must be submitted to be reviewed by
either the city council and/or the planning and zoning commission;
(2) Provide application materials for applicants;
(3) Schedule all development review committee (DRC) meetings;
(4) Decide all approvals as defined in section 14.11.001, Table of Administrative and Public Meeting
Approvals; and
(5) Submit in writing to an applicant and [any] specific conditions required as a part of conditional
approval for any and all applications.
Sec. 14.10.002 Airport zoning board
See the city Code of Ordinances, article 1.14, Airports.
Sec. 14.10.003 City council
(a) Home rule charter. The city council is established by City of Plainview Home Rule Charter, article II, City
Council.
(b) Powers and duties. The city council reserves to itself all of the powers and duties that are not expressly delegated
within this chapter of the Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 14.10.004 Development review committee
(a) Generally. A regulatory body to be known as the development review committee (DRC) is hereby established for
the purpose of:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/507
(1) Administering the requirements of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances;
(2) Ensure that all information necessary to determine compliance with this chapter of the Code of
Ordinances has been provided;
(3) Formulating staff recommendations;
(4) Rectifying review comments between city departments and referral agencies; and
(5) Providing cohesive and timely review of subdivision applications.
(b) Membership.
(1) The DRC shall be comprised of the city staff designated by the administrator and representatives from
each referral agency that reviews development projects in conjunction with the city.
(2) Based on the nature of a development, DRC meetings can be limited to those staff and agencies
affected by the development, or can be expanded to include additional agencies or staff with review
responsibilities.
(c) Powers. The DRC shall have the role to review and provide technical recommendations concerning any
application specified in this chapter of the Code of Ordinances. It does not have the power to grant a variance or change
zoning classification.
(d) Meetings. DRC meetings shall be convened by the administrator, as necessary.
Sec. 14.10.005 Planning and zoning commission
(a) Creation. The city council adopted Ordinance 19-3690 [this chapter], creating an advisory board known as the
planning and zoning commission to monitor and implement the city's zoning ordinance.
(b) Membership.
(1) Generally. The commission shall consist of seven members, each to be appointed by the city council
for a term of two years and serve at the pleasure of the council.
(2) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes
vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
(3) Terms of service. Four members shall serve until January 1 of odd-numbered years, and three members
shall serve until January 1 of even-numbered years, and thereafter each member reappointed or each new
appointee shall serve for a full term of two years unless removed as hereinabove provided.
(4) Alternate members. The city council may also appoint alternate members to the commission who shall
serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the chairman of the
commission. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular
members, which is for a term of two years, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner and they shall
be subject to removal by the same means and under the same procedures as the regular members.
(c) Rules and regulations.
(1) Minutes. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
commission and shall be public record.
(2) Action. The commission shall act by resolution in which, at least, four members must concur to grant
approval of the applicant's request.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/507
(3) Attendance. Each member of the commission shall attend no less than 75 percent of the regular
meetings called by the officers of the commission. The secretary of the commission shall make a quarterly
report to the mayor and city council showing the attendance of each member of the commission. Any
representative failing to attend 75 percent of the regular meetings legally called during any calendar year
without an excused absence, as determined by a majority vote of the commission members, shall be
automatically disqualified for service on the commission and shall be replaced by the city council.
(4) Membership disqualification. Should any member of the commission move from the city or otherwise
become disqualified for any reason, he/she shall be deemed to have vacated the office.
(5) Terms of service. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve, provided the
member is reappointed by the city council.
(6) Open meetings. All business shall be conducted in accordance with the State of Texas Open Meetings
Act and other laws applicable to local public bodies.
(d) Duties and responsibilities. The planning and zoning commission is hereby charged with the duty and invested
with the authority to:
(1) Comprehensive plan. Recommend to the city council for its adoption updates to its comprehensive plan
to facilitate the movement of people and goods, and the health, recreation, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the city.
(2) Zoning ordinance amendments. Recommend zoning ordinance amendments to carry out the goals of
the city's plan; hold public hearings and make recommendations to the city council relating to the creation,
amendment, and implementation of zoning ordinance amendments as authorized under state law.
(3) Decisions. Decide all approvals as defined in section 14.11.001, Table of Administrative and Public
Meeting Approvals.
(4) Other duties. Work on any other planning and zoning related issue as deemed necessary by the city
council.
(5) Subdivision regulations. See section 10.04.006, Planning and Zoning Commission.
State law reference–Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.007.
Sec. 14.10.006 Zoning board of adjustment (ZBA)
(a) Creation. A zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) was reestablished by Ordinance 19-3690 [this chapter] in
accordance with the provisions of Texas Local Government Code, sections 211.008 through 211.010.
(b) Membership.
(1) Generally. The ZBA shall consist of five members, each to be appointed by the city council for a term
of two years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public
hearing.
(2) Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes
vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made. Three members shall serve
until January 1 of odd-numbered years, as heretofore appointed, and two members, as heretofore appointed,
shall serve until January 1 of even-numbered years, and thereafter each member reappointed or each new
appointee shall serve for a full term of two years unless removed as hereinabove provided.
(3) Alternate members. The city council may also appoint alternate members of the board who shall serve
in the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the chairman of the board,
so that all cases to be heard by the board will always be heard by a minimum number of four members. These
alternate members shall serve for a term of two years. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner and
they shall be subject to removal by the same means and under the same procedures as the regular members.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/507
(c) Rules and regulations.
(1) Minutes. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be public
record.
(2) Action. The board shall act by resolution in which at least four members must concur to:
(A) Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official;
(B) Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to approve; or
(C) Authorize a variation from the terms of a zoning ordinance that is permitted with board approval.
(3) Attendance. Each member of the commission shall attend no less than 75 percent of the regular
meetings. Any representative failing to attend 75 percent of the regular meetings legally called during any
calendar year without an excused absence, as determined by a majority vote of the commission members,
shall be automatically disqualified for service on the commission and shall be replaced by the city council.
(4) Membership disqualification. Should any member of the commission move from the city or otherwise
become disqualified for any reason, he/she shall be deemed to have vacated the office.
(5) Terms of service. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve, provided the
member is reappointed by the city council.
(d) Powers and duties of the board.
(1) Decisions. Decide all approvals as defined in section 14.11.001, Table of Administrative and Public
Meeting Approvals.
(2) Appeals. The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of
law or interpretation of this chapter in any requirement or determination made by the administrator in regard
to this chapter.
(3) Limitation on reapplications. When the board has denied a proposal, no new applications of similar
nature shall be accepted by the board or scheduled for 12 months after the date of board denial. Applications
which have been withdrawn at or before the board meeting may be resubmitted at any time for hearing before
the board.
(4) Limitation of board's authority. The board shall have no authority to change any provisions of any
ordinance. Its jurisdiction is limited to hardship and borderline cases which may arise. The board may not
change the district designation of any land either to a more or less restrictive zone.
(5) Administrator decision required prior to any board action.
(A) All development applications and questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first
presented to the administrator who shall have officially replied to the applicant prior to any request
being presented to the board.
(B) An applicant shall have the right to appeal any decision of the board to the courts as provided by
the laws of the State of Texas.
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et seq.
ARTICLE 14.11 STANDARDIZED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
Sec. 14.11.001 Table of administrative and public body approvals
Table 14.11.001. Administrative and Public Body Approvals
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/507
Permit/Plan Required For Timing Exceptions Issued By Fee Cross Reference 1
Administrative Approval
Billboard permit Installation or
substantial
modification of any
billboard
Prior to installing
or substantially
modifying a
billboard
None Administrator $50 Sec. 14.12.001,
Billboard Permit
Building permit Construction,
reconstruction,
improvement, or
repair of any building
or structure for which
an additional permit
or approval is
required
Prior to
commencement of
construction
None Administrator See sec.
3.03.004,
Building
Permit Fees
Art. 3.03, Buildings,
and sec. 10.06.002
[10.06.001],
Building Permit
Certificate of
occupancy
Occupancy of
buildings and
structures including
new, reconstruction,
and the conversion of
residential to
nonresidential and
vice versa
Prior to occupancy None Administrator $25 Sec. 14.12.003,
Certificate of
Occupancy
Floodplain
development
permit
See sec. 3.13.032, Permit Development Procedures
Sign permit Installation or
substantial
modification of any
sign that is not
exempt
Prior to installing
or substantially
modifying a sign
See sec.
14.08.002(b),
Exceptions
Administrator $25 Sec. 14.12.005, Sign
Permits
Site development
plans
All new development,
redevelopment,
expansion, or
substantial
improvement for
mixed-use,
multifamily
residential, and
nonresidential
development types
Prior to issuance of
a building permit
None Administrator $50 Sec. 14.12.006, Site
Development Plans
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/507
Temporary use
permit
The operation of any
land use that is
regulated by
temporary use
standards per table
14.04.004
Prior to the
operation of any
temporary use
None Administrator $50 Sec. 14.12.007,
Temporary Use
Permit
Public Body Approval
Certificate of
appropriateness
Changes to the
exterior of any
building or structure
within the DT zoning
district
Prior to any
building or
structure
modifications or
redevelopment
where changes to
the exterior
appearance will
occur
None Planning and
zoning
commission
$50 Sec. 14.13.001,
Certificate of
Appropriateness
Certificate of
demolition or
removal
Demolition or
removal of any
building or structure
either located within
the Downtown (DT)
zoning district or
designated as a
historic building or
landmark
Prior to any
demolition or
removal
None Planning and
zoning
commission
See sec.
3.03.004,
Building
Permit Fees
Sec. 14.13.002,
Certificate of
Demolition or
Removal
Comprehensive
plan amendment
Applications that are
in conflict with the
plan
Prior to any land
development
application
requiring
conformance with
the plan
None City council $50 Sec. 14.13.003,
Comprehensive Plan
Amendment
Special use permit The operation of any
land use that is
regulated by special
use standards per sec.
14.04.004
[14.04.003]
Prior to the
operation of any
land use that is
designated as a
special use
None City council $50 Sec. 14.13.004,
Special Use Permit
Text amendment Text additions and
changes to this
chapter
N/A None City council $50 Sec. 14.13.005, Text
Amendment
Zoning map Changes to the city's Prior to any change None City council $100 Sec. 14.13.006,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/507
amendment
(rezoning)
zoning map in land use other
than those that are
permitted in the
respective district
Zoning Map
Amendment
Special exception
carport approval
Approval of a setback
requirement that is
not met via article
14.05
Prior to a building
permit for
improvements
where a special
exception is
required;
concurrently with
other development
N/A Zoning board of
adjustment
$50 Sec. 14.13.007,
Special Exception
Variance Deviation from the
standards of this
chapter when literal
enforcement of the
ordinance would
result in unnecessary
hardship
Prior to a building
permit for
improvements
which a variance is
required;
concurrently with
other development
None Zoning board of
adjustment
$50 Sec. 14.13.008,
Variances
Appeals to
planning and
zoning
commission
Appeals from
decisions of city staff
(administrator, public
works director, etc.)
Within 15 days of
the decision
None Planning and
zoning
commission
$200 Sec. 14.13.009,
Appeals
Appeals to zoning
board of
adjustment
Appeals from
decisions of the
planning and zoning
commission
Within 15 days of
the decision
None Zoning board of
adjustment
$200 Sec. 14.13.009,
Appeals
Table notes:
1 Cross references are provided for convenience only and do not exempt the application from complying with all applicable standards of this
chapter, any other provision within the city's Code of Ordinances, or state law.
Sec. 14.11.002 Pre-application conference
(a) Applicant responsibilities. An applicant shall:
(1) Consult early and informally with the administrator; and
(2) Avail himself to the advice and assistance of the administrator.
(b) Administrator responsibilities. The administrator shall:
(1) Informally confer with the applicant.
(2) Advise and assist the applicant in procedure for approval of plats and on regulations and policies of the
city regarding development either within the corporate limits of the city or within the city's ETJ.
Sec. 14.11.003 Application filing process
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/507
(a) Generally. Every process established by this chapter of the Code of Ordinances shall be submitted on a form
approved by the city with the appropriate application fee in accordance with the city's schedule of fees.
(b) Revision of form. The city may revise any applicable form to comply with any new or revised requirements of this
chapter.
(c) Schedule of fees. No permit, certificate, special exception, or variance shall be issued unless and until such costs,
charges, fees, or expenses, as set out in table 14.11.001, Table of Administrative and Public Meeting Approvals, are paid.
Sec. 14.11.004 Application completeness review
(a) Generally. Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this chapter, the administrator shall provide the applicant
with a dated receipt. Within 10 business days of receipt of an application, the administrator shall review the application
and determine if:
(1) The application includes all required materials and information; and
(2) Those parts of the application which are required to be prepared by licensed professionals are, in fact,
prepared by such professionals.
(b) Determination of completeness.
(1) If the application is complete, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of this
determination and require the applicant to provide a sufficient number of copies of the application.
(2) No application is complete until all up-front fees for review are paid. The time period for processing an
application after completeness review does not start unless the fees are paid.
(3) Once an application has been accepted by the administrator, the filing fee is nonrefundable.
(c) Determination of incompleteness. If the application is incomplete, the administrator shall notify the applicant in
writing, specifying the additional materials or information required to complete the application. The applicant shall
provide these materials within 10 business days of the request or the application will be withdrawn. An application that
is withdrawn may be re-filed at a future date, however a new filing fee will be required.
Sec. 14.11.005 Inactive and expired applications
(a) Generally. Applications must be diligently pursued by the applicant. This section extinguishes applications that
become stale due to applicant inaction.
(b) Expiration of inactive applications.
(1) An application becomes an “inactive application” for failure to comply with this chapter, preventing it
from being docketed for action or approved.
(2) Inactive applications become “stale” after 90 days of the filing of the application if the applicant fails to
address staff or referral agency review comments to allow further processing of an application, unless the
applicant is actively pursuing action to address comments with staff, in which case the application shall
become stale after 180 days of the date when the action was originally requested.
(3) Stale applications are automatically voided six months after the original date when the action was
requested if the applicant fails to take action or requests an extension of time for cause.
(4) Application fees will not be refunded for any inactive or expired application. A full resubmittal shall be
required including a new application and fees.
(c) Extension of time.
(1) Prior to the expiration of an inactive plat, the application may be extended for up to six months upon
written request of the applicant for cause only; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/507
(2) If the city amends this chapter or adopts other regulations during the period of time when the
application was inactive or stale, the application shall:
(A) Not be subject to compliance to the new regulations until the original application is considered to
be voided; and
(B) The application shall be subject to the new regulations and ordinances if the period of time to
request an extension lapses.
(3) A stale application shall expire after a six-month extension lapses and if an extension was not
requested.
(d) Effect of expiration. Applications that expire pursuant to this section are automatically null and void without
further notice or action by the city.
Sec. 14.11.006 Public notice
(a) Generally.
(1) Notice by publication, when required, shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
Texas Local Government Code (TLGC).
(2) Notice by mail, when required, shall be provided to each owner, as indicated by the most recently
approved municipal tax roll of real property.
(3) Table 14.11.006, Required Notice, sets out the specific notice requirement for each type of application
where notice is required.
(b) Content of notice. Notice shall include:
(1) The date, time, and place of the hearing;
(2) Staff contact and phone number, a description, address, or location of the matter to be heard, and a
statement that the public is invited to review and comment on the application.
(c) Time of hearing. For all matters properly brought before the city council or the planning and zoning commission,
the city shall select a reasonable time and place for such hearing; provided, however, that such time shall be no later than
45 days following the submission of a complete application per section 14.11.004, Application Completeness Review.
(d) Computation of time. In computing the time periods for notice, the day of mailing, publication, or posting shall not
be counted, but the day of the public hearing shall be counted.
(e) Constructive notice.
(1) Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice
in a bona fide attempt to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice shall be limited
to errors in a location map, typographic or grammatical errors, or errors of actual acreage that do not impede
communication of the notice to affected parties.
(2) If questions arise at the public hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the administrative body shall
direct city staff to make a formal finding as to whether there was substantial compliance with the notice
requirements of this chapter and the TLGC. City staff's findings shall be made available to the administrative
body prior to final action on the request.
Table 14.11.006. Required Notice
Type of Application By Mail By Publication
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/507
Certificate of appropriateness Not required Required
Certificate of demolition or removal Not required Required
Comprehensive plan amendment (TLGC 213.003) Not required Required
Text amendment (TLGC 211.006) Not required Required
Special use permit Required 1 Required
Zoning map amendment (TLGC 211.006) Required 1 Required
Variance (TLGC 211.009) Not required Required
Appeals (TLGC 211.010) Required 2 Required
Table notes:
1 To owners of property within 200 feet.
2 TLGC section 211.010(d) requires “due notice to the parties in interest.” At a minimum, this shall include the original
applicant and the persons who are the party to the appeal.
ARTICLE 14.12 ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS: PERMITS AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 14.12.001 Billboard permit
(a) Permit required. A billboard shall not hereafter be erected, altered or maintained except as provided by section
14.08.002 [section 14.08.006], Off-Site Advertising and Billboard Regulations, and after a permit has been issued by the
administrator.
(b) Application for permit. Billboard permit applications shall:
(1) Be made in writing on forms furnished by the administrator;
(2) Contain the location by street and number of the proposed billboard; and
(3) Contain the name and address of the owner of both the property and the proposed billboard.
Sec. 14.12.002 Building permit
No building permit shall be granted unless an applicant is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter,
including article 3.13, Floodplain Development, and section 14.12.006, Site Development Plans, and all other applicable
provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances. Cross references: Section 10.06.002 [Section 10.06.001], Building Permit;
article 3.03, Buildings; section 14.13.001, Certificate of Appropriateness.
Sec. 14.12.003 Certificate of occupancy
(a) Generally.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/507
(1) No building may be occupied in the city without a certificate of occupancy permit as required by this
section.
(2) No building shall be changed from a residential to a nonresidential use or vice versa until a certificate
of occupancy has been issued by the administrator.
(b) Application. Each application for a certificate of occupancy permit shall be accompanied by a final plat in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
(1) The name of the person making the application;
(2) The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
(3) The size, shape, and location of the building to be erected; and
(4) Such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
(c) Decision criteria. Certificate of occupancy permits shall be issued only upon a finding that all requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable portions of the city's Code of Ordinances have been met.
(d) Records. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the administrator and copies
shall be furnished on request to any interested person.
Sec. 14.12.004 Floodplain development
Cross reference: Article 3.13, Flood Prevention.
Sec. 14.12.005 Sign permits
(a) Permits required. A sign shall not hereafter be erected, altered or maintained except as provided by section
14.08.002, Permit Required; Exceptions, and after a permit has been issued by the administrator. A separate permit shall
be required for a sign or signs for each business entity, and a separate permit shall be required for each group of signs on
a single supporting structure.
(b) Application for permit. Sign permit applications shall:
(1) Be made in writing on forms furnished by the administrator;
(2) Contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure; and
(3) Contain the name and address of the owner of the property where the sign is proposed to be located.
(c) Master sign program application requirements.
(1) Generally. A master sign program application shall set out a master plan for signage for an entire parcel
or parcels proposed for development. For example, shopping center master sign programs shall include all
tenants and outparcels; and office or industrial parks shall include all types of signs for way-finding and
tenants or uses within the development.
(2) Specific submittal requirements. Master sign programs shall include:
(A) A depiction of all the signs that the applicant is requesting to deviate from the underlying sign
regulations;
(B) Size, location and number of all signs, including area, letter height, and height;
(C) Materials, styles (letter colors, background colors, text, fonts, etc.) and colors for all signs subject
to the master sign plan, including context of where signs are to be placed on any given facade;
(D) Proposed illumination (external, internal, etc.), including illumination levels;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/507
(E) Maximum numbers of items of information per sign face;
(F) A design theme with illustrative examples of each sign type and the proposed general locations of
each sign type;
(G) A demonstration that the master sign program will improve the aesthetics of the development and
will not have an adverse impact on the use, enjoyment, or value of property in adjacent or nearby
residential uses or districts; and
(H) Landscaping and/or ornamental structures including fences, fountains, public art, ground cover,
and other landscaping elements that are intended to complement those proposed signs that would
deviate from the underlying sign regulations.
(3) Duration. An approved master sign program shall expire two years from the date of such approval if no
progress has been made towards completion of the project, pursuant to section 245.005 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended.
(4) Amendment. Prior to expiration of the master sign program, the applicant may apply for an amendment
that alters the design, materials, locations, placements and orientations, and specifications of the signs. The
sign administrator may approve the amended master sign program if it is consistent with this section and does
not increase the area or height of any freestanding or wall sign subject to the original master sign program by
more than 10 percent.
(d) Billboard permits. See section 14.12.001, Billboard Permit.
Sec. 14.12.006 Site development plans
(a) Generally. A site development plan is required for all development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement
within the municipal boundaries of the City of Plainview.
(b) Application. All applications shall state the name(s) and address(es) of the owner, developer, and applicant (if
applicable) for the parcel proposed for development, and shall include all applicable fees as required per table 14.11.001,
Table of Administrative and Public Meeting Approvals.
(c) Submittal requirements.
(1) Format. A site development plan application shall be submitted in the following format:
(A) Scale: One inch equals 100 feet;
(B) Size: 24 x 36 inches;
(C) Method of submittal: Electronic PDF file format.
(2) Locations identified. The following showing items shall be accurately depicted on the plan:
(A) All existing or proposed buildings, structures, or improvements;
(B) All existing front, side, and back setback locations;
(C) All proposed modifications to the external configuration of each building, structure, or
improvement (including all carports);
(D) Open spaces and landscaped areas; and
(E) Parking and loading with vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
(3) Supplemental plans required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/507
(A) Grading plan. Grading plan showing the proposed grading of all land disturbing activities on the
site tied to existing grades with cut and fill slopes that shall be no greater than a three to one ratio,
except as approved by the city to meet other community or environmental objectives.
(B) Engineering plan. Engineering plans for water, sewer, and other utilities, as well as street(s) and
parking construction.
(C) Drainage plan. Drainage plan showing all detention/retention facilities providing for a 100-year
storm and storm sewers or surface drainage providing for a 25-year storm.
(D) Landscaping plan. Landscaping plan showing trees to be removed or preserved, and new
landscaping delineating and annotating canopy, shrub, and ground covering plantings along with any
additional buffering requirements per article 14.07, Landscaping and Buffering.
(E) Lighting plan. A lighting plan showing the location and design of fixtures and illumination levels
across the property and into neighboring properties is required in accordance with section 14.06.003,
Lighting.
(d) Exceptions. A site development plan is not required for the following activities:
(1) Construction of a building addition that does not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area or that does
not require an expansion in the number of parking spaces exceeding 15 percent;
(2) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural
resources; and
(3) Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted principal and/or accessory use.
Sec. 14.12.007 Temporary use permit
(a) Permit required. No person shall operate a temporary use in accordance with table 14.04.004, Temporary Use
Standards, within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a temporary use permit.
(b) Premises; building inspections. All temporary uses per table 14.04.004, Temporary Use Standards, shall be
inspected by the administrator or his designee prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit.
(c) Application required. Any person desiring a temporary use permit for any temporary use in accordance with table
14.04.004, Temporary Use Standards, shall make a written application no less than 14 days prior to the starting date of
the event or installation of the use, to the administrator.
ARTICLE 14.13 PUBLIC BODY APPROVALS: PERMITS AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 14.13.001 Certificate of appropriateness
(a) Generally. Land development applications within the Downtown (DT) zoning district require a certificate of
appropriateness to ensure that all new development on the exterior of all buildings and structures within the district is
compatible with the requirements set out in section 14.05.007, Historic Standards for Downtown District.
(b) Submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit an electronic copy in PDF format which can be easily printed
clearly showing all detailed plans, elevations, perspectives, specifications and other documents to the administrator for
work on the exterior of a building within the DT zoning district regardless of whether or not a building permit is
required.
(c) Public hearing.
(1) Next available regular meeting. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on the
application at its next available regular meeting.
(2) Approval criteria. If the commission finds the proposed work of a nature which will not adversely
affect any significant architectural or historical feature of the designated DT district, and is appropriate and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/507
consistent with the spirit and purposes of this section, it shall forward its recommendations to the applicant
and to the administrator within five days after the public hearing.
(3) Disapproval criteria. If the commission finds that the proposed work will adversely affect or destroy
any significant architectural or historical feature within the DT district or is inappropriate or inconsistent with
the spirit and purposes of this section the administrator shall, within five days of the public hearing, notify the
applicant of the disapproval and of changes in the application which are necessary for future approval.
(4) Failure to act. If no action has been taken by the planning and zoning commission within 30 days of
original receipt by the commission, approval shall be deemed issued by the commission, and the
administrator shall so advise the applicant.
(5) Notification requirements. See section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
(d) Resubmittal. After a decision is reached by the planning and zoning commission denying an application for a
certificate of appropriateness, a resubmittal of application will not be accepted for additional hearing within 12 months
from the date of final decision, except upon written request by the applicant indicating that there has been a change in
conditions or that all changes in the application as recommended by the commission have been made.
Sec. 14.13.002 Certificate of demolition or removal
(a) Generally. A certificate of demolition or removal is required prior to the commencement of removal or demolition
of any building or structure:
(1) Located within the Downtown (DT) zoning district; or
(2) Designated by either the state or federal government as a historic building or landmark and located
within the municipal boundary of the city.
(b) Public hearing. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the application at its next available regular meeting.
(c) Decision criteria. In determining whether to grant or deny a request for a certificate of demolition or removal, the
commission shall consider:
(1) The state of repair of the building;
(2) The reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair;
(3) The existing and/or potential usefulness, including economic usefulness of the building;
(4) The purposes behind preserving the structure as a historic landmark;
(5) The character of the neighborhood; and
(6) All other factors the commission deems it finds appropriate.
(d) Disapproval procedure. If the commission determines that, in the interest of preserving historical values, the
structure should not be demolished or removed, it shall notify the administrator that the application has been
disapproved; and the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the commission's decision.
(e) Failure to act. If no action has been taken by the planning and zoning commission within 60 days of original
receipt by the commission of the application, a certificate of demolition or removal shall be deemed issued by the
commission; and the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing.
(f) Resubmittal requirements. After a decision is reached by the planning and zoning commission denying an
application for a certificate of demolition or removal, the resubmittal of an application for such a certificate will not be
accepted for additional hearing within a 12-month period from the date of final decision.
(g) Appeals. Any applicant aggrieved by a ruling of the commission under the provisions of this section may, within
60 days after the ruling of the planning and zoning commission, appeal to the city council. Following an appropriate
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/507
public hearing within at least 30 days of the filing of a notice of appeal with the city clerk, the city council may uphold
or overturn the ruling of the commission by a simple majority vote.
Sec. 14.13.003 Comprehensive plan amendment
(a) Purpose. Amendments to the comprehensive plan are for the general purpose of guiding coordinated development
of the city and its needs, and public health and safety.
(b) Comprehensive plan amendments. Comprehensive plan amendments may be requested to amend to a map or
written text.
(c) Criteria for review of plan amendments. The following criteria shall be used to determine if an amendment should
be approved.
(1) Amendment to a plan map. Sufficient evidence has been provided that the plan map amendment meets
the following criteria:
(A) The proposed amendment is compatible with existing or planned land uses on adjacent
properties;
(B) Adequate public utilities, facilities, and services are available or may be extended in an efficient
manner; and
(C) The amendment is either:
(i) Warranted by changing conditions;
(ii) To correct an error;
(iii) To provide for the changes because of annexation; or
(iv) To address an unforeseen circumstance.
(2) Amendment to the plan text. Sufficient evidence is provided showing that the text amendment will:
(A) Advance the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan;
(B) Address a legitimate public need; or
(C) Is warranted by changing community conditions.
(d) Amendment procedures.
(1) Initiation of amendment. The commission, council, or city staff may initiate a study or propose
amendments. Additionally, any person having a proprietary interest in property may make an application for
an amendment.
(2) Application. A comprehensive plan amendment, if filed by any person having a proprietary interest in
any property, shall include an application that clearly states the requested amendment along with a summary
of the applicant's argument for why the amendment should be approved.
(3) Notice of public hearings. The city shall publish notice as set out in section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
(e) Planning and zoning commission action.
(1) The commission shall hold a public hearing prior to taking action on the proposed amendment to the
comprehensive plan;
(2) The proposed amendment shall be reviewed subject to the criteria set out in subsection (c), Criteria for
Review of Plan Amendments, above;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/507
(3) The commission shall make a written recommendation regarding a proposed amendment to the city
council;
(4) An affirmative vote of two-thirds of the entire voting membership of the commission is required to
advance the proposed amendment to the city council; and
(5) In the event of an unfavorable recommendation, the commission shall adopt findings of fact as the basis
for that decision.
(f) Action by the city council. The council, upon receiving the written recommendation of the commission, shall
determine whether to approve or denial the application using the procedures and criteria as set out in subsection (c),
Criteria for Review of Plan Amendments, and subsection (d), Amendment Procedures.
(g) Notification requirements. See section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 14.13.004 Special use permit
(a) Applicability. A special use permit is required to:
(1) Grant identified land uses in specific zoning districts to ensure that the use will be compatible with
surrounding land uses and appropriate at the proposed locations as set out in section 2.02.03 [section
14.03.003], Residential Uses and Commercial Uses of the Home, and section 2.02.04 [section 14.03.004],
Nonresidential Uses; or
(2) Convert a nonconforming land use to become conforming per section 14.09.007, Mitigation of
Nonconforming Uses.
(b) Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a special use permit, applicants shall schedule a pre-application
conference, as set out in section 14.11.002, Pre-Application Conference.
(c) Submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit the following minimum information in order to apply for a
special use permit:
(1) Completed application and the application fee;
(2) The street address, location, legal description of the property affected, or a certified boundary survey,
plat, or site development plan of land area subject to the special use permit;
(3) A statement explaining the rationale for the special use permit relative to the approval criteria of section
14.04.003, Special Use Standards, and if applicable, section 14.09.007, Mitigation of Nonconforming Uses;
and
(4) Any plans, operating data, and expert evaluation to explain the proposed use and to demonstrate why
the special use permit, if granted, would be compatible with surrounding development.
(d) Staff review process. The development administrator shall formulate a staff report and recommendation based on
the applicable standards of either section 14.04.003, Special Use Standards, or section 14.09.007, Mitigation of
Nonconforming Uses.
(e) Review by the planning and zoning commission.
(1) Upon conducting a public hearing, the commission shall consider and review the staff recommendation
and will formulate a recommendation for city council consideration.
(2) The commission may establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement, or other aspects of the
land use deemed to be in the public interest and/or to assure compatibility with surrounding development.
(3) If the commission recommends denial, the commission shall adopt findings of fact citing specific
approval criteria that were not satisfied.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/507
(f) Records. The city shall maintain a file containing all documents relevant to the application and disposition of
special use permit applications.
(g) Notification requirements. See section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 14.13.005 Text amendment
(a) Generally. Requests for amendments to the text of this chapter may be initiated by the request of the planning and
zoning commission, city council, or city manager to amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal any portion of this
chapter that is not expressly required by Texas or federal law.
(b) Processing of application and decision.
(1) Notice of public hearings. The city shall comply with all notice requirements set out in section
14.11.006, Public Notice.
(2) Planning and zoning commission recommendation.
(A) The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing prior to taking action on the
proposed text amendment; and
(B) The commission shall make a recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the city
council.
(c) Decision by city council. The city council shall:
(1) Receive the written recommendation of the commission and staff regarding the proposed amendment.
(2) Hold a public hearing prior to taking action on the proposed amendment.
(3) By majority vote, approve or deny the amendment, or continue the item to a future meeting.
(d) Criteria for approval. The following criteria should be considered by the commission and council. The proposed
amendment:
(1) Promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the city;
(2) Is consistent with other regulations within the city's Code of Ordinances; and
(3) Is consistent with the policies of the most recent comprehensive plan for the city.
(e) Non-substantive amendments. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the city council may, by
resolution:
(1) Correct spelling or punctuation errors:
(2) Cross-reference modifications (because another area of city code has been moved or amended);
(3) Cross-reference errors; and
(4) Other matters herein determined by the city attorney to be non-substantive without being required by
law to comply any public notice requirement per either state law or section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
(f) Nonconformities and retroactive cure of violations.
(1) The amendment of the text of this chapter may transform a legally nonconforming situation into a
conforming one.
(2) No petition for a text amendment shall be used expressly to cure, or to create, a violation of any part of
this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/507
(g) Notification requirements. See section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 14.13.006 Zoning map amendment (rezoning)
(a) Application.
(1) Applicant information. Amendment(s) may be initiated by the city council or the planning and zoning
commission or by an application of one or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment(s).
(2) Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application, applicants shall schedule a pre-application
conference, as set out in section 14.11.002.
(3) Submittal requirements.
(A) A completed application form which describes the requested zoning map amendment and the
rationale for the request;
(B) Complete application fee;
(C) The legal description and survey plat of the subject property; and
(D) Any data requested by either the city council or the planning and zoning commission necessary to
demonstrate that the proposed zoning map amendment is in general conformance with the most recently
adopted version of the city's comprehensive plan.
(b) Staff review process. The administrator shall:
(1) Ensure the application is complete, as set out in section 14.11.004, Application Completeness Review;
and
(2) In review of the application shall utilize the approval criteria listed in subsection (c), below, to create a
staff report to be presented to the planning and zoning commission.
(c) General rezoning approval criteria. The city staff, the planning and zoning commission, and the city council shall
use the following criteria when determining whether to approve or deny a zoning map amendment (rezoning) request:
(1) The character of the surrounding area is transitioning or being affected by other factors, such as traffic,
a new school, adjoining uses, or environmental issues;
(2) The rezoning is necessary to allow a land use not anticipated by either this chapter or the
comprehensive plan;
(3) The rezoning is consistent with the most recent future land use map adopted by the city council;
(4) There will be benefits derived by the community and in the area where the amendment is proposed; and
(5) The amendment, if approved, would be compatible with the surrounding area and would not constitute
“spot zoning.”
(d) Requirements for rezoning to manufactured housing (MH). Any applicant who wishes to rezone property to the
MH district must not be located:
(1) Adjacent to any Suburban Residential (SR) or Mixed Residential (MR) zoning district; or
(2) On a local street as per appendix A, Thoroughfare Map, of chapter 10, Subdivision Regulations.
(e) Requirements for rezoning from Suburban Residential (SR) to Neighborhood Commercial (NC). Any applicant
who wishes to rezone their property from Suburban Residential (SR) to Neighborhood Commercial (NC) shall meet the
following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/507
(1) The parcel proposed for rezoning must be on corner lot with one of the fronting streets being classified
as a collector or above as per appendix A, Thoroughfare Map, of chapter 10, Subdivision Regulations;
(2) Existing infrastructure including parking, loading, lighting, and adequate site access exist to
accommodate any and all of the permitted, limited, or temporary uses allowed in the NC zoning district per
table 14.03.004, Nonresidential Uses;
(3) The proposed parcel of property is on the eastern side of I-27; and
(4) The proposed parcel of property must be consistent with the NC district requirements within article
14.05, Lot, Density, Design, and Historic Standards.
(5) All requirements of article 14.07, Landscaping and Buffering, shall be met.
(f) Submittal of plan and agreement to create a new planned development (PD). An application to rezone a property
must be accompanied with specific plans for the parcel of property that:
(1) Meet the requirements of section 14.02.006, Planned Development District Regulations; and
(2) Approval of said plans by the planning and zoning commission must be done so either concurrently or
prior to approval of the rezoning application.
(g) Planning and zoning commission action.
(1) The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing prior to taking action on the proposed
text amendment; and
(2) The commission shall make a recommendation regarding the proposed amendment to the city council.
(h) City council action.
(1) When planning commission has recommended approval. If the planning and zoning commission has
recommended to the city council that a proposed amendment be either approved or disapproved, the city
council may approve or disapprove by a simple majority vote of the city council members present and voting.
(2) When official petition submitted. In the case of an official petition against a proposed text amendment
to this chapter signed by 20% or more of the property owners whom are either directly included within the
area of the proposed change or within an area extending (200) feet from the area directly affected, such
amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the
city council.
(i) Notification requirements. See section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 14.13.007 Special exception carport approval
(a) Generally. A special exception to build a carport that does not meet the setback requirements of this chapter may
be authorized by the zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) in accordance with the requirements and procedures of section
14.10.006, Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(b) Applicability. A special exception may only be considered for approval of a setback requirement that is not met
via section 14.05.002, Standards for Rural and Residential Development; section 14.05.003 [section 14.05.006],
Standards for Accessory Buildings and Structures; and section 14.05.004, Special Setback and Lot Standards.
(c) Standard for approval of special exception. The ZBA may grant a special exception to build a carport provided that
the requirements of section 14.05.006(b)(2), Special Exception Approval Requirements, have been met.
Sec. 14.13.008 Variances
(a) Generally. Variances to the requirements of selected provisions of this chapter may be authorized by the ZBA in
accordance with the requirements and procedures of section 14.10.006, Zoning Board of Adjustment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/507
(b) Applicability. Variances may only be considered for approval for provisions relating to the following articles
and/or sections of this chapter:
(1) Section 14.05.002, Standards for Residential Development;
(2) Section 14.05.003, Standards for Nonresidential and Mixed Use Development;
(3) Section 14.05.006, Standards for Accessory Standards [Standards for Accessory Buildings and
Structures];
(4) Article 14.06, Parking and Loading;
(5) Article 14.07, Landscaping and Buffering; and
(6) Article 14.08, Signs.
(c) Unnecessary hardship standard. When an applicant can show that a provision of these regulations would cause
unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of some physical condition peculiar to the land, the ZBA
may authorize a variance. The unnecessary hardship may not be of a financial nature.
(d) Procedural requirements.
(1) Any variance authorized is required to be entered in writing into the minutes of the ZBA meeting
specifically stating the reason(s) for which the variance was approved.
(2) Four affirmative votes of the five-person ZBA is required to approve the request.
(e) Notification requirements. See section 14.11.006, Public Notice.
Sec. 14.13.009 Appeals
(a) Generally.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the appeals process is to provide an opportunity for affected parties to seek
review of a decision of a responsible official or the planning and zoning commission in a timely and
inexpensive way.
(2) Administrator decisions. All decisions of the administrator pertaining to this chapter may be appealed
to the zoning board of adjustment (ZBA).
(3) Planning and zoning commission decisions. All decisions of the planning and zoning commission
pertaining to this chapter may be appealed to the city council.
(4) Zoning board of adjustment decisions. All decisions of the ZBA pertaining to this chapter may be
appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(5) City council decisions. All decisions of the city council pertaining to this chapter may be appealed to a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(b) Deadline to appeal. All appeals must be fully completed and submitted to the city 30 days after an official decision
by any city official, committee, or governing body.
(c) Eligibility to appeal. Appeals may be taken to the ZBA by:
(1) Any person aggrieved whom resides in the city and can show that they were harmed by the board's
decision; or
(2) Any applicant who has applied to the city for a permit or approval via this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/507
(3) Such appeal shall be made by filing the appropriate form and delivering it via mail or in person to the
department of community services. All of the grounds for the appeal shall be stated in the application.
(d) Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the
administrator certifies to the ZBA that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
(e) Notice of hearing. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the appellate hearing and shall mail notices of such
hearing to the petitioner and to the owners of property lying within 200 feet of any point of the lot at issue. Depositing of
such written notice in the mail shall be deemed sufficient compliance.
(f) Decision by board. The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the
determination as in its opinion ought to be made.
ARTICLE 14.14 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
Sec. 14.14.001 Non-judicial remedies
The city may enforce any violation of this chapter prior to, and without, judicial process by:
(1) Withholding permits. The city may deny or withhold permits, approvals, or other forms of
authorization for failure to comply with the requirements of the chapter or those of a referral agency.
(2) Temporary revocation of permits. The city may temporarily revoke permits for due cause to address an
imminent danger to public health, public safety, or public or private property or to prevent irreparable harm.
(3) Suspension of permits. The city may suspend any permits to allow for the correction of a violation or in
response to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) Revocation of permits and approvals.
(A) Generally. Any permit or other approval required by this chapter may be revoked when it is
determined that:
(i) There is a violation of any provision of this chapter;
(ii) The permit or approval was issued in error or based on false representation;
(iii) Upon the request of a referral agency with jurisdiction and due cause; or
(iv) There is a departure from the approved plans required under the permit, this chapter, or the
construction requirements.
(B) Notice. Written notice of revocation shall state a time frame to correct the violation.
(C) Effect of notice. No work or construction may proceed after service of the revocation notice
except work necessary to correct a violation.
(D) Failure to correct. After the period to correct the violation lapses, and arrangements acceptable to
the city have not been made, the city may:
(i) File litigation in a court of competent jurisdiction; and/or
(ii) Remove or correct such violation and cause to be placed a lien upon the property or
improvements to the property in an amount to cover all costs related to correction or abatement of
the violation.
(5) Stopping work. The administrator shall have the authority to stop any or all construction activity
necessary to halt, correct, or prevent a violation of this chapter by issuing a written stop work order.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/507
(A) The permittee and/or operator shall immediately stop all activity until authorized, in writing, by
the city to proceed.
(B) With or without revoking permits, the city may stop work on any building or structure in which
there is an uncorrected violation of this chapter, a permit, or other form of authorization issued by the
city.
(C) Stop work orders, when issued, will be executed in accordance with the procedures and
authorities to stop work under article 3.03, Buildings.
(6) Cease and desist orders. The city may issue a cease and desist order to close unlawful uses or to halt a
violation of this chapter.
Sec. 14.14.002 Judicial remedies
The city may seek the following judicial remedies or any other judicial remedy as permitted by law to enforce this
chapter in any court of competent jurisdiction:
(1) Injunctive relief. The city may seek an injunction to stop any violation granted under this chapter. Such
relief may include revocation or termination of permits, including limited and special use permits. In any
court proceedings in which the city seeks a preliminary injunction, it shall be presumed that a violation of this
chapter is, or may be, an injury to the public health, safety or general welfare or that public health, safety or
general welfare may be irreparably injured.
(2) Abatement. The city may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement, or other action to
abate or remove a violation, or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they
existed prior to a violation.
(3) Civil liability. The administrator, or his or her designee:
(A) Has the authority to issue citations and deliver it to a person believed to be committing a civil
violation; and
(B) Is declared to be the official with the duty of enforcing this chapter with respect to:
(i) Appearing and testifying in any trial held with respect to the citation;
(ii) Notifying the court of competent jurisdiction of any notice of intention to stand trial or any
request for adjudication when a fine is not paid after formal notice has occurred;
(iii) Mailing formal notices of the violation to persons who do not give notice of intention to
stand trial or pay the established fine within the time set in the citation; and
(iv) Receiving and filing a copy of each original citation and any fines or notices of intention to
stand trial.
(4) Criminal liability.
(A) Punishment. Upon conviction, any person in violation of, or showing failure to comply with, any
of the provisions of this chapter may be punished by fines and/or imprisonment, as prescribed by law,
for each week or portion thereof, that the violation or noncompliance has continued.
(B) Responsible parties. Every person concerned in the violation of, or showing failure to comply
with this chapter, whether the person directly commits the act, or aids or abets the same, and whether
present or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal.
Sec. 14.14.003 Penalties
Any person violating this chapter or any portion thereof shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined any sum not exceeding $2,000.00 and each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/507
and punishable accordingly. See section 1.01.009, General Penalty for Violations of Code; Continuing Violations, and
section 1.01.010, Provisions Considered as Continuation of Existing Ordinances.
ARTICLE 14.15 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 14.15.001 Rules of construction
(a) “Shall,” “will,” “should,” and “may.”
(1) The words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory.
(2) The words “should” and “may” are discretionary.
(b) Representative of the city. Any office referred to in this chapter by title means the person employed or appointed
by the city in that position, or his duly authorized representative, and includes any person designated to perform the
duties of such office.
(c) Customary usage. Definitions not expressly prescribed in this chapter are to be construed in accordance with
customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.
Sec. 14.15.002 Definitions
Abutting. Property where two adjoining lots have a common boundary line including lots that are separated by a street or
alley.
Accessory building. A building detached from a principal building located on the same lot and which is incidental and
subordinate to the principal building.
Accessory structure. A structure detached from a principal building located on the same lot and which is incidental and
subordinate to the principal building.
Accessory use. A use of a building or land which serves an incidental function to and is customarily associated with, and
located on the same lot or premises as, the main use of the premises.
Adjacent. “Next to” or “closest to” but shall not necessarily mean “touching.”
Administrator. The director of community services or appointee designated by the city to administer the regulations and
provisions of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances.
Adult day care center. A facility that provides services under an adult day care program on a daily or regular basis, but
not overnight, to four or more elderly or handicapped persons who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the
owner of the facility. Adult day care centers must be licensed by the Texas Department of Human Services.
Alcohol sales (off-site consumption). The use of a site for the retail sale of any alcohol beverage for off-premises
consumption.
Alcohol sales (on-site consumption). The use of a site for the retail sale of any alcohol beverage for on-premises
consumption.
Alley. A minor public way which extends only secondary means of access to properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Animal husbandry. The keeping or raising of livestock or any other animal for agricultural purposes, whether it be
commercial or noncommercial.
Antenna support structure. Any structure, mast, pole, tripod, box frame or tower utilized for the purpose of transmission,
retransmission, or reception of electromagnetic, radio, or microwave signals.
Apartment. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as
three or more dwelling units or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families living
independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/507
Asphalt or concrete batching plant. A temporary light manufacturing facility used for the production of asphalt or
concrete, or asphalt or concrete products, used in building or construction of a specific site or project, and includes
facilities for the administration and management of the business, the stockpiling of bulk materials used in the production
process or of finished products manufactured on the premises, and the storage and maintenance of required equipment.
This facility does not include the retail sale of finished asphalt or concrete products.
Attached accessory dwelling unit. A dwelling unit that is structurally attached to a principal building which has separate
front and/or rear access and separate kitchen facilities and does not include a downtown loft.
Automated teller machine (ATM), non-freestanding. An automated mechanized consumer banking device operated by a
financial institution for the convenience of its customers, whether inside or outside of a financial institution, or located in
a structure unrelated to the financial institution operating it. Such uses may not serve as the principal use of a parcel of
land or site.
Automobile and vehicle wash. Any area or business using self-service, in-bay automatic, or conveyor equipment for
cleaning and washing motor vehicles, whether as a part of another business operation (e.g., as an accessory use to an
automobile fueling or charging station, automobile sales, rental, and service), or as a stand-alone operation, of any type,
on a commercial basis.
Automobile parking lot (primary use). Surface lots designed and built for the parking of small to medium sized motor
vehicles, not including large trucks such as semi-trailers that are designed to move large quantities of goods.
Automobile structured parking (primary use). A garage that is available to the public for free or for a fee, or to residents,
tenants or guests of a building. Structured parking is also frequently referred to as a parking garage.
Automobile/vehicle parts and/or accessories. Retail sales of automobile related parts and accessories.
Automobile/vehicle repair and auto body. Any land, building, structure, or premises used for the general repair of
automobiles including but not limited to engine rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; engine steam cleaning;
transmission welding or rebuilding and installation; collision service such as body, frame and fender straightening and
repair; and painting of motor vehicles after a collision, fire damage, water damage, or other natural disaster or for the
purpose of restoration. Automobile repair/body shop may also include automobile/vehicle service, as defined.
Automobile/vehicle sales and rental. Premises on which new or used passenger automobiles, trailers, recreational
vehicles, or light trucks in operating condition are displayed for sale, lease, or rental.
Automobile/vehicle service. Any land, building, structure, or premises used for the routine maintenance of automobiles
and limited servicing of automobiles including but not limited to the sale and installation of oil, lubricants, filters,
batteries, tires, brakes, belts, and other similar activities or for installing or repairing parts and accessories but not to
include the activities of automobile repair/body shop as defined.
Awning. A roof-like cover of a temporary nature that projects from the wall or roof of a building.
Bakery, wholesale. A place for preparing, cooking or baking of products primarily intended for off-premises distribution.
Bank, credit union, and financial services. Any of the class of business in a freestanding building, kiosk or automated
teller machines; that provides financial services and the transmission of funds.
Banner, flag or pennant. Any sign exposed to the weather and which is made from or on cloth or other limp material. A
flag shall be any such sign which is flown from one flag staff. Any sign made from or on cloth or other limp material and
which is displayed behind glass and within a building shall be deemed a wall sign.
Basement. A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a
story where more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground, using measurements
taken at each corner of the building which meets the ground.
Batch plant, permanent. A use where cement, mortar, or asphalt is manufactured.
Bed and breakfast. A portion of an owner-occupied dwelling unit or detached accessory building offering transient
lodging, with or without breakfast, to paying guests on an overnight basis, usually staying less than seven days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/507
Billboard. Any portion of a large outdoor off-site advertising structure that promotes or otherwise disseminates
information pertaining to goods, products or services. For a structure to qualify as a billboard for the purposes of this
chapter, the structure must be steel-framed and mounted on a poll that is at least 20 feet above the ground.
Block. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings.
Board. Shall mean the zoning board of adjustment.
Buildable width. The width of the building site left to be built upon after the required side yards are provided.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and designed or intended for the shelter, support,
enclosure or protection of persons, animals, or personal property, except for tents and canopies.
Building, detached. A building surrounded by yards or open space on the same building lot.
Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the front, back, and/or side lot line at a specific distance
marking the minimum distance from the lot line that a building may be erected.
Building lot. A single tract of land located within a single block which (at time of filing for a building permit) is
designed by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or
control. It shall front upon a street or approved place.
Building, main or primary. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
Building materials and hardware store. The retail sale, rental, or lease of durable consumer goods, or in the retail sale,
rental, or lease of such goods in combination with repair and maintenance services and the sale of replacement parts and
accessories. Stores which include in part the sale of raw materials such as lumber and/or brick are included within this
definition and land use category.
Building, mixed use. A building used partly for residential use and partly for community facility and/or commercial use.
The primary use of a mixed-use building is considered to be commercial with the accessory use being residential.
Building, residential. A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by
one or more families or lodgers.
Canopy. Any structure of a permanent fixed nature attached to or independent of the main structure, built and designed
for the purpose of shielding from the elements, persons or chattels, or a roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
is supported by or projects from the wall of a structure.
Cargo terminal. A facility used for the loading and unloading of materials to be distributed by either truck or train.
Carport. A roofed structure that is open on two or more sides, designed to provide shelter for an automobile, and
provides for a parking space where an automobile may only enter or exit from one direction.
Cemetery/funeral services. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, whether human or animal,
including crematoriums and mausoleums and buildings where funeral services may be held.
Certificate of occupancy. An official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official which indicates
conformance with or an approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorized legal use of the
premises for which it is issued.
Changeable copy centers. A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, i.e., reader boards with changeable
letters or changeable pictorial panels.
Child-care, day care center. A child-care facility that provides care at a location other than the residence of the director,
owner, or operator of the child-care facility for seven or more children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day,
but at least two hours a day, three or more days a week.
City council. The governing body of the City of Plainview, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/507
City manager. The chief administrative officer of the City of Plainview, Texas.
Commercial amusement, indoor. Uses that provide commercial amusement indoors (except sexually oriented
businesses), including, but not limited to: bowling alleys and pool rooms; indoor sports arenas; movie theaters and live
theaters; indoor skating rinks (ice or roller); and video arcades.
Commercial amusement, outdoor. Uses that provide commercial amusement outdoors (except sexually oriented
businesses), including, but not limited to: outdoor arenas or stadiums (including, but not limited to, amphitheaters, sports
stadiums, concert facilities, rodeos, and racing facilities); amusement parks or theme parks; fairgrounds; miniature golf
establishments; golf driving ranges; water slides; and batting cages.
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of Plainview, Texas.
Community garden. Privately or publicly owned land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or
herbs by multiple users. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more
individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained or used
by group members.
Comprehensive plan. The most recently adopted comprehensive plan for the City of Plainview which serves as a policy
guide to be used in interpretation and amendments to this chapter.
Construction buildings and structures (temporary). Temporary buildings used for project management proposes during a
construction project.
Construction dumpsters (temporary). Temporary dumpsters at a construction site for the disposal of garbage during a
construction site.
Construction yard (temporary). An area used temporarily to stage construction of a site or infrastructure and may
include storage of materials and associated activities only for the duration of the construction project.
Contiguous. A parcel of property that directly touches another parcel of property. A parcel of property that is on the
opposite side of the street from another parcel is not contiguous.
Contractor's shop and/or service yard. An area used to store and maintain construction equipment and other materials
customarily used in the trade carried on by the construction contractor. This definition excludes temporary contractors
storage associated with the site of an ongoing construction project.
Correctional institution. A facility providing housing and care for individuals legally confined for violations of law.
Council. The city council of Plainview, Texas.
Court. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building.
Dance hall/nightclub. A commercial establishment where alcoholic beverages may be served for consumption on the
premises and in which dancing, musical entertainment, comedy, or other types of performances and activities are
presented.
Detached accessory dwelling unit. A secondary dwelling unit on the same parcel of property that does not have a wall,
roof or other structural component in common with the primary structure on the property.
Development lot. A parcel or abutting parcels of land, having definite boundaries, which is improved as a single unit of
use.
District. Shall mean zoning district which is a section of the City of Plainview for which the regulations governing the
areas, heights or uses of buildings or lots are uniform for each type and class of structure.
Donation bin/recycling center. Containers dedicated for the purpose of collecting discarded materials for recycling or
reuse for the benefit of nonprofit charitable organizations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/507
Dormitory. A building in which housing is provided for individual students under the general supervision or regulation
of an accredited college or university and as distinguished from an apartment, hotel, motel.
Downtown loft. An accessory use located on the second floor of a building in the Downtown District where the first floor
of the building is used for nonresidential purposes.
Drive-in or drive-through facility. A place of business being operated for the retail sale of food and other goods,
services, or entertainment wherein patrons may be served or otherwise conduct their business while remaining in their
automobiles.
Duplex. A detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied by not more than two families.
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family, duplex,
and multiple-family dwellings, except for buildings designed and used as hotels, boarding houses, rooming houses and
motels.
Dwelling, multiple-family. See “Apartment.”
Dwelling, single-family. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not more than one family. A
single-family dwelling shall not include a HUD-code manufactured home or mobile home.
Dwelling unit. One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one individual or family living
independently as a single housekeeping unit, with no more than one kitchen unit.
Educational services. Any use devoted to learning, regardless of whether it is public, private, commercial or
noncommercial or for children or adults. Playground equipment, athletic fields, athletic stadiums, cafeterias,
gymnasiums, parking (including bus parking), and libraries are considered a valid accessory use of this land use
definition.
Efficiency unit. An apartment having a combination living and bedroom, designed for occupancy by one person,
containing not less than 220 square feet of net floor area, which may include kitchen facilities within the room.
Electronic message center. A sign that is electronically or electrically controlled that displays a message center or reader
board composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means.
Exterior architectural feature. The architectural style and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure as is
designated to be open to view from a public right-of-way.
Family. An individual or group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship including
foster children, exchange students, and servants together with not more than two additional persons not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the previously identified individual or group, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit.
Farm, ranch, or orchard. Land used for growing of usual farm products and/or raising of usual farm poultry and farm
animals and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but
not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of
agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law.
Farming, landscaping, and horticultural sales and services. The sale of products either cultivated by agricultural
methods or sold to assist with the cultivation of agriculture.
Flagpole. A freestanding structure or a structure attached to a building or to the roof of a building used for the sole
purpose of displaying flags.
Floodplain. An area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency flood, as shown on the floodplain map of the
City of Plainview. The term “floodplain” is interchangeable with the term “flood hazard area.”
Floor area. The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level,
but excluding cellars, carports, or garages.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/507
Footcandle. A unit of light intensity used to calculate lighting levels.
Garage, private. A detached accessory building or portion of the main building for the parking or temporary storage of
automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
Garden center. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales of horticultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs
and trees, intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes.
Gasoline station. Any building, land area, premises or portion thereof, where petroleum-based fuels or other petroleum
products are sold and light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor
cleaning may be conducted and convenience goods or services may be offered.
Governmental service (police, fire, emergency medical services). A local government facility for conduct of public
safety and emergency services, including fire and police protection services and emergency medical and ambulance
services.
Grade. A term having particular reference under the following conditions:
(1) For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, it is the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of
the wall adjoining the street.
(2) For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, it is the average of the elevation of the
sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining the street.
(3) For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, it is the average level of the finished surface of the
ground adjacent to the exterior wall of the building.
(4) Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line is to be considered as
adjoining the street.
(5) Where no sidewalk has been constructed, the administrator shall establish such sidewalk level or its
equivalent for the purpose of these regulations.
Greenhouse/nursery. An establishment primarily engaged on the propagation (for sale at retail or wholesale) of
horticultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs and trees, intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes.
Grocery (food sales). An establishment engaged in retail and/or wholesale sale of food, foodstuffs, sundries, or other
common household items to members of the public.
Gross floor area. The gross floor area of a building shall be measured by taking outside dimensions of the building at
each floor level.
Group homes. A dwelling occupied by persons with a disability who need not be related by blood or marriage to each
other or to the residents, which dwelling is licensed by the state.
Heavy machinery sales and rentals. An establishment providing for the sales and rental of equipment to be used for
farming and construction.
Helipad (hospital/public safety). Any landing area for helicopters on public or private lands, which, in addition, includes
all necessary facilities for the picking up and discharging of passengers or cargo.
Home furnishing store. Retail or service activities for the selling of home furnishings and appliances that can either be
easily installed or are intended to be used as furniture. Stores that sell a substantial amount of raw materials such as
lumber and brick are not included within this definition and land use category.
Home occupation. An occupation, profession, domestic craft or economic enterprise which is customarily conducted in a
residential dwelling. This includes, but is not limited to, the use of a home for cottage food production operations.
Hospital/rehabilitative care. An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons,
primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, disability, and other physical or mental conditions and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/507
including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training
facilities, medical offices, and staff residences.
Housing, industrialized. See “Industrialized housing.”
Housing, manufactured. See “Manufactured housing.”
Industrial and manufacturing product sales and supply. The sale and supply of petroleum products and large-scale
industrial and manufacturing products typically sold and shipped in large quantities.
Industrialized housing. A residential structure designed for use and occupancy of one or more families, constructed in
one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent
residential site, designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the modules or modular components are
transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or installed on a permanent foundation system.
Junkyard/salvage yard. A place or a business that owns junk and/or salvage, and is operated to store, buy, or sell said
junk and/or salvage. Typically all or part of the junk and/or storage is stored outdoors.
Kennel. A place primarily for the keeping of three or more dogs, cats, or other small animals of at least four months of
age that are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, and/or sold. Veterinarian services are not included in the definition
of a kennel.
Landfill. A solid waste disposal facility consisting of an area of land or an excavation used for disposal of any solid
waste resulting from the operation of residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional establishments
that would normally be collected, processed, and disposed of through a public or private solid waste management
service.
Landscape screen. Plant material of the evergreen variety, a minimum of six feet in height at the time of installation and
planted on four-foot centers. All such landscape screens shall be permanently maintained. Adequate facilities shall be
provided for watering at the time of installation.
Landscaping. Creating an aesthetic effect by the use of a combination of plant material, including but not limited to
grass, trees and shrubs, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms, aggregate and other landscape features.
Landscaping shall not include the use of smooth concrete or asphalt.
Legal nonconforming sign, use, building or lot. A use, sign, building or lot existing legally at the time of the passage of
this chapter which does not by reason of design, use, or dimensions conform to the regulations of the district in which it
is situated.
Library, museum, or gallery. An institution for the collection, display, and distribution of books, [or] objects of art or
science, and which is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency, and which facilities are open to the general public.
Loading space. An off-street space used for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise
or materials which abuts upon a street or other appropriate means of access.
Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land under one ownership having frontage upon a public street or officially approved
place, either occupied or to be occupied by a building or building group, which is designated as a separate and distinct
tract and is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat of record.
Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot that shall not include portions of streets or alleys.
Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on the street which the front of the primary
structure faces or if there is no structure on the lot then the street on which it has its least dimension.
Lot coverage. The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of buildings located on
the lot.
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a building lot measured at the
respective midpoints of the front lot line and rear lot line within the lot boundary.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/507
Lot, interior. A building lot other than a corner lot.
Lot lines. The lines designated on a plat as being the boundaries of a lot.
Lot, through. An interior lot having frontage on two streets.
Lot width. The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line and measured from the
point on the building line which is closest to the front lot line.
Lumen. The unit of luminous flux, the total amount of light falling uniformly on or passing through an area of one square
foot, each point of which is one foot from a one-candela source.
Manufactured [Manufacturing], heavy. A use category which includes the following specific manufacturing uses:
acetylene gas manufacture or storage; acid manufacture; alcohol manufacture; ammonia, bleach or chlorine manufacture;
arsenal; asphalt manufacturing or refining; bag cleaning; blast furnace; boiler works; brick, tile, pottery or terra-cotta
manufacturer, other than handcraft; celluloid manufacture or cleaning; chemical manufacturing; cotton seed oil
manufacture; creosote treatment; disinfectant manufacture; dyestuff manufacture; emery cloth and sandpaper
manufacture; explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fiberglass
manufacture; forage plant; foundry (iron, steel, brass or copper); garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping;
gas manufacture; glue or gelatin manufacture; herbicide manufacture; insect poison manufacture; metal fabrication;
oilcloth or linoleum manufacture; ore reduction; paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture; paper products
manufacture; and steel fabrication.
Manufactured [Manufacturing], light. Advertising displays manufacture; apparel and other products assembled from
finished textiles; bookbinding (except hand binding); bottling works; brooms, brushes, manufacture; cameras or other
photographic equipment; candle manufacture; carpet manufacture or cleaning; cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris
manufacture; ceramics, stone, glass, marble, or porcelain products manufacture; cosmetic manufacture; cotton gin; dairy
products processing, manufacturing; drugs or pharmaceutical products manufacturing; electrical appliances, supplies,
machinery assembly or manufacture; electronic products, assembly; electronic products, manufacturing; fish smoking
and curing; food products processing; fur good manufacture (not including tanning or dying); furniture and upholstery
manufacture; glass products, from previously manufactured glass; household appliance products assembly and
manufacture from prefabricated parts; ice production, dry or natural; jute, sisal, or oakum products manufacturing; light
manufacturing; mattress manufacture or renovation; meat processing/locker plant/frozen food products; mill (grain,
flour, food products); musical instrument manufacture; orthopedic or medical application manufacturing; plastic
products manufacture (not including processing of raw materials); sporting and athletic equipment manufacture; tire
recapping and vulcanizing; tools or hardware manufacture; toys and novelty products manufacture; window shade,
awnings, venetian blinds manufacture; and yeast manufacture.
Manufactured home park. An area of land designed for the placement of manufactured homes or mobile homes with two
or more improved pads or spaces for manufactured homes or mobile homes providing connections for, but not limited to,
water, sewer, and electricity service.
Manufactured home sales. A business engaged in the sales or rental of manufactured homes.
Manufactured housing (or manufactured home). A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules
of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include a
recreational vehicle.
Manufactured housing (or manufactured home) site. That part of a manufactured home park which has been reserved for
the placement of one HUD-code manufactured home.
Medical and diagnostic laboratories. A facility that is used for the express purpose of the design, fabrication and repair
of dental and optical goods, and/or a laboratory where tests are performed on biological specimens in order to obtain
information about the health of a patient.
Medical office/clinic. A use where medical, dental, psychiatric, psychological, chiropractic, and other outpatient services
are performed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/507
Mobile home. A structure that is similar in appearance to a manufactured home but is not constructed in conformance
with the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
Model homes and on-site real estate offices. A dwelling unit temporarily used as a sales office for on-site sale of
individual units within the same residential subdivision or other residential project that is under development.
Motel. A building in which lodging is offered with or without meals principally to transient guests and that provides each
unit with individual entrances from the outdoors.
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle designed to carry one or more persons which is propelled or drawn by mechanical power,
such as automobile, truck, motorcycle, and bus.
Nonconforming building or use. A building, structure or use of land or portion thereof lawfully existing or occupied at
the time this chapter became effective, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use that does not
conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Office, general. A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management or administrative services.
Typical uses include administrative offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management,
investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering and business offices of public utilities,
organizations and associations but excluding medical offices.
Off-street parking space. An area for the temporary storage of an automobile which shall be permanently reserved for
such purpose and which shall not be within or on any public street, alley or other right-of-way.
Open space. That part of a building lot, including courts or yards, that is open and unobstructed from its lowest level to
the sky; accessible to all residents upon a building lot; and not part of the roof of any building on the lot.
Outdoor shooting/archery range. The use of land for archery and/or the discharging of firearms for the purposes of target
practice, skeet and trap shooting, mock war games (paintball), or temporary competitions, such as turkey shoots.
Excluded from this use type shall be general hunting and unstructured and nonrecurring discharging of firearms on
private property with the property owner's permission.
Park and recreation facility. An area containing a building or complex of buildings housing community recreation
facilities owned, operated, or leased for operation by a public entity.
Parking lot. An open area, other than a private parking lot, street or alley, used for the parking of automobiles and
available for public or quasi-public use.
Parking space, off-street. See “Off-street parking space.”
Parkway. Any part of the public right-of-way lying between the curb or grade line of any public street and the abutting
private property line.
Passenger terminal. A facility that receives and discharges passengers and at which facilities and equipment required for
their operation are provided. Examples include terminals for bus, trolley, taxi, railroad, shuttle van, or other similar
vehicular services.
Pawn shop. An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the
owner (pawnbroker).
Permanently maintained. A constant and continuing state of maintenance, thereby preserving the installation as similar
to the original as possible.
Person. When used in this chapter shall mean every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, partnership,
corporation or society; and the term “person” shall include both singular and plural.
Personal services. An establishment primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person
or his apparel including but not limited to barber and beauty shops, dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations and
reducing salons/health clubs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/507
Place. An open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently established or dedicated as the principal
means of access to property abutting thereon.
Place of public assembly, indoor. A building in which people assemble for civic, educational, religious, or cultural
purposes. This use includes event facilities, meeting halls, fraternal organizations, places of worship and private clubs.
This use does not include residential buildings.
Planning and zoning commission. The agency appointed by the city council as an advisory body to it on matters related
to planning and zoning.
Plat. A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other
information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of Plainview.
Porte-cochere. A covered porch-like structure located at the primary entrance to a building which can provide shelter for
both automobiles or persons and where automobiles can enter and exit from two different directions.
Power generation, transmission, and distribution. Large-scale creation of power which includes large solar collectors
and windmills and more [other] forms of utility power generation.
Public park. Any publicly owned park, playground, beach, parkway, greenbelt, or roadway within the jurisdiction and
control of the city.
Publishing services. An establishment primarily engaged in the production of books, magazines, newspapers and other
printed matter.
Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. A parcel in single ownership on which two or more recreational vehicle
sites and/or camping sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles or camp units as
temporary living for recreation, education, or vacation purposes.
Registered family home (child care). A home that provides regular care in the caretaker's own residence for not more
than six children under 14 years of age, excluding children who are related to the caretaker, and that provide care after
school hours for not more than six additional elementary school children, but the total number of children, including
children who are related to the caretaker, does not exceed 12 at any given time. The term does not include a home that
provides care exclusively for any number of children who are related to the caretaker.
Repair service. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households,
rather than businesses, but excluding automotive repair use types. Typical uses include jewelry, clock, radio and
television repair, small appliance repair, bicycle repair and services of a similar nature.
Resource extraction. The removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of sand, gravel, soil, rock, minerals, mineral
substances, or organic substances, other than vegetation, from water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, exposed
or submerged.
Restaurant. A building or portion of a building, not operated as a dining room in connection with a hotel or boarding
house, where food is served for pay and for consumption in the building, and where provisions may be made for serving
food on the premises outside the building.
Retail sales. The sale of goods, merchandise, services, and/or commodities to the general public.
Retirement housing. The use of a site for one or more dwelling units designed for independent living and marketed
specifically for the elderly, persons with physical disabilities or both.
Self-storage, mini-warehouse. A building or group of buildings that are used for the storage of personal property or
records, where individual owners or tenants control individual storage spaces.
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a building, excluding steps and unenclosed porch to the street line.
Setback, front. The setback required between a building and the rear property line of the lot on which the building is
located, extending along the full length of the rear property line between the side property lines.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/507
Setback, interior side. The setback measured from any interior lot line.
Setback, rear. A setback from an interior property line lying on the opposite side of the lot from the front street setback.
Setback, street side. The required minimum horizontal distance between the use or structure and the street-facing side lot
line on a corner lot.
Sexually oriented business. An establishment providing, featuring or offering employees or entertainment personnel who
appear on the premises while in a state of nudity or simulated nudity and provide live performances or entertainment for
customers; or provides, features or offers non-live, sexually explicit entertainment, materials, or items for sale or rental
to customers; or provides materials or items that are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its
customers.
Sign. A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly
upon a building, structure, or piece of land.
Sign area. The area of any freestanding sign or billboard shall be the sum of the areas enclosed by the minimum
imaginary rectangles, triangles, or circles which fully contain all extremities of the sign, including the frame but
excluding any supports. Sign area for all other signs shall be the sum of the areas of the minimum imaginary rectangles,
triangles, or circles which fully contain all words, numbers, figures, devices, designs, or trademarks by which anything is
made known.
Sign, banner. A type of temporary sign that is made or composed of a flexible piece of fabric, plastic, canvas, vinyl,
paper, or another non-rigid material that does not include any enclosing framework and which is commonly mounted to
a building, structure, fence, railing, or wall with rope, or mounted to the ground with stakes.
Sign, billboard. See “Billboard.”
Sign face. The area or display surface used for the message.
Sign, flashing. A sign which has illumination that is alternately turned on and off at a rate equivalent to or greater than
twice an hour, excluding time and temperature signs.
Sign, frame. A type of temporary sign with two faces attached at one surface on each face to form a triangle with one
side parallel to the grade.
Sign, freestanding. Any sign permanently affixed to the ground and which is not affixed to a building and which is not
used for off-site advertising.
Sign height. Sign height shall be the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure,
whichever is higher, and the average established ground level beneath the sign.
Sign, illuminated. Any sign designed to give forth any artificial light, or designed to reflect light from one or more
sources, natural or artificial.
Sign, pole. A freestanding structure used for on-site advertising that is supported by braces, and columns, poles and that
does not qualify as a billboard.
Sign, portable. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground, a building or other fixed structure or object. Portable
signs include those signs installed on wheels, trailers, skids and similar mobile structures.
Sign, setback. Sign setback shall be the horizontal distance between a sign and the front lot line, as measured from that
part of the sign, including its extremities and supports, nearest to any point on any imaginary vertical plane projecting
from the front lot line.
Sign, stake. A type of temporary sign that does not exceed six square feet in area with a base/stake commonly made of
metal, wood, or other similar material with an end for driving into the ground.
Sign, substandard. A sign that in the opinion of the administrator does not meet all of the requirements of section
14.08.010, Removal of Substandard Signage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/507
Sign, temporary. A sign not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground.
Sign, wall. Any sign affixed flat against and parallel to a building wall and having the sign face not more than 12 inches
from the wall surface. Neon tubing attached directly to a wall surface shall be considered a “wall sign.” For the purposes
of this definition, wall shall include window areas.
Single-family detached dwelling. A building or structure containing only one dwelling unit that is not attached by a
common wall to another dwelling unit.
Site plan. A scaled plan for mixed use, multifamily and/or nonresidential development showing uses and structures
proposed for a parcel of land as required by the city's Code of Ordinances. Generally this will include lot lines, streets,
building sites, reserved open space, buildings, landscaping, screening, buffering, and the location of proposed utilities
and infrastructure improvements.
Solar collectors/windmills (small accessory structures). Alternative and environmentally friendly energy sources which
collect or create power on-site for an individual home or group of homes. The mass production and/or selling of energy
is prohibited within this definition.
Special event. A temporary, short-term use of property, signage or promotional devices occurring outside of a permanent
building and not otherwise included as a permitted or accessory use by these zoning regulations.
Special use. A use, which because of its potential impacts, may be permitted in a given zoning district, only after public
hearing review by the planning and zoning commission and the city council and issuance of a special use permit.
Street. A public way which extends primary means of access to abutting properties.
Street, arterial. A street designed to serve the entire community or substantial portions of the community.
Street, collector. A street designed to serve as a connector between a local street and an arterial street.
Street, local. A street designed to serve properties abutting and in the immediate vicinity of the street.
Street width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a street, measured at right angles to the side lines.
Structure. Any constructed or erected man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on land or in water,
whether or not affixed to the land.
Studio or shop (arts, crafts, or recording). A place designed to be used, or used as, both a dwelling place and a place of
work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson, including persons engaging in the application, teaching, or performance of fine
arts such as but not limited to drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture, and writing.
Substandard sign. See “Sign, substandard.”
Townhouse. One of a series of not less than three nor more than 10 attached single-family dwellings under a common
roof with a common exterior wall, and separated from one another by single partition walls without openings from
basement to roof. No townhouse dwelling unit is to be constructed above another townhouse dwelling unit.
Truck parking lot (primary use). Surface lots designed and built for large trucks such as semi-trailers that are designed to
move large quantities of goods.
Use. The purpose for which land or building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or building is or
may be occupied or maintained.
Utility line. The extension of water or wastewater lines and related facilities constructed in accordance with engineering
standards and accepted by the city for ownership, maintenance, and use.
Utility transfer station. A solid waste processing facility where solid waste is transferred from collection vehicles and
placed in other vehicles for transportation.
Variance. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/507
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or
highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Vending kiosk. A self-service, interactive device that is located on the outer side of a principal building (or as a standalone
unit outside and independent of the principal building), which is accessible to the general public for the purposes
of dispensing products or information.
Veterinary clinic and/or service, small animal. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for
the diagnosis and treatment of disease and injury of household pets. The term does not include medical care for
livestock.
Veterinary clinic, large animal. An animal hospital or clinic that provides medical care services for large or livestock
animals, including but not limited to: horses, cows, bison, elk, deer, llamas, alpacas, sheep, goats, chickens, turkeys,
ducks, and pigs.
Warehousing and storage. A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
Water and sewage treatment. A facility, or group of facilities, used for the treatment of industrial or domestic wastewater
for sewer systems and for the reduction and handling of solids and gases removed from such wastes; and facilities used
for the storage and distribution of potable and gray water to customers.
Water storage. Facilities and infrastructure provided by a public agency, utility, or franchise which convey water
facilities including regional water storage tanks and reservoirs.
Wheel stop. A stone or concrete barrier that keeps a car from moving forward beyond a parking space.
Wholesale. The sale of goods, merchandise, services and/or commodities for resale by the purchaser and does not offer
retail sales to the general public.
Wireless telecommunications tower. Radio or television broadcasting towers, telecommunications towers, and antenna
arrays.
Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied, and unobstructed by any
portion of a structure from the ground upward.
Yard, front. The yard between the front setback and the front lot line.
Yard, rear. The yard between the rear setback and the rear lot line.
Yard, side. The yard between the side building line and the side lot line.
Zoning district map. The map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part hereof by reference thereto.
(Ordinance 19-3690 adopted 4/23/19)